^gyy 


THE  GIFT  OF 


Mrs.  William  Dinsmore  Briggs 


TO  THE 


English  Department  of 
STANFORD  UNIVERSITY 


*>9'^\f>'^^>^4 


Under  no  circumstances  should  this 
book  be  removed  from  this   room. 


THE  DECENNIAL  PUBLICATIONS  OF 
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 


THE  DECENNIAL  PUBLICATIONS 


ISSUED  IN  OOMMEMOBATION  OF  THB  COMPLETION  OP  THE   PIR8T  TEN 
TEARS  OP  THE  UNTVEBSITT'S   EXISTENCE 


AUTHORIZED  BY  THE  BOARD  OP  TRUSTEES  ON  THE  RECOMMENDATION 
OP  THE   PRESIDENT  AND  SENATE 


EDITED  BY  A  COMMITTEE  APPOINTED  BY  THE  SENATE 

EDWASD  CAPPS 
8TABB  WII«LABD  CUTTINa  BOLLDT  D.  BAUBBUBT 

JAMBS  BOWLAND  ANQELIj     WH^LIAM  I.  THOKA8  BHAIUEB  MATHEWB 

CABL  DABLINO  BUOK  FBBDBBIC  IVE8  OABPBITEB        08KAB  BOLZA 

JULIUS  BTIBOLrrZ  JACQUES  LOBB 


THESE  VOLUMES  ARE  DEDICATED 

TO  THB  MEN  AND  WOMEN 

OF  OUR  TIME  AND  COUNTRY  WHO  BY  WISE  AND  GENEROUS  OTVING 

HAVE  ENCOURAGED  THE  SEARCH  AFTER  TRUTH 

nr  ALL  DEPARTMENTS  OF  KNOWLEDGE 


THE  POEMS  OF  ANNE  COUNTESS  OF 
WINCHILSEA 


THE  POEMS  OF  ANNE  COUNTESS 
OF  WINCHILSEA 


FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  EDITION  OF  1718  AND  FROM  UNPUBLISHED  MANUSCRIPTS 
EDITED  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES 

BT 

MYKA  REYNOLDS 

or  THE  DEPASTMENT  OF  BNOUBH 


THE  DECENNIAL  PUBLICATIONS 
SECOND  SERIES    VOLUME  V 


CHICAGO 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  PRESS 

1903 


tf 


Copyright  2S02 
BT  THB  UNIVKBSrrT  OF  CHZCAOO 


PREFACE 

This  edition  of  the  Poems  of  Anne,  Countess  of 
Winchilsea,  is  based  on  a  small  volume  of  verse  published 
by  her  in  1718,  on  two  unpublished  manuscripts,  and  on 
poems  scattered  through  various  Miscellanies.  These 
sources  are  more  fully  described  in  the  Introduction^  and 
the  Table  of  Contents  indicates  in  which  of  them  each  poem 
is  found  In  preparing  the  present  text  for  publication  the 
volume  of  1718  has  been  considered  authoritative  for  the 
poems  it  includes,  but  there  has  been  incorporated  into  the 
text  the  list  of  Errata  published  in  that  volume.  For  poems 
occurring  in  both  manuscripts  the  folio  has  been  accepted 
as  the  best  authority,  inasmuch  as  it  is  later  than  the 
octavo  and  was  apparently  revised  by  the  author  or  under 
her  supervision. 

There  has  been  no  modernization  of  the  text,  except  that 
in  some  instances  titles  are  not  given  with  the  original 
amplitude  and  variety  of  capitalization,  and  brackets  are  not 
used  to  mark  tripleta  Beyond  these  slight  changes  the 
various  accepted  texts  are  exactly  followed.  Some  of  the 
poems  could  doubtless  have  been  made  more  pleasing  to  the 
eye  and  more  easily  intelligible  by  a  series  of  editorial 
changes.  It  must  be  admitted  that  as  the  poems  stand  they 
show  an  orthography  which,  though  often  quaint  and  a  val- 
uable indication  of  contemporary  pronunciation,  is  also 
often  inconsistent  and  the  outcome  of  carelessness  or  pos- 
sibly of  ignorance.  The  punctuation  is  sometimes  so  scanty, 
sometimes  so  elaborate,  as  to  obscure  the  text.  And  there 
is  an  irritating  excess  of  capitals  and  italics.  But  in  spite 
of  these  facts,  more  seemed  to  be  lost  than  gained  by  any 
attempt  to  make  the  poems  conform  to  exact  canons  or  to 

ix 


X  Pbefagb 

modem  taste.  Since  bo  many  of  them  are  now  published 
for  the  first  time,  it.  seemed  best  on  the  whole  to  follow  the 
original  sources  exactly.  In  order  to  avoid  encumbering 
the  poems  with  references,  the  Notes  are  printed  in  a 
separate  section  at  the  end  of  the  volume. 

I  cannot  bring  forward  this  edition  of  Lady  Winchilsea's 
poems  without  an  expression  of  my  sense  of  indebtedness  to 
Mr.  Frederic  Ives  Carpenter,  of  the  Department  of  English 
in  the  University  of  Chicago,  through  whose  mediation  the 
manuscripts  were  given  to  me  to  edit,  and  whose  aid  has 
been  constant  throughout  the  perplexities  incident  to  the 
production  of  this  volume;  to  the  Earl  of  Winchilsea,  not 
only  for  the  use  of  the  octavo  manuscript  in  his  posses- 
sion, but  for  access  to  other  manuscript  material  valuable  in 
connection  with  Lady  Winchilsea's  life,  and  for  introductions 
whereby  it  became  possible  to  visit  the  places  most  closely 
associated  with  her  poems;  and  to  Mr.  Edmund  Gosse  for 
the  use  of  his  most  important  folio  manuscript  volume  of 
Lady  Winchilsea's  work,  and  for  many  valuable  suggestions 
in  connection  with  the  Introdtiction  and  the  Notes. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

[  In  the  following  table  are  mark^  showing  in  which  of  the  original 
sources  each  poem  is  found.  The  volume  of  1713  is  indicated  by  '*'; 
the  folio  MS.  by  t*  ^^  octavo  MS.  by  (;  Birch's  General  Dictionary 

by||]. 

Introduction ...  xvii 

Mercury  and  the  Elephant  ♦ 3 

The  Introduction,  "Did  I  My  Lines  "ft         -        -        -  ^ 

The  Preface  f -        -  6 

TheAppologyt 13 

Fragment* 13 

OnMyseHt 14 

Ardelia  to  Melancholy  ft 15 

An  Invocation  to  Sleep  ft 16 

The  Losse  ft 17 

The  Consolation  1 1 18 

A  Song  on  Greife  1 1 18 

On  Affliction  tt 19 

A  Letter  to  Dafnis  1 1 19 

ToMr.  F.,nowEarlof  W.*t 20 

A  Letter  to  the  Same  Person* 23 

Upon  Ardelia's  Return  Home  f 24 

An  Invitation  to  Dafnis  \ 28 

The  Goute  and  Spider  f 30 

Upon  the  Death  of  Lord  Maidstone  \ 32 

From  the  Muses  at  Parnassus  ft 32 

Upon  my  Lord  Winchilsea's  Converting  the  Mount,  etc.f       -  33 

A  Song  upon  a  Punch  Bowl  f 36 

The  Bargain:  A  Song  tt 37 

To  My  Sister  Ogle  tt 38 

Ardelia's  Answer  to  Ephelia  t 38 

Friendship  between  Ephelia  and  Ardelia  *      -        -        -        -  46 

A  Description  of  a  Piece  of  Tapestry  * 47 

Glass*  t 50 

The  Bird  and  the  Arras  t 51 

To  Lady  Worsley  at  Longleate  t 52 

xi 


xii  Table  of  Contents 

On  the  Marriage  of  Edw.  and  Eliz.  Herbert  *         -        -        -  55 

On  the  Death  of  Hon.  James  Thynne* 56 

On  an  Hi-drawn  Picture  of  Cleone  ♦ 59 

To  the  B^  Hon.  the  Countess  of  Hertford  II      -        -        -        •  61 

Upon  the  Death  of  Sir  William  Twisden  t      -        -        -        -  61 

Enquiry  after  Peace*  f   "        "  * 67 

Petition  for  an  Absolute  Betreate*t 68 

To  the  Lady  C.  Tufton  t 77 

For  the  Birthday  of  Lady  C.Tufton*t 79 

On  the  Lord  Dundee  ft 81 

The  Change*  tt 84 

Upon  the  Death  of  King  James  the  Second  \          -        •        -  85 

On  the  King  of  Sweden's  Picture  ♦! 91 

The  Circuit  of  AppoUo  f 92 

An  Epistle  from  Ardelia  to  Mrs.  Bandolph  f  -                -        -  95 

A  Prologue  to  Don  Carlos  f 96 

A  Poem  Occasioned  by  the  Sight  of  the  4th  Epistle,  etc.  f      -  98 

An  Epilogue  to  the  Tragedy  of  Jane  Shore  II  -        -        -        -  100 

To  Mr.  Prior  (Prior's  Miscellaneous  Works)    -        -        -        -  102 

The  Answer  to  Pope's  Impromptu  || 102 

To  Mr.  Pope  (Pope's  Works,  ed.  1717) 103 

To  a  Fellow  Scribbler  II 105 

To  Dr.  Waldron  t 106 

To  Edward  Jenkinson* 108 

To  Mr.  Jervas  (Steele's  Miscellany,  1714)        -        -        -        -  109 

In  Praise  of  the  Invention  of  Writing  Letters  ft*        -        -  HO 

Clarinda's  Indifference  at  Parting  with  Her  Beauty  ft-        -  111 
Five  Pieces  out  of  the  Aminta  of  Tasso 

Daphne's  Answer  to  Silvia  ♦  f 112 

Amintor*t 113 

"  Thirsis  persuades  Amintor  "  ♦  f H^ 

"  Though  We  of  Small  Proportion  see "  ♦  f  t     '        -        -  118 

The  Golden  Age*  tt 119 

From  the  French  of  the  188th  Sonnet  of  Petrarc  ft       -        -  119 

ASongof  theCanibalstt 120 

A  Maxim  for  the  Ladys  ft 121 

OnAbsencet 121 

Written  before  a  French  Book,  etc.f 121 

The  Equipage*  t 122 

Melinda  on  an  Insipid  Beauty  \ 122 


Table  op  Contents  xiii 

•  

Part  of  the  Second  Act  of  Athaliah*       -----  123 

La  Passion  Vaincue  ♦ 125 

An  Epistle  to  Madam  Deshouliers* 126 

A  Song  for  a  Play  \ 127 

A  Song,  Melinda  to  Alcander  ft 128 

ASong,"ByLovepersu'd"tt 128 

A  Song,  "Miranda  hides  her" tt             129 

A  Song,  "Whilst  Thir8is"tt 129 

ASong,"Persuademenot"*tt 130 

Jealousy,  a  Song*  tt 130 

ASong,  "Love  thou  art  best"* t 131 

A  Song,  "Quickly  Delia''*  ft 131 

A  Song,  " Tis  strange  this  heart"  * f 132 

A  Song,  "The  Nymph  in  vain"  tt 132 

ASong,  "If  forawomaQ"tt 133 

A«ong,  "Lett  the  fool  still  be  true"  tt         -        -        -        -  133 

Moral  Song*  ft 134 

Honour,  a  Song  f 134 

Timely  Ad?ice  to  Dorinda  f 135 

ThePhoBttix*! 135 

Hope*t 136 

Life's  PrQgr^s*t    -        -                136 

A  Sight 138 

Caesar  and  Brutus  1 1 138 

An  Epistle  from  Alexander  to  Hephaestion  *  t        -        -        -  139 

A  Fragment  written  at  Timbridge  Wells  ♦      -        -        -        -  142 

ThePiodigyll -       -       -        -  142 

A  Pastoral  Dialoguo*t 144 

The  Cautious  Lovers  *  t           .-..-..  147 

AdamPo6'd*t 149 

Ralph's  Reflections  t 150 

The  Unequal  Fetters  t 150 

Alcidor*t 151 

TheCritickandthe  Writer  of  Fables* 153 

A  Miller,  his  Son,  and  their  Asse  *  1 1 155 

The  Wit  and  the  Beau  * 158 

Gipid  and  Folly*  t 159 

Love^  Death,  and  Reputation*  t 160 

The  King  and  tljt3  Shepherd*  t 162 

There's  no  Tomorrow  *  t 164 


xiv  Table  op  Contents 

Jupiter  and  the  Farmer  ♦! 165 

For  the  Better  ♦! -  166 

The  Jester  and  the  Little  Fishes  ♦  f 168 

The  Atheist  and  the  Acorn* 169 

The  Prevalence  of  Custom* 170 

The  Musselman's  Dream  ♦ 172 

The  Shepherd  Piping  to  the  Fishes* 173 

The  Decision  of  Fortune* 174 

The  Brass-Pot  and  Stone-nJugg*  177 

The  Owl  describing  her  Young  ones  ♦ 178 

The  Philosopher,  the  Young  Man  and  his  Statue  ♦         -        -  181 

The  Hog,  the  Sheep, and  the  Goat* 182 

The  Shepherd  and  the  Calm* 183 

The  Lord  and  the  Bramble* 185 

The  House  of  Socrates* 186 

The  Young  Bat  and  his  Dam,  the  Cock  and  the  Cat*    -        -  187 

The  Executor* 189 

The  Miser  and  the  Poet* 191 

The  Tradesman  and  the  Scholar*  -        -        -        -        -  194 

Man's  Injustice  towards  Providence  * 196 

TheEagle,  theSow,  andtheCat* 198 

The  Man  bitten  by  Fleas* 200 

Reformation*  -        .        . 202 

The  Lyon  and  the  Gnat* 203 

The  Man  and  his  Horse* 205 

The  Dog  and  his  Master  t        - 206 

The  Battle  between  the  Rats  and  the  Weazels*      -        -        -  207 

Democritus  and  his  Neighbours  *  208 

FansoombBam* 210 

Psalm  the  137th  paraphrased  to  the  7th  verse  *  f  t  -        -  214 

A  Preparation  to  Prayer  ft 214 

A  Pastoral  between  Menalcas  and  Damon  ft  ...  215 

On  Easter  Day  1 1 -        -        -  220 

Hallelujah  tt 222 

Some  Reflections  in  a  Dialogue  between  Teresa  and  Ardelia  f  t  223 

The  10th  Part  of  the  119th  Psalm  paraphrased  1 1  "        -  226 

The  146th  Psalm  Paraphrased  ft 227 

Goldistry'dinthefirett -  228 

The  Poor  Man's  Lamb  *t 229 

The  Second  Chapter  of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  ft        -        -  235 


Table  op  Contents  xv 

Jealousie  is  the  Eage  of  a  Man  f 238 

AU  is  Vanity  ♦!        "        -        • 238 

The  Spleen*  t 248 

OntheHuiricane* 252 

Hymn*            262 

TotheEochott 264 

TheBirdtJ 265 

•—The  Tree  tt 266 

The  Nightingale  ♦! 267 

A  Nocturnal  Be  verie* 268 

ToDeath^tt 270 

The  Triumphs  of  Love  and  Innocence  f          ....  271 

Aristomenes*t 337 

Prologue  to  Aristomenes  t 337 

Song  for  Aristomenes  f            410 

Epilogue  to  Aristomenes  t 411 


INTRODUCTION 

Lady  Winchilsea  was  born  in  1661  and  died  in  1720. 
Her  poems  were  written  after  1685.  During  the  period 
from  1685  to  1720  she  takes  rank  as  a  minor  writer  in  all  the 
popular  literary  forms  except  comedy.  Love  songs,  sacred 
songs,  pindarics,  satires,  epistles,  fables,  translations,  trage- 
dies, verse  criticism,  and  one  prose  critical  essay,  come 
within  the  compass  of  her  works.  Her  poems  are  fre- 
quently commonplace  in  substance  and  even  more  frequently 
crude  in  form.  Only  now  and  then  does  she  reach  an  excel- 
lence that  would  make  them  of  importance  apart  from 
their  place  in  literary  history.  Yet,  taken  as  a  whole,  her 
work  proves  to  be  of  unusual  interest  This  is  due,  in  part, 
to  the  social  environment  and  the  literary  associations  of 
which  the  poems  give  so  detailed  and  clever  a  picture,  and 
in  part  to  Lady  Winchilsea's  own  personality,  as  revealed  in 
her  work.  But  the  chief  elements  of  interest  arise  from 
the  fact  that  she  was  a  heretic  in  her  own  day,  a  protestant, 
both  consciously  and  unconsciously,  against  the  religious, 
social,  and  literary  canons  then  in  vogue;  and  from  the 
further  fact  that  some  of  her  heresies  became  the  orthodox 
faith  of  later  generations.  Her  education  and  her  literary 
activities  fall  entirely  within  the  compass  of  the  classical 
period,  but  her  poems  show  romantic  tastes  unparalleled  in 
her  own  day,  and  not  afterward  so  highly  developed  before 
Cowper.  She  was  hardly  strong  enough  to  be  counted  one 
of  the  influences  in  bringing  about  changes  in  taste,  but  she 
distinctly  foreshadows  such  changes,  and  it  is  on  her  deli- 
cate originality  and  independence  of  judgment  that  her 
claim  to  literary  recognition  must  rest. 

xvii 


xviii  Introduction 


8KBT0H   OF   LADY   WINOHILSBA's   LIFE 

Anne  Kingsmill  was  descended  from  a  very  ancient  Hamp- 
shire family.  This  family,  whose  original  name  was  Caste- 
layne,  resided  at  Basingstoke  from  the  twelfth 
to  the  sixteenth  century.  One  of  its  members, 
for  a  personal  service  done  to  King  John,  had  the  grant  of 
the  Boyal  Mill  at  Basingstoke,  and  he  took  thereafter  the 
name  of  Eingsmnln.  Early  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.  the 
mill  was  alienated  by  Hugh  de  Kingsmuln,  but  the  name 
was  retained.  During  succeeding  generations  the  family 
held  a  position  of  importance  in  Hanta  It  was  at  the 
house  of  Bichard  Eyngesmylle,  bailiff  of  Basingstoke,  that 
Catherine  of  Aragon  and  her  suite  were  entertained  for  a 
night  on  her  way  to  be  married  to  Prince  Arthur.  Richard's 
son,  Sir  John  Eingsmill,  was  judge  of  the  common  pleas, 
and  one  of  the  feofPees  in  the  will  of  Henry  VIL  His  son. 
Sir  John  Eingsmill,  was  high  sheriff  of  Hants  and  pur- 
chased from  the  crown  various  manors,  among  them  that  of 
Sydmonton,  with  which  this  branch  of  the  family  is  after- 
ward associated.  Of  the  seventeen  children  of  this  Sir 
John  several  were  of  high  distinction.  Thomas  was  pro- 
fessor of  Hebrew  at  Oxford;  Bichard  was  attorney  at  the 
court  of  wards  under  Elizabeth;  Sir  George,  judge  of  the 
common  pleas,  married  a  direct  descendant  of  Edward  I. 
by  Eleanor  his  wife.  One  daughter  married  Sir  James 
Pilkington,  Bishop  of  Durham,  and  another  married  Bichard 
Cooper,  ancestor  to  the  first  Earl  of  Shaftesbury.  The  Con- 
stance Eingsmill  who  married  the  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Lucy, 
the  supposed  original  of  Shakespeare's  "Justice  Shallow," 
was  probably  a  niece  of  this  Sir  John.  A  cousin,  William 
Eingsmill,  was  the  last  prior  of  Si  Swithun's  Priory,  Win- 


Introduction  xix 


Chester,  and  the  first  dean  of  Winchester  OathedraL  His 
initials,  "  W.  K.,"  and  the  Eingsmill  arms,  are  carved  on  the 
oak  stalls  of  the  choir.  Anne's  great  grandfather,  who  was 
high  sheriff  under  James  I.  and  Elizabeth,  was  esteemed 
^'the  wisest  gentleman  of  his  country."  Her  father.  Sir 
William  Kingsmill,  married  Anne  Haselwood,  one  of  the 
nine  children  of  Sir  Anthony  Haselwood  and  Elizabeth  Wil- 
mer,  of  Maidwell,  Northamptonshire.  Anne  Haselwood's 
brother.  Sir  William  Haselwood,  succeeded  his  father  in 
1660.  His  estate  that  year  was  rated  at  £3,000  per  annum. 
His  daughter  Elizabeth,  ''whose  excellent  character  would 
fill  a  volume,"  became  in  1685  the  third  wife  of  Viscount 
Hatton  of  Kirby.  Another  daughter,  Penelope,  was  the  first 
wife  of  Sir  Henry  Seymour,  alias  Portman,  of  Orchard- 
Portman,  in  Somersetshire.  Anne  Haselwood's  sisters, 
Catherine  and  Elizabeth,  married,  respectively.  Sir  Thomas 
Cave  and  Sir  William  Langham.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that 
through  both  father  and  mother  Anne  Eingsmill  was  related 
to  families  of  high  repute. 

Sir  William   Eingsmill   and  his  wife  Anne  had  three 

children,  William,  Bridget,  and  Anne.      Sir  William  died 

when  Anne,  who  was  bom  in  April,  1661,  was 

^^^  but  five  months  old.  In  his  will,  after  solemnly 
''  bequeathing  his  soul  to  his  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  through 
whose  merits  he  hopes  to  join  the  Saints  and  Angels,  and 
his  body  to  the  dust  whence  it  came,"  he  shows  his  con- 
fidence in  his  "Ladie  and  loving  wife"  by  making  her  his 
sole  executrix  during  the  minority  of  his  son,  William,  then 
a  child  of  two  or  three  years,  to  whom  the  estates  were 
bequeathed.  Provision  was  likewise  made  for  his  daughters, 
a  sum  of  £2000  being  set  aside  to  be  invested  for  Bridget 
and  paid  to  her  with  all  the  interest  accruing  therefrom  on 
her  twenty-first  birthday  or  on  her  marriage.  A  sum  of 
£1500  was  similarly  set  apart  as  Anne's  portion.     The 


XX  Introduction 


authority  vested  in  the  wife  was  to  remain  in  force  during 
her  widowhood  or  her  after-marriage  "to  any  man  what- 
soever if  so  it  should  come  to  pass  according  to  her  good 
will  and  pleasure.^'  That  it  did  so  come  to  pass,  and  that 
with  almost  indecorous  promptitude,  is  shown  by  the  mar- 
riage license  issued  in  October,  1662,  to  "  Sir  Thomas  Ogle, 
Ki,  of  Wickin,  in  Barewell,  Co.  Suffolk,  Bach',  24,  and 
Dame  Anne  Kingsmill  of  Sydmonton,  Co.  South*®**,  widow, 
above  30.^^  The  only  child  of  this  second  marriage  was 
Dorothy  Ogle,  bom  in  1663.  In  1664  the  mother  died, 
leaving  four  children  under  seven  years  of  age.  In  her  will 
she  says:  ''Out  of  the  assurance  I  have  of  the  prudent  love 
and  care  of  my  dear  husband.  Sir  Thomas  Ogle,  I  doe 
wholly  give  and  bequeath  to  him  all  my  possessions,  and  I 
doe  hereby  wholly  give,  assign,  remit  and  bequeath  the 
education  and  government  of  all  my  children  unto  the  said 
Sir  Thomas  Ogle,  to  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  God  and 
good  nurture  according  to  their  quality,  as  he  in  his  discre- 
tion shall  think  fit."  In  what  way  the  young  widower 
fulfilled  this  momentous  trust  must,  unfortunately,  be  left 
largely  to  the  imagination.  Beyond  the  fact  that  he  became 
Major  of  H.  M.  Holland  Regiment  in  1665,  we  have  no 
record  of  him  except  that  he  died  in  1671.  His  daughter 
Dorothy  was  left  as  the  ward  of  Sir  Richard  Campion  (or 
Champion),  but  there  is  no  statement  as  to  the  disposition 
made  of  the  other  children.  It  would  perhaps  be  most  nat- 
ural to  suppose  that  they  would  go  to  Sir  William  Hasel- 
wood,  their  mother's  brother,  and  their  intimacy  with  his 
daughter  Elizabeth  would  lend  color  to  that  supposition. 
But  wherever  they  were,  Anne  and  Bridget,  if  we  may  judge 
by  a  few  letters  preserved  among  the  Hatton  MSS.  in 
the  British  Museum,  received  a  more  thorough  education 
than  Dorothy.  Bridget's  letters  are  smooth,  formal,  high- 
bred and  tolerably  correct,  while  Dorothy's  orthography  and 


Intboduotion  xxi 


sentence  structure  follow  no  law  more  imperative  than  her 
immediate  whim.  But  whether  the  sisters  were  educated 
together  or  not,  there  was  always  a  close  bond  between  Anne 
and  Dorothy.  In  a  poem  written  to  Dorothy  from  Barby  in 
1688  Anne  dwells  with  eager  affection  on  the  ''  lost  pleas- 
ures''  of  their  former  companionship,  and  demands  that 
time  shall  pay  back  the  days  and  hours  of  their  separation. 
Their  ^'soft  endearing  life^^  together  makes  her  think  of 
Heaven  as  the  place  when  they  shall  learn  new  mysteries 
of  love.  "Teresa,"  as  Dorothy  is  poetically  called,  also 
appears  in  the  Dialogue  between  Teresa  and  Ardelia, 
as  the  wisest  and  most  loving  counsellor  of  the  unhappy 
Ardelia.  Dorothy  was  maid  of  honor  to  the  Princess  of 
Denmark,  and  died  unmarried  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
nine.  The  original  draft  of  her  will  is  among  the  Hatton 
manuscripts  and  is  worth  quoting  in  full: 

In  the  name  of  Qod  Amen  I  Dorothy  Ogle  of  Maidwell  in  ye 
Coimty  of  Northton,  spinster  for  the  settling  of  my  temporall  estate 
Doe  make  this  my  last  will  &  testament  in  manner  following  first  I 
give  &  bequeathe  to  ye  Bight  Hon^^o  the  Lord  Viscount  Hatton 
his  Ladyes  picture  then  I  give  unto  ye  Lady  Hatton  my  bible  and 
common  prayer  booke  then  I  give  to  my  cozen  M^s  Elizabeth 
Hatton  my  tea  table  dishes  and  gilt  spoones  then  I  give  to 
my  sister  Bridget  Kingsmill  my  bed  then  I  give  to  my  sister 
ffinch  my  cabinet  and  5  yards  of  new-point,  then  I  give  unto 
my  serv^  Mary  Bice  all  the  residue  of  my  books,  my  watch  & 
all  my  wairing  Apparell  [three  words  undecipherable]  dresing 
glasse  &  Boxes  and  all  the  rest  &  residue  of  my  Goods,  Chattells 
&  personall  estate  what  soever  I  give  and  bequeath  to  the  aforesaid 
Lady  Viscountess  Hatton  who  I  doe  hereby  ordaine  &  make  the 
sole  executrix  of  this  my  last  will  and  testament  In  witness 
.  whereof  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  &  scale  this  eight  day  of 
Aug*  1692. 


Sealed  and  published  by  ye  above  named 


xxii  Introduction 


Dorothy  Ogle  to  be  her  last  will  and  testament  in  ye  presence 
of  us;  and  by  us  subscribed  in  ye  presence  of  ye  testator. 
Jere  Bellyrout 

John  Hatton  my  mind  and  desire 

his  mark  is  that  my  cozen  M^" 

Will  A  Dawson  Portman  have  my  Shag- 

green  tooth-pick  case 
in  remembrance  of  me. 

Of  "sister  bidy,"  as  Dorothy  called  her,  we  know  practically 
nothing  except  that  she  died  unmarried  in  1719-20.  Wil- 
liam was  knighted  and  married  as  soon  as  he  attained  his 
majority.  His  relation  to  his  sisters  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  close.  In  a  codicil  to  his  will  he  left  Anne  and 
Bridget  £100  each,  but  his  great  ambition  was  to  bequeath 
his  estates  so  that  they  would  remain  under  the  Kingsmill 
name.  He  died  in  1698  leaving  a  son  of  four  who  lived  to 
the  age  of  eighty-one  unmarried.  The  estate,  which  was  a 
large  one,  was  apparently  managed  by  Anne^s  husband,  in 
whose  note-book  are  many  records  of  accounts  paid  for  "  my 
nephew  Kingsmill,"  even  the  house  servants  receiving  their 
wages  through  Mr.  Finch.  At  the  death  of  this  nephew,  the 
last  male  heir,  the  estates  devolved  upon  a  granddaughter 
whose  husband  took  the  name  of  Kingsmill.  His  nephew, 
the  distinguished  Admiral  Sir  Robert  Kingsmill,  a  friend  of 
Nelson,  succeeded  to  the  estates  in  1805. 

In  1683  we  find  Anne  Kingsmill  as  one  of  the  six  maids 
of  honor  of  Mary  of  Modena.  Gregario  Leti,  historio- 
As  lUid  of  grapher  to  Oharles  II.,  gives  the  list  of  the 
^"W'  ladies   who    made   up   the  household  of    the 

duchess  in  that  year.  First,  there  was  Penelope  O'Brien, 
Countess  of  Peterborough,  who  spoke  French  well,  drew  a 
salary  of  1600  crowns,  and  had  been  with  the  duchess  since 
her  marriage.  A  more  exciting  personality  was  Susanna 
Armine,  the  famous  Lady  Belasyse,  who,  coming  to  court  as 
a  very  young  widow  in  1670,  had  so  attracted  James  by  her 


Intboduotion  xxiii 


wit,  gayety,  and  remarkable  powers  of  mind  that  he  had 
"honorably  wooed  her  for  his  wife."  Of  Lady  Belasyse 
Mary  of  Modena  never  felt  the  slightest  jealousy.  It 
was  Catharine  Sedley,  the  maid  of  honor  drawing  the 
highest  salary,  intrepid,  brilliant,  conscious  of  her  power 
over  James,  and  unscrupulous  in  her  use  of  it,  who  roused 
all  the  fierce  antagonism  in  the  nature  of  the  Italian  wife, 
and  brought  discord  into  the  court  circle.  Of  the  other 
maids  of  honor  Anne  Killigrew  was  the  most  famous.  She 
died  of  smallpox  in  her  twenty-fifth  year.  But  she  had 
already  shown  superior  ability  in  both  poetry  and  painting. 
She  was  a  pupil  of  Lely  and  her  royal  master  and  mistress 
sat  to  her  for  their  portraits.  If  we  may  trust  Dryden's  Ode 
to  Mistress  Anne  Killigrew^  her  pencil  was  also  skilled 
in  the  representation  of  landscapes  Dryden  was  her 
master  in  poetry,  and  she  was  not  a  pupil  of  whom  he 
needed  to  be  ashamed.  The  thin  volume  of  her  pub- 
lished verse  shows  a  vigor  and  a  bitterness  not  to  be 
looked  for  in  a  maid  of  honor.  There  is  no  hint  of 
interest  in  nature,  no  tenderness,  no  lightness,  almost  no 
beauty  or  grace.  The  poems  are  marked  instead  by  a  crude 
virility.  They  are  apparently  genuine  in  their  Oarlylean 
scorn  of  fools,  and  of  men  who  will  expose  themselves  to 
hostile  arms,  or  give  themselves  to  "toylsome  study"  "all 
for  the  praise  of  Fools."  '^  O  f amisht  soul,"  she  exclaims, 
"  which  such  thin  food  can  feed."  She  hates  war,  but  she 
shows  admiration  for  strength  and  daring,  and  she  scorns 
weakness  There  is  in  her  poems  no  contemplative  religious 
spirit,  but  there  is  a  stem  morality,  and  an  emphatic  recogni- 
tion of  reason  as  man's  supreme  guide.  There  would  seem 
to  be  valid  reasons  in  the  law  of  affinities  for  a  warm  friend- 
ship between  the  two  Annes.  They  were  both,  Miss  Strick- 
land says,  "much  beloved  by  her  [Mary  of  Modena],  were 
ladies  of  irreproachable  virtue,  members  of  the  Church  of 


xxiv  Intboduotion 


England,  and  alike  distinguished  for  moral  worth  and 
literary  attainments."  Bnt  if  such  a  friendship  did  exist 
there  is  no  hint  of  it  in  the  poetry  of  either.  Their  minds 
were  stretched  to  a  contemplation  of  the  progress  of  man 
through  the  "Inextricable  Mazes  of  Life  to  his  probable 
final  Ruine,"  and  they  could  not  turn  the  uncertain  and  diffi- 
cult stream  of  their  verse  into  merely  domestic  or  friendly 
channels.  Both  were,  however,  ardently  devoted  to  Mary 
Beatrice,  and  it  is  not  strange  that  the  young,  unhappy 
duchess,  "so  innocently  bred,"  so  religiously  inclined,  found 
in  them  most  congenial  companionship.  The  two  Annes 
vied  with  each  other  in  their  scorn  of  vice  and  frivolity,  and 
their  association  with  their  blameless  mistress  creates  at 
once  in  the  midst  of  the  stifling  court  life  of  Charles  II.'s 
day  a  little  oasis  of  moral  purity,  and  of  spiritual  and  intel- 
lectual aspiration.  To  the  court  in  general.  Miss  Strickland 
adds,  Anne  Kingsmill  was  well-known  as  the  beautiful  and 
witty  maid  of  honor. 

In  her  youthful  days  Anne  had  looked  forward  to  life 
and  recognition  at  court  as  "an  earthly  paradise,"  but  her 
Xarriage  to  disappointment  there  had  been  intense.  Almost 
Mr.  Finch  ^er  only  unquestioned  source  of  happiness, 
aside  from  her  love  for  her  royal  mistress,  was  her  acquaint- 
ance with  Mr.  Heneage  Finch.  Ardelia  had  early  declared 
hostility  to  love,  "however  painted  o'er  and  seeming  soft" 
his  addresses  might  be,  but  she  was  at  last  forced  to  admit 
that  Mr.  Finch's  constant  passion  had  found  the  way  "to 
win  a  stubborn  and  ungrateful  heart."  Mr.  Finch  was  at 
that  time  a  commoner  with  but  a  remote  chance  of  an  earl- 
dom, but  as  the  oldest  living  son  of  Lord  Winchilsea,  and 
the  uncle  of  Charles,  the  heir  to  the  title,  he  was  treated 
with  consideration  in  court  circles.  He  had  been  bred 
to  arms,  and  was  at  this  time  captain  of  the  halbardiers 
of   the   Duke    of    York,   and   likewise    gentleman    of  the 


InTBODUOTION  XXV 


bedchamber.  But  though  brought  up  to  arms  and  forced 
by  circumstances  into  public  life,  not  Anne  Kingsmill  her- 
self had  a  more  genuine  love  for  studious  retirement  than 
possessed  the  mind  of  this  captain  and  courtier.  Doubtless 
no  dignity  of  these  days  was  more  prized  by  him  than  the 
D.  C.  L.  bestowed  upon  him  by  Oxford  when  he  went  thither 
with  James,  May  22,  1683. 

How  long  Anne's  stubborn  heart  resisted  Mr.  Finch's 
constancy  cannot  be  definitely  told,  but  the  marriage  license 
reads  as  follows : 

14  May,  1684.  Appealed  personally  Collonell  Heneage  Finch 
of  Eastwell  in  ye  Goimty  of  Kent,  Batchelor,  aged  ab.  27  years, 
and  alleadged  that  he  intends  to  marry  with  Madam  Anne  Kings- 
mill  of  ye  Parish  of  St.  Martins  in  ye  fields  in  ye  coimty  of  Middl 
a  spinster  aged  ab.  18  years  at  her  own  disposal  he  not  knowing 
any  lawful  let  or  impediment  to  hinder  ye  said  intended  marriage 
of  ye  truth  of  which  he  made  oath  and  prayed  a  Lyoenoe  for  them 
to  be  married  in  the  Chappie  of  St.  James  in  ye  parish  of  St.  Martin 
in  ye  ffields  after. 

The  "spinster  ab.  18  years"  is  a  delicious  bit  of 
coquetry,  a  charming  subjugation  of  the  independent  maid 
of  honor  to  the  prejudices  of  her  day.  She  was  cer- 
tainly twenty-two.  A  relentless  cordon  of  dates  makes 
escape  impossible.  But  who  can  censure  the  smooth  little 
"abouf  which  let  Anne  into  the  paradise  of  eighteen, 
if  he  but  recalls  the  fact  that  in  her  day  and  circle,  from 
fourteen  to  eighteen  were  the  marriageable  ages,  that  to  be 
twenty-one  was  to  rank  as  "  ancient,"  while  to  be  twenty- 
three  was  to  be  off  the  stage?  Anne's  mother  had  indulged 
in  a  like  evasive  phrase,  when,  in  her  second  wedding  license, 
she  put  herself  on  record  as  "  above  thirty."  The  marriage 
probably  took  place  on  the  following  day,  a  day  commemo- 
rated thirty-nine  years  later  in  Lord  Winchilsea's  private 
journal  by  the  simple  entry,  "  May  15,  1684.  Most  blessed 
day."     And  though  succeeding  years  held  much  in  the  way 


xxvi  Intboduotion 


of  deprivation  and  anxiety  and  grief,  this  marriage  was  the 
beginning  of  Anne  Finch's  real  and  permanent  happiness. 
Miss  Strickland  speaks  of  Mrs.  Finch  as  ''a  favorite  Maid 
of  Honour  of  the  Queen."  This  is,  however,  a  mistake.  On 
Domeitie  ^^^  occasion  of  Anne's  marriage  she  left  the 

Eappineif  service  of  Mary  of  Modena.  But  Mr.  Finch 
was  still  in  the  retinue  of  the  Duke  of  York,  and  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Finch  therefore  lived  in  Westminster.  It  was  the  pref- 
erence of  both  that  they  should  order  their  lives  in  as  simple 
and  retired  a  fashion  as  court  demands  would  permit. 
Ardelia's  poetic  aspirations  had  been  no  secret  to  Mr.  Finch 
in  her  maid  of  honor  days,  and  now  in  the  independency 
and  privacy  of  their  own  home  he  not  only  indulged  her 
verse,  but  even  now  and  then  "requir'd  her  rhymes."  When 
he  went  away  for  the  day  he  liked  to  have  a  poem  waiting 
for  him  at  night,  and  he  enjoyed  versified  letters.  Ardelia 
had  come  into  a  new  freedom.  She  and  her  husband  were 
most  unfashionably  happy  together.  She  was  not  ashamed 
to  declare  that  all  her  hopes  and  joys  were  bound  in  him. 
Occasional  brief  separations  caused  genuine  grief  to  both  of 
them.  When  Mrs.  Finch  was  at  Tunbridge  Wells  for  the 
waters  in  the  summer  of  1685,  her  husband's  loneliness 
made  him  urge  her  to  shorten  her  stay.  Only  the  first 
stanza  of  her  answer  is  decipherable  in  the  manuscript,  but 
that  in  its  simplicity  and  directness  of  statement  shows 
something  of  the  feeling  between  them: 

Daphnis  your  wish  no  more  repeat 
For  my  return  nor  mourn  my  stay, 
Lest  my  wise  purpose  you  defeat, 
And  urged  by  love  I  come  away. 
My  own  desires  I  can  resist 
But  blindly  yield  if  you  persist. 

Ardelia  gaily  describes  the  consternation  of  the  Muses 
when  they  were  called  upon  for  aid  in  praising  her  husband. 


Intboduotion  xxvii 


A  Husband  I  echo'd  all  around: 
And  to  ParruMSua  sure  that  sound 
Had  never  yet  been  sent. 

At  least  no  such  compromising  request  had  been  received 
at  the  sacred  Mount  "since  GrizzePs  Days,"  and  it  would  have 
gone  hard  with  Ardelia's  poem  had  she  not  luckily  found  in 
her  own  breast  so  many  tender  memories  that  the  aid  of  the 
Nine  was  superfluous.  Domestic  felicity  of  this  idyllic  sort 
was  certainly  not  in  harmony  with  the  prevailing  court 
standards.  This  age  had  defined  courtship  as  a  "witty  pro- 
logue to  a  dull  play;''  marriage  was  but  "an  ecclesiastical 
mouse-trap,"  and  all  marriage  was  said  "to  end  in  repent- 
ance;" while  the  accepted  similes  for  a  wife  were  "a  clog," 
"a  tether-stake,"  "a  yoke,"  "a  galling  load."  In  such  a 
state  of  public  opinion  a  home-life  so  unaffectedly  good,  so 
frankly  happy,  as  that  of  this  court-bred  lady  and  gentleman 
was  of  itself  a  mark  of  distinction. 

With  the  accession  to  the  throne  of  James  in  February, 
1685,  Mr.  Finch  became  more  than  ever  occupied  with  pub- 
lic affairs.  He  was  colonel  in  the  army;  he  was  groom  of 
the  bedchamber  to  the  king;  he  was  three  years  deputy 
lieutenant  for  the  county  of  Kent;  and  he  sat  one  year  as 
member  of  parliament  for  Hythe.  During  this  period  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Finch  lived  in  London  with  but  occasional  short 
visits  in  other  parts  of  England.  A  brief  stay  in  Somerset- 
shire in  1688  (probably  in  the  sunmier)  had,  as  its  outcome, 
the  following  statement  made  by  Lord  Winchilsea  August 
12,  1722: 

I  do  affirm  that  in  the  year  1688,  Mrs.  Mompesson  (wife  to 
Thomas  Mompesson,  esq.  of  Bruham,  in  Somersetshire,  a  worthy 
and  a  very  good  woman)  told  me  and  my  wife,  that  Archbishop  Juxon 
assured  her,  that  to  his  certain  knowledge  the  EIKON  BA2IAIKH 
was  all  composed  and  written  by  King  Charles  the  First. — Although 
in  the  following  book  the  King's  book  is  thoroughly  vindicated,  and 


xxviii  Intboduction 


proved  to  be  of  his  Majesty's  composing,  I  am  willing  to  add  this 
circumstance  from  Mrs.  Mompesson  with  whom  and  her  husband 
my  wife  and  I  at  this  time  sojourned.  WiNcmLSEA. 

This  "statement"  shows  the  eagerness  with  which  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Finch  followed  up  whatever  pertained  to  the 
fame  or  fortunes  of  the  Stuarts.  The  revolution  was  there- 
fore to  them  a  momentous  and  lamentable  event  as  a  result 
of  which  the  course  of  their  lives  was  suddenly  and  violently 
changed.  So  closely,  indeed  had  they  identified  themselves 
with  the  Stuart  interests  that  Mr.  Finch  found  it  impossible 
to  take  the  vows  of  allegiance  to  the  new  monarch. 

The  first  two  or  three  years  after  the  revolution,  accord- 
ingly, were  trying  ones.  During  these  years  we  find  Anne  in 
various  places  of  temporary  refuge,  but  with  no  fixed  home. 
In  December,  1688,  immediately  after  the  fiight  of  James,  she 
went  to  Kirby  and  spent  some  time  with  her  cousin  Elizabeth, 
the  Viscountess  Hatton.  In  July,  1689,  she  was  at  Eastwell 
on  a  visit.  At  some  date  near  this  she  was  at  Godmersham, 
where  she  wrote  Aristomenes.  Her  retirement  to  Wye 
college  belongs  somewhere  in  this  period.  The  succor 
offered  by  Lady  Thanet  to  Ardelia  in  her  hour  of  sorest 
need  may  indicate  that  for  a  time  Hothfield  was  her  refuge. 
At  any  rate  there  was  quite  a  prolonged  period  during  which 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Finch  felt  great  anxiety  concerning  their 
"much-diminished  bread"  and  their  possible  future  place  of 
abode.  Just  when  they  were  finally  domiciled  at  Eastwell 
is  a  little  uncertain.  Ardelia  says  in  her  Preface  that  their 
removal  into  the  solitude  and  security  of  the  country  was 
due  to  the  "generous  kindness  of  one  who  possessed  the  most 
delightful  seat  in  it,"  but  she  does  not  say  whether  this  was 
her  husband^s  father  or  nephew.  Heneage,  the  second  earl, 
died  in  September,  1689,  so  the  invitation  may  have  come 
from  him,  and  the  poem  of  July,  1689,  may  mark  the  begin- 
ning of  the  permanent  Eastwell  sojourn.  But  this  is  unlikely. 


Intboduotion  xxix 


All  the  farther  references  to  the  earl  in  this  preface  seem 
consistent  with  her  later  very  warm  friendship  for  the  young 
earl,  Charles,  and  inconsistent  with  other  references  to  her 
husband's  father.  Moreover,  a  poem  to  Lady  Worsley, 
written  after  1690,  speaks  as  if  Anne  were  still  in  some  place 
of  retirement  with  the  future  not  yet  determined  upon.  It  was 
almost  certainly  Charles,  the  third  earl,  who  invited  them 
to  make  their  home  at  EastwelL 

For  Anne  and  her  husband  the  change  was  complete. 
There  were  practically  no  ties  that  bound  the  family  to  the 
new  court,  for  although  the  second  earl,  in  spite  of  the  long 
and  devoted  services  of  his  house  to  the  Stuart  cause,  had 
at  last  declared  in  favor  of  William  and  Mary,  and  at  the 
revolution  had  been  counted  of  so  much  importance  that  his 
public  offices  had  been  renewed,  his  early  death  had  broken 
the  only  possible  link  between  his  family  and  the  reigning 
powers.  Charles  was  too  young  for  statecraft,  while 
Heneage  Finch,  Anne's  husband,  as  a  non-juror,  could 
have  no  part  in  public  affairs.  This  entire  severance  from 
court  activities  could  not,  however,  have  been  a  matter  of  un- 
mixed grief  to  Ardelia  and  her  husband.  To  be  together  on 
this  beautiful  estate  would,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  cause 
for  unmixed  joy  had  it  not  been  for  the  fate  of  their  royal 
master  and  mistress.  Their  loyalty  to  the  Stuarts  was  no 
ephemeral  passion,  and  nearly  all  the  poems  of  this  period 
are  dominated  by  a  melancholy  bom  of  the  disasters  of  that 
unhappy  house.  Ardelia  writes  concerning  the  composition 
of  Aristomenes: 

I  must  acknowledge,  yt  the  giving  some  interruptions  to  those 
melancholy  thoughts,  which  possesst  me,  not  only  for  my  own,  but 
much  more  for  the  misfortunes  of  those  to  whom  I  owe  all  imagin- 
able duty,  and  gratitude,  was  so  great  a  benefit,  that  I  have  reason 
to  be  satisfied  with  the  undertaking,  be  the  performance  never  so 
inconsiderable.  And,  indeed,  an  absolute  solitude  (which  often 
was  my  lott)  under  such  dejection  of  mind,  could  not  have  been 


XXX  Intboduotion 


supported,  had  I  indulged  myself  (as  was  too  natural  to  me)  only 
in  the  contemplation  of  present  and  real  afflictions,  which  I  hope 
will  plead  my  excuse,  for  turning  them  for  relief,  upon  such  as 
were  imaginary,  and  relating  to  persons  no  more  in  being. 

These  words  fairly  describe  the  state  of  mind  in  which 
many  of  the  early  poems  were  composed.  The  Petition  for 
an  Absolute  Retreat,  A  Fragment,  and  Lines  to  Lady 
Worsley  recount  Ardelia's  own  unhappiness.  The  Change, 
which  for  its  gentleness  and  dignity,  for  its  pathetic  sweet- 
ness, is  one  of  her  most  charming  poems,  is  a  little  allegory 
of  the  selfishness  and  insincerity  of  courtiers.  The  obscured 
sun  no  longer  followed  by  the  flowers  it  had  brought  into 
being,  the  dried-up  river  deserted  by  the  fish  it  had  nour- 
ished, the  ruined  mansion  forsaken  by  the  guests  it  had 
cherished,  are  evidently  but  successive  pictures  of  the  dis- 
crowned king.  The  Losse  commemorates  the  breaking  of 
some  close  personal  tie.  Could  the  Urania  of  the  poem  be 
possibly  Mary  of  Modena  herself  ? 

Urania  is  no  more,  to  me  she  is  no  more, 

All  these  combined  can  ne'er  that  loss  deplore. 

But  whoever  the  heroine,  the  genuineness  of  the  grief 
cannot  be  questioned,  a  genuineness  not  lessened  by  the 
Shelley-like  lament  that  grief  itself  is  mortal  The  verses 
On  the  Death  of  King  James  bring  to  an  end  the  series  of 
poems  especially  marked  by  the  bitterness  of  the  revolution. 
It  is  a  long,  heavy  poem,  in  parts  incomplete  and  crude,  but 
it  is  of  distinct  value  as  showing  James  II.  and  Mary  of 
Modena  from  the  point  of  view  of  one  of  their  own  house- 
hold. 

This  last  poem  was  not  written  till  1701,  and  in  spite  of 
the  indignant  sorrow  and  rebuke,  the  passionate  loyalty,  that 
flamed  up  anew  in  its  many  stanzas,  the  twelve  years  had 
already  brought  their  gift  of  healing,  and  Ardelia  had  found 
at  beautiful  Eastwell  a  more  serene  and  deeply  satisfying 


Intboduotion  xxxi 


life  than  could  have  opened  before  her  had  the  highest  court 
honors  been  hers. 

It  is  difKcult  to  think  of  the  present  splendid  mansion  at 
Eastwell  Park  as  connected  in  any  intimate  way  with  Arde- 
2Mtw6U  ^^*     '^^  eighteenth  century  house  was  built  by 

The  Kaniion  the  Italian  architect,  Bonomi,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Gteorge  Finch  Hatton,  the  eighth  Earl  of  Winchilsea. 
And  that  house  has  been  remodeled  and  enlarged  on  so 
magnificent  a  scale  by  the  present  owner,  Lord  Gerard,  as 
hardly  to  suggest  the  house  of  a  century  ago.  Yet  the  house 
to  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Finch  went  was  nevertheless  of  excep- 
tional interest.  It  dated,  in  its  seventeenth  century  form, 
from  1589,  in  which  year  Sir  Moyle  Finch  obtained  permis- 
sion from  Queen  Elizabeth  to  inclose  one  thousand  acres 
and  to  embattle  his  house.  The  original  building  was  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  having  been  built  by  Sir  Thomas  Moyle 
in  about  1544,  and  having  come  into  the  Finch  family 
through  the  marriage  of  Thomas  Finch,  Esq.,  and  Catherine 
Moyle.  The  wife  of  Sir  Moyle  Finch,  their  son,  was  the  rich 
heiress  of  Sir  Thomas  Heneage.  She  was  a  woman,  glad,  it 
is  true,  to  be  assured  of  an  appropriate  local  habitation,  but 
more  ambitious  of  a  name.  Nine  years  after  the  death  of 
her  husband  her  energetic  use  of  the  resources  at  her  com- 
mand was  crowned  by  the  title  of  Viscountess  Maidstone, 
and,  five  years  later,  in  1628,  by  that  of  Countess  of  Win- 
chilsea, both  titles  with  reversion  to  heirs  male.  So  that 
the  house  to  which  Anne  came  in  1690  was  of  interest  to  her 
not  only  as  a  fine  English  mansion  a  century  old,  with  por- 
tions of  it  boasting  an  additional  half  century  as  well,  but  it 
must  have  had  a  stronger  personal  attraction  as  the  home  of 
her  husband^s  family  since  the  days  of  Catherine  Moyle  and 
Elizabeth  Heneage,  the  heiresses  to  whom  they  owed  rank 
and  fortune. 

Of  Ardelia's  associations  with  the  estate  itself  we  may 


xxxii  Intboduotion 


speak  more  confidently.  Yet  even  here  reservations  most 
be  made.  We  must  free  ourselves,  for  instance,  from  the 
glamor  of  certain  historical  associations  that  date  back  only 
to  the  days  when  H.  R.  H.  the  Duke  of  Edinburgh,  made 
Eastwell  his  home,  when  members  of  the  royal  family 
planted  trees  that  still  bear  their  names,  when  Edward  YIL, 
then  Prince  of  Wales,  drank  tea  on  the  balcony  of  the  beauti- 
ful winter-garden.  We  must  banish,  too,  from  our  mental 
picture  of  Ardelia's  home  most  of  the  luxuries,  perhaps  most 
of  the  conveniences  of  the  modem  estate.  The  electric  light 
plant  and  the  gas  plant  must  give  way  to  candles.  For  the 
present  elaborate  system  of  water-works  we  must  substitute 
Mr.  Finch's  "  darling  spring  "  whence  water  was  brought  to 
the  house  in  a  cart ''  driven  by  one  of  the  underkeepers  in  a 
green  coat  with  a  hazelbough  for  a  whip."  For  the  modem 
splendor  of  equipment  and  service  we  must  figure  to  our- 
selves very  simple  domestic  arrangements.  The  completion 
of  the  house,  the  building  in  of  wide  glass  windows,  the 
plotting  of  gardens,  the  fair  ordering  of  the  trees,  terraces, 
and  lawns  adjacent  to  the  house  were  all  improvements  not 
accomplished  till  ten  or  twelve  years  after  Ardelia's  arrival 
at  Eastwell. 

But  in  spite  of  all  the  enlargements  and  modifications 
and  improvements  made  from  1700  to  1900,  there  are  yet 
larse  portions  of  the  estate  that  must  be  today 
as  they  were  when  Ardelia  first  went  to  East- 
well  The  following  notes,  taken,  in  substance,  from  the 
Eastwell  Blue  Book  of  the  present  day,  give  the  very  details 
urged  in  enthusiastic  praise  by  earlier  topographical  writers: 

Near  the  church  of  Boughton  Aluph  is  the  Pilgrim's  Road, 
marked  by  yew  trees  supposed,  to  have  been  planted  by  pilgrims 
on  their  way  to  Canterbury  to  show^other  pilgrims  the  way.  Near 
Timber  Gate  Lodge  is  a  grand  avenue  of  beeches  with  large 
stretches  of  fern.  In  one  place  are  twelve  yew  trees  near  together 
—  wierd  in  shape,  colossal  in  proportion,  hoary  in  antiquity.    If 


Intboduotion  xxxiii 


they  could  speak  they  would  probably  tell  us  of  forest  chases  in  the 
time  of  Alfred  the  Great,  if  not  of  Egbert,  the  first  king  of  Eng- 
land, who  ascended  the  throne  in  827 We  pass  through 

hills,  slopes,  undulations,  and  levels,  which,  with  their  ancient 
timber  and  high  fern,  form  the  very  ideal  of  an  ancestral  park  of 
the  ancient  noblesse.  Here  and  there  through  the  Park  are  stumps 
of  trees  that  were  flourishing  before  Duke  William  of  Normandy 

became  William  I.  of  England The  ride  through  the  woods 

on  a  sultry  day  is  most  delightful ;  the  complete  shelter  and 
obscured  sky,  the  brown  carpet  of  dried  beech-leaves  and 
beech-husks,  the  startling  of  the  deer,  the  voices  of  nature,  the 
absence  of  any  sight  or  sound  to  indicate  that  one  is  in  a  country  of 
human  beings  combining  to  add  a  charm  of  repose  and  of  poetic 
seclusion.  The  church  of  St.  Cosmos  and  the  embattled  tower  and 
beacon  turret  of  the  church  are  very  ancient.  In  this  churchyard 
is  a  yew,  old  in  the  time  of  William  the  Conqueror.  This  church 
stands  in  a  lovely  si)ot  surrounded  by  greenery  where  no  sound 

reaches  it  but  the  voices  of  birds  and  occasional  animals At 

Challocks  Church  bottom  formerly  stood  the  straight  oak  which, 
because  of  its  shape  and  colossal  proportions,  was  worth  more  than 
£100  for  the  timber  there  was  in  it.    A  former  Lord  Winchilsea 

refused  that  sum  for  it The  Star  Walk  is  still  traceable  but 

much  overgrown Mt.  Pleasant  is  a  circular  eminence  sur- 
rounded by  ancient  yew  trees  standing  at  intervals  as  solitary  sen- 
tinels. From  this  i>oint  the  view  is  remarkable.  At  our  back  is  the 
wooded  park  with  its  undulations,  its  mansion,  gardens  and  lake, 
with  the  tower  of  Eastwell  church  peeping  up  through  the  trees. 
On  our  left  the  horizon  line  is  formed  by  Wye  church  and  Wye 
Downs.  Spread  out  before  us  are  villages,  parks,  county  seats,  hop 
gardens,  fruit  gardens,  orchards,  cornfields,  woods,  plantations  and 
meadows.  In  the  distance  we  descry  the  coast  town  of  Hythe,  and 
on  a  clear  day  we  may  see  the  English  channel  with  its  passing 
shipping. 

The  majesty  and  dream-like  loveliness  of  this  park  could 
not  have  been  less  in  the  seventeenth  century.  Lady  Win- 
chilsea says  of  it: 

And  now  whenever  I  contemplate  the  several  beautys  of  this 
Park,  allow'd  to  be  (if  not  of  the  Universal  yett)  of  our  British 
World  infinitely  the  finest. 


xxxiv  Introduction 


A  pleasing  wonder  through  my  fancy  roves, 
Smooth  as  her  lawns,  and  lofty  as  her  Groves. 
Boundless  my  Genius  seems,  when  my  free  sight, 
Finds  only  distant  skys  to  stop  her  flight. 
Like  mighty  Denhams,  then,  methinks  my  hand, 
Might  bid  the  Landskip,  in  strong  numbers  stand, 
Fix  all  its  charms,  with  a  Poetick  skill, 
And  raise  its  Fame  above  his  Cooper's  Hill. 

This,  I  confess,  is  what  in  itts  self  itt  deserves,  but  the  unhappy 
difference  is,  that  he  by  being  a  real  Poet,  cou'd  make  that  place 
(as  he  sais)  a  Parnassus  to  him ;  whilst  I  that  behold  a  real  Par- 
nassus here,  in  that  lovely  Hill,  which  in  this  Park  bears  that  name, 
find  in  myself  so  little  of  the  Poet,  that  I  am  still  restrained  from 
attempting  a  description  of  itt  in  verse,  tho'  the  agreeableness  of 
the  subject  has  often  prompted  me  most  strongly  to  itt. 

The  central  figure  in  the  family  circle  when  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Finch  went  to  Eastwell  was,  of  course,  Charles,  the 
The  FamUy  joxmg  earl,  then  eighteen  or  nineteen  years  of 
atEastweU  age.  His  sister  Mariamne  was  three  years 
older,  while  his  mother,  Elizabeth  Wyndham,  a  widow  from 
his  birth,  was  still  a  young  woman.  Charles  was  the  grand- 
son of  the  second  earl  by  his  second  wife,  Mary  Seymour, 
of  whose  eleven  children  five,  at  least,  were  still  living.  Of 
these,  Frances  was  the  wife  of  Viscount  Thynne  of  Long- 
leat.  Leopold  was  warden  of  All-Soul's  College,  Oxford. 
The  sons  possibly  still  at  Eastwell  were  Lashley  and  Henry, 
young  men  between  twenty-two  and  eighteen  years  of  age. 
Two  daughters,  Catherine  and  Elizabeth,  between  ten  and 
fifteen,  were  children  of  the  third  wife.  Elizabeth  Ayres, 
the  fourth  wife,  was  still  living,  and  though  technically  the 
grandmother  of  the  earl,  was  a  young  woman  of  twenty- 
eight,  with  a  son  John,  of  seven,  who  became  the  fifth  earl, 
and  a  little  daughter,  Anne,  of  two.  It  is  possible  that  not 
all  these  persons  lived  at  Eastwell.  But  it  was  at  any  rate 
a  large,  a  young,  and  a  curiously  complex  family  circle  into 


InTBODUOTION  XXXV 


which  Heneage  and  Anne  Finch  came  after  the  wreck  of 
their  fortunes  in  1688. 

That  Anne  was  speedily  at  home  with  her  husband's  kin 
is  apparent  from  various  bits  of  playful  verse  commemorating 
domestic  happenings,  the  best  of  these  being  the  charmingly 
light  and  deft  Lines  on  a  Punch  Bowl,  addressed  to  her 
brother  Lashley.  But  her  meed  of  serious  verse  was  natu- 
rally reserved  for  Charles.  He  was  the  earl;  he  was  her 
generous  and  hospitable  host;  he  was  young,  gay,  hand- 
some; she  approved  of  his  management  of  Eastwell;  he 
approved  of  her  poetry.  The  ties  were  certainly  strong. 
Fortunately  Charles  was  not  only  knowing  in  all  the  rules  of 
poetry,  and  at  his  pleasure  capable  of  putting  them  in  prac- 
tice, but  he  was  also  indulgent  to  the  gentle  craft  of  poesy 
when  practiced  by  others.  It  was,  indeed,  his  lordship's 
commendation  of  some  lines  of  hers  that  led  Ardelia  to  her 
final  joyous  renunciation  of  the  vows  so  often  and  so 
straitly  made  to  forego  the  unfeminine  seductions  of  the 
pen.  In  the  Prologue  to  Aristomenes  we  have  a  very 
pleasant  picture  of  the  shy  Ardelia  and  the  poetically 
inclined  young  earl  by  the  good  winter's  fire  in  the  drawing- 
room  at  Eastwell,  while  she,  with  outward  dash  and  fun,  but 
with  hardly  concealed  inward  trepidation,  presents  to  this 
much-dreaded  critic  who  had  the  rules  of  Horace  at  his 
tongue's  end  her  "wholly  tragicall"  play. 

The  social  joys  of  Eastwell  were  not,  however,  limited  to 
the  family.     Ardelia,  who  says  of  herself, 

j^  I  who  to  my  heart  just  bounds  had  sett, 

WinehilMa'f  And  in  my  friendship  scom'd  to  be  coquette 

FrieniUhipf  Qj.  geem  indulgent  to  each  new  Adresse, 

really  did,  in  spite  of  this  reserve,  walk  in  the  footsteps  of 
the  Matchless  Orinda  in  her  capacity  for  devoted  attach- 
ments, and  were  it  not  for  the  disguise  of  fanciful  names, 
we  should  be  introduced  through  her  poems  to  a  wide  circle. 


xxxvi  Intboduotion 


But  though  certain  Oranias  and  Uranias  remain  unidentified, 
in  many  cases  the  disguise  is  penetrable,  and  sometimes  the 
real  names  are  used. 

One  group  of  poems  shows  the  close  relationship  always 
maintained  between  Ardelia  and  the  family  of  Lord  Thanet, 
of  Hothfield.  Catherine  Cavendish  was  four  years  younger 
than  herself,  but  she  was  married  to  Lord  Thanet  in  1684, 
only  a  few  months  after  the  marriage  of  Anne  Kingsmill 
and  Mr.  Finch.  Inasmuch  as  all  the  poems  addressed  to 
Arminda  refer  to  her  as  **my  Lady  Thanet,"  they  must  all  date 
after  1684.  The  Inquiry  After  Peace^  a  poem  inserted  in  a 
letter  to  Lady  Thanet,  and  the  Petition  fen*  an  Absolute 
Retreat  show  that  in  hours  of  foreboding  or  of  actual  dis- 
aster, Ardelia's  instinctive  refuge  was  *'the  great  Arminda." 

What  Nature,  or  refining  Art, 
All  that  Fortime  cou'd  impart. 
Heaven  did  to  Arminda  send ; 
Then  gave  her  for  Ardelia'a  Friend. 

The  good  Lord  Thanet  evidently  agreed  with  Ardelia's 
estimate  of  his  young  wife.  He  outlived  her  for  many  years, 
but  had  carved  on  his  tombstone  as  the  most  notable  fact  in 
his  career  that  he  had  been  married  to  Catherine  Cavendish, 
and  that  he  "  believed  no  woman  on  earth  would  have  made 
him  so  happy  as  she  did;"  so  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Finch  were  not 
alone  in  their  unfashionable  domestic  felicity.  The  daugh- 
ter, Catherine  Tufton,  chose  Ardelia  as  the  recipient  of  "the 
first  letter  that  ever  she  writt,"  and  she  is  thereupon  cele- 
brated as  the  high-bom  Serena,  fair  and  young.  Of  more 
interest  is  the  probable  relation  between  Ardelia  and  the 
second  daughter,  Anne  Tufton,  who  was  married  in  1708-9, 
when  she  was  but  fifteen  or  sixteen,  to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury. 
Is  she  then  the  "  Salisbury  "  praised  in  the  Nocturnal  Rev- 
erief  Leigh  Hunt,  in  Jfen,  Women,  and  Books,  says  posi- 
tively, but  without  giving  his  authority,  that  the  "  Salisbury" 


Intboduotion  xxxvii 


of  the  poem  is  Frances  Bennett,  the  wife  of  the  fourth  Earl 
of  Salisbury ;  while  Jane  Williams  in  Literary  Women  of 
England^  says,  with  equal  positiveness  and  equal  absence 
of  a  citation  of  authority,  that  this  "  Salisbury"  is  the  Lady 
Anne  Tufton.  Wordsworth  suggested  that  the  lines  in  ques- 
tion marred  the  poem  and  should  be  omitted.  Such  a 
course  would  certainly  save  controversy.  With  no  actual 
proof  at  hand,  only  the  probabilities  of  the  case  can  be 
stated,  and  these  are  all  in  favor  of  Anne  Tufton.  The  com- 
paratively late  date  of  the  poem  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that 
it  appears  in  neither  manuscript^  The  latest  possible  date 
for  it  would  be  1713,  the  date  of  its  publication,  and  the 
earliest  possible  date,  if  Anne  Tufton  is  the  "  Salisbury," 
would  be  1709.  In  these  years  the  young  countess  would 
be  between  sixteen  and  twenty,  with  Lady  Winchilsea  twenty- 
two  years  older,  a  disparity  of  age  that  might  tell  against  a 
close  friendship  between  the  two  countesses,  but  would  cer- 
tainly be  no  bar  to  an  adroit  compliment  from  the  older  lady 
to  the  daughter  of  her  dearest  friend.  And  there  is  no 
record  of  any  friendship  with  Frances  Bennett 

Another  family  closely  connected  with  the  Finches  was 
that  of  the  Thynnes  of  Longleat  Ardelia  visited  often  at 
The  ThyiuMf  ^^^  noble  estate,  and  the  mansion,  and  espe- 
of  Longleat  cially  the  gardens,  the  most  splendid  and  costly 
example  of  the  formal  garden  at  that  time  in  England,  never 
failed  to  arouse  her  enthusiasm.  The  Thynne  family,  also, 
both  collectively  and  individually,  received  their  meed  of 
eulogistic  verse.  The  poems  run  along  from  1690  to  1714, 
and  show  a  steadfast  and  intimate  friendship.  The  death  of 
young  James  Thynne  is  made  the  occasion  for  an  enumeration 
of  the  renowned  ancestors  of  the  family.  Of  these  distin- 
guished persons  none  attracted  Ardelia  more  than  ^^that 
matchless  Female,"  the  Lady  Packington,  who  was  supposed 
by  many  to  be  the  author  of  The  Whole  Duty  of  Marty  and  who 


xxxviii  Intboduotion 


of  each  Sex  the  two  best  Gifts  enjoyed, 
The  Skill  to  write,  the  Modesty  to  hide. 

Grace  Stroud,  the  wife  of  Henry  Thynne,  is  the  Cleone  of 
the  poems.  Her  husband  is  Theanor,  and  is  always  spoken 
of  with  a  certain  awe  because  of  his  knowledge  of  the  fine 
arts.  As  a  judge  of  tapestry,  painting,  and  poetry  his  opin- 
ions seemed  beyond  contradiction.  Ardelia  must  have  had 
more  than  one  thrill  of  gratified  pride  as  she  found  her  own 
poems  praised  from  time  to  time  by  so  competent  a  critic. 
When,  seven  years  after  his  death,  she  sent  her  volume  of 
poems  to  his  daughter,  the^oung  Countess  of  Hertford,  she 
rests  her  modest  plea  on  the  father's  favor  rather  than  on 
her  own  merits.  It  is  interesting  to  see  Lady  Hertford,  the 
friend  in  later  years  of  Thomson,  Savage,  and  Shenstone, 
begin  thus  early  her  role  as  patroness  of  letters. 

Frances,  the  daughter  of  Viscount  Weymouth,  married  Sir 
Robert  Worsley  in  1690.  Lady  Worsley  is  the  "  Utresia  "  who 
had  "  so  obligingly  desired  Ardelia  to  correspond  with  her  by 
Letter."  Ardelia's  response  to  the  request  of  this  petted 
child  of  fortune,  beautiful  in  her  fresh  and  smiling  bloom, 
universally  beloved,  encompassed  with  present  joys  and  rich 
in  hope,  is  couched  in  complimentary  terms  that  would  cer- 
tainly stimulate  Lady  Worsley's  side  of  the  correspondence. 
But  though  extravagant,  the  praise  Ardelia  gives  is  evidently 
from  her  heart.  She  speaks  only  what  she  feels.  A  little 
hint  of  the  permanence  of  this  friendship  is  found  in  a  letter 
from  Lady  Marrow  to  Lady  Kay,  quoted  on  page  xliv.  In 
Ardelia^ B  Answer  to  Ephelia  the  reference  to  "your  large 
Pallace"  as  their  "place  of  meeting,  love  and  liberty," 
would  seem  definitely  to  affix  the  "  Ephelia"  to  some  one  of 
the  Longleat  ladies.  The  date  of  the  poem,  which  is  about 
1690-1,  would  still  further  confine  the  allusion  to  the  Vis- 
countess Weymouth  or  to  the  Lady  Worsley,  and  Anne's  in- 
timacy with  the  latter  would  make  her  the  more  probable  one. 


Intboduotion  xxxix 


In  that  case  the  "Ephelia"  of  the  little  poem  on  Friendship 
is  doubtless  also  Lady  Worsley.  That  she  should  be  "  Utre- 
sia,^^  in  one  poem  and  ''Ephelia^'  in  another  is  no  more  sur- 
prising than  that  Mr.  Finch  should  figure  as  both  ''  Daph- 
nis"  and  "  Flavio."  Lady  Worsley's  daughter  is  celebrated 
in  some  gay  little  verses  in  honor  of  the  marriage  of  Edward 
and  Elizabeth  Herbert,  which  must  have  taken  place  about 
1709,  when  the  bride  and  groom  were  respectively  fourteen 
and  seventeen.  Cupid,  having  lost  Elizabeth  Herbert,  is 
comforted  by  the  thought  that  he  may  still  find  a  suitable 
mate  in  the  young  Worsley,  who  was  then  fiifteen,  and  who 
was  marri^  the  next  year  to  Lord  Cartaret. 

One  of  the  prominent  figures  at  Longleat  at  this  time  was 
Elizabeth  Singer,  afterward  Mrs.  Rowe,  whose  pen-name 
was  Philomela.  In  1694,  when  a  young  lady  of  twenty, 
she  was  on  intimate  terms  with  the  family,  and  Mr.  Henry 
Thynne  taught  her  Latin  and  Italian.  A  collection  of  her 
poems  was  published  in  1696  and  was  much  admired.  The 
friendship  between  Elizabeth  Singer  and  Lady  Hertford  was 
warm  and  was  life-long.  One  would  expect  from  the  circum- 
stances that  Ardelia  and  Philomela  would  have  found  much 
in  common,  but  their  extant  letters  and  poems  do  not  reveal 
any  especial  friendship.  Ardelia  refers  once  in  The  Miser 
and  the  Poet  to  the  poems  of  Philomela,  and  a  letter  from 
Mrs.  Rowe  to  Lady  Hertford,  in  1720,  the  year  of  Lady 
Winchilsea's  death,  written  to  condole  with  Lady  Hertford 

for  the  death  of   "My   Lady ,"  may  refer    to    Lady 

Winchilsea.  The  letter  closes:  "  'Tis  impertinent  to  reason, 
and  against  the  dictates  of  nature,  or  else  you  might  satisfy 
yourself  with  the  extraordinary  character  she  left  behind  her 
and  her  rest  from  the  misfortunes  of  life.''  But  this  letter  is 
indecisive,  and  there  are  no  further  indications  of  any  ac- 
quaintance between  the  two  poetesses. 

There  was  also  resident  at  Longleat  the  saintly  Bishop 


xl  Intboduotion 


Ken,  the  author  of  several  widely-known  hymns,  as  ''  Awake 
My  Soul"  and  " Glory  to  Thee,  My  God,  This  Night."  He 
was  one  of  the  nonjuring  bishops,  and  at  this  time  living 
in  retirement  under  the  protection  of  Yisoount  Thynne. 
Ardelia  was  much  impressed  by  the  beauty  and  consistency 
of  Bishop  Ken's  life.  She  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  in 
her  poem  on  the  hurricane  of  1703,  that  the  bishop's  man- 
sion at  Wells  would  never  have  been  so  scourged  by  the  wild 
winds  had  Bishop  Ken  not  been  supplanted  by  Bishop  Kidder. 
On  the  whole,  we  may  safely  say  that  Longleat  was  the  source 
to  Ardelia  of  much  personal  happiness,  and  of  much  in  the 
way  of  poetical  guidance  and  inspiration. 

Ardelia's  long,  dignified,  and  rather  heavy  poem  on  the 
death  of  Sir  William  Twysden,  shows  how  intimately  she 

knew  him  and  how  genuinely  she  admired  him. 

The  Twysdens  were  also  her  husband's  relatives, 
for  Sir  William  was  the  great-grandson  of  the  famous 
Elizabeth  Heneage,  the  first  Countess  of  Winchilsea.  When 
Anne  visited  at  the  Twysden  estate  it  must  have  been 
with  an  envious  pleasure  that  she  gazed  upon  certain  heir- 
looms there.  Sir  William  owned  the  picture  of  the  first 
Lady  Winchilsea  and  "  the  blew  case  of  gold  in  which  it  is," 
and  also  a  dozen  of  silver  plates  that  had  been  given  by  the 
said  Lady  Winchilsea  as  a  legacy  to  Sir  William's  grand- 
mother, '^having  the  said  Ladies  armes  on  the  one  side  and 
coronet  of  an  Earle  over  them,  and  on  the  backside  a  Coro- 
net and  over  against  it  A.  T.,"  the  initials  of  the  grandmother, 
Anne  Twysden.  There  was  also  "a  gold  booke  "  and  "a  gold 
bole  and  cover  to  it  belonging,"  which  had  apparently  come 
from  the  same  source.  Sir  William  was  learned  in  history, 
genealogies  and  heraldry.  He  was,  according  to  Ardelia,  a 
clear-sighted  and  moderate  patriot;  an  author  himself  of  no 
mean  rank;  and  a  gentleman  of  fine  taste,  high  breeding, 
and  affable  manners. 


Intboduction  xli 


Ardelia^s  personal  poems  do  not  bear  the  stamp  of  con- 
ventional eulogy.  In  an  interchange  of  formal  literary 
compliments  she  could  be  as  verbose  and  vapid  as  the  law 
governing  such  effusions  seemed  to  demand.  But  poems 
written  to  people  for  whom  she  had  a  personal  friendship 
are  quite  different  in  tone.  They  strike  a  modem  reader 
as  having  a  good  deal  of  what  Dr.  Johnson  would  call 
**encomiastic  fervor,"  but  they  likewise  have  the  stamp  of 
genuineness.  These  eulogies  are  Ardelia's  deliberate  esti- 
mates of  the  friends  she  praises.  The  total  effect  of  her 
rather  prolific  and  almost  wearisomely  minute  personal  poems 
is  to  introduce  us  to  a  company  of  sweet-spirited,  quick- 
witted, beautiful,  and  virtuous  women;  to  a  company  of  men 
patriotic,  well  educated,  of  high  breeding,  refined  manners, 
and  cultivated  tastes.  It  is  worth  a  moments  pause  to  note 
the  marked  contrast  between  the  social  life  thus  indicated 
and  that  presented  by  contemporary  writers,  such  as  Pope, 
Swift,  or  Prior.  Certainly  no  Jeremy  Collier  would  have 
been  needed  had  all  the  aristocracy  been  such  as  Ardelia 
portrays.  Either  she  had  a  gift  for  eliciting  and  seeing 
only  the  best  in  her  friends,  or  she  decisively  rejected  all 
who  were  not  of  the  best;  or,  the  more  probable  hypothesis, 
her  pictures  of  Lord  Thanet  and  Viscount  Thynne  and  Sir 
William  Twysden,  of  Arminda  and  Cleone,  and  Serena,  and 
Ephelia,  and  Utresia,  and  the  rest  of  the  goodly  squires 
and  dames,  as  truthfully  represent  the  times  as  Pope's 
Chloes  and  Atossas  and  Sapphos,  his  Bufos  and  Bubos 
and  Lord  Fannys.  Ardelia  merely  brings  into  the  light  a 
typical  group  of  the  best  portion  of  the  English  aristocracy 
of  her  day. 

Life  at  Eastwell  was  further  varied  by  visits  to  different 
watering-places,  and  by  winters  in  London.  Ardelia's  town- 
house  was  in  Cleveland  Row,  a  short  street  adjacent  to  St. 
James's  palace.     Charles  Jervas,  the  artist  who  painted  a 


xlii  Introduction 


portrait  of  Pope,  and  whose  house  was  often  Pope's  head- 
quarters in  London,  lived  but  a  short  distance  away,  in 
Cleveland  Court.  Lady  Winchilsea  knew  Jervas,  and  admired 
his  work,  especially  the  portrait  of  her  friend,  the  lovely 
Mrs.  Chetwynd.  It  was  at  the  house  of  Jervas  that  Pope 
was  staying  when  Lady  Winchilsea  invited  him  to  the  famous 
dinner  which  was  followed  by  the  dramatic  recital  destined 
to  play  so  interesting  a  part  in  the  relations  between  Pope 
and  Ardelia. 

Visits  to  the  more  noted  watering-places  were  not  infre- 
quent. We  have  seen  the  depression  of  spirit  engendered  by 
the  public  and  private  disasters  incident  on  the  revolution. 
But  Ardelia's  peace  of  mind  was  assailed  by  another  and 
even  more  insidious  foe.  That  "anxious  Rebell,"  her  heart, 
was  reinforced  by  another  enemy  within  the  gates.  ^  She  was, 
in  fact,  an  unfortunate  victim  of  the  Spleen,  a  fashionable 
eighteenth  century  distemper,  the  protean  woes  of  which 
had  early  cradled  her  into  song.  Many  were  her  ineffectual 
attempts  to  find  relief  through  visits  to  various  health  resorts. 
Of  these  Tunbridge  Wells  with  its  "quick  spring  of  spirit- 
eous  water''  was  the  most  fashionable,  and  its  fame  as  a  cure 
for  the  Spleen  was  long-lived.  We  find  Lady  Winchilsea 
here  once  in  1685  and  again  in  1706. 

A  less  noted  resort,  but  one  much  frequented  by  the 
gentry  and  lauded  by  medical  men  was,  at  Astrop,  a  small  vil- 
lage near  London.  A  "  Learned  Physician  "  in  1668  gave 
four  pages  to  an  encomium  of  the  well  dedicated  to  St.  Bum- 
bald,  a  child  which  spake  as  soon  as  he  was  bom.  This 
well,  says  the  Learned  Physician,  "openeth,  astringeth,  and 
consolidateth  egregiously."  It  takes  away  "ecrementitious 
Humidities  of  the  Brain  ....  opens  the  obstructions  of  the 
Liver  and  Spleen,  cures  the  Flatus  Hypochondriacus,  and  the 
Palpitation  and  Trembling  of  the  Heart  proceeding  from 
thence It  fastens  the  Teeth  though  ready  to  drop 


Intboduotion  xliii 


ont It  comforts  the  Nerves,  helps  the  Gout 

strengthens  broken  Bones takes  away  the  swelling 

and  pains  of  the  Spleen  ....  and  cures  Aches  and  Cramps 
in  any  part  of  the  body  whatsoever."  But  even  this  concen- 
trated apothecary's  shop  proved  unavailing  in  Lady  Winchil- 
sea's  case.  Neither  Tunbridge  nor  Astrop  gave  her  the 
branch  of  healing  spleenwort  with  which  Pope's  Umbriel 
safely  penetrated  to  the  cave  of  the  gloomy  goddess.  Her 
poem  on  The  Spleen  is  of  the  first-hand,  naturalistic  order. 
It  has  none  of  the  glittering  generalities  bom  of  vague  knowl- 
edge. So  full  and  accurate  is  its  account  of  symptoms  that 
it  achieved  prompt  professional  recognition.  Dr.  Stukeley 
published  it  in  his  treatise  on  the  spleen,  for  the  purpose,  as 
he  said,  of  helping  out  his  own  description.  Lady  Win- 
chilsea  admits  that  the  spleen  is  often  counterfeited,  but 
maintains  that  the  real  disease  is  of  the  gravest  sort.  The 
sufferer  is  afflicted  by  insomnia  or  by  boding  dreams  and 
terrifying  visions.  There  are  successive  moods  of  stupid 
discontent,  wild  anger,  panic  fear.  Spleen  blights  the  ablest 
minds  with  self-doubt.  It  enters  the  realm  of  religion  and 
perplexes  men  with  endless,  foolish  scruples.  It  fills  the 
heart  with  fancied  griefs.  It  creates  an  abnormal  love  of 
solitude.  Various  early  poems,  as  On  Orief^  To  Sleep^  To 
Melancholy^  express  in  other  terms  the  extreme  depression 
of  spirits  against  which  the  sufferer  from  the  spleen  had  to 
contend.  Ardelia  addresses  Melancholy  as  her  ^'  old  invet'- 
rate  foe,"  who  in  spite  of  mirth,  music,  poetry  and  friendship, 
in  spite  even  of  "  the  Indian  leaf  and  parch'd  eastern  Berry" 
still  holds  his  throne  in  her  darkened  heart.  In  despairing 
surrender  she  exclaims: 

To  thee,  great  Monarch,  I  submitt. 

Thy  Sables  and  thy  Cypress  bring, 

I  own  thy  Pow'r,  I  own  thee  King, 

Thy  title  in  my  heart  is  writt. 

And  till  that  breaks  I  ne'er  shall  freedom  gett. 


xliv  Introduction 


It  is  probable,  however,  that  as  the  years  went  by  her 
health  improved.  Her  spirits  certainly  did.  When  she  was 
at  Tunbridge  in  1706  she  was  sufficiently  at  leisure  from  her- 
self to  examine  into  the  love-making  then  so  popular  a  pas- 
time at  the  Wells  and  to  write  it  up  with  fine  scorn.  And 
she  threw  a  playful  jibe  at  the  doctors  who  thought  to  cure  the 
spleen  with  a  formula.  Further  proof  of  this  increased 
gayety  of  spirit  is  in  a  letter,  written  August  1708,  from  Lady 
Morrow  to  her  daughter.  Lady  Kay: 

Friday  last  I  went  to  town From  the  Vice  Chamberlain 

I  went  to  see  Mrs.  Finch,  she  ill  of  the  spleen.  Lady  Worsley  has 
painted  a  pretty  fire-screen  and  presented  her  with;  and  notwith- 
standing her  ill-natured  distemper,  she  was  very  diverting — Mrs. 
Finch  I  mean. 

It  is  not  certain  that  Ardelia  ever  discovered  Green's 
famous  remedy  for  the  spleen, 

Throw  but  a  stone,  the  Giant  dies, 

but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  simple  life  at  East- 
well,  the  long,  entrancing  walks  in  the  park,  and  the  peace 
growing  out  of  congenial  companionships  and  congenial 
occupations  were  better  cures  than  Tunbridge  or  Astrop. 

No  record  of  Ardelia's  life  at  Eastwell  would  be  satisfac- 
tory without  as  full  an  account  as  possible  of  the  '^one  from 
whom  she  was  inseparable.''  In  her  description  of  her  ideal 
retreat  from  the  world  the  one  person  needed  to  make  its 
charms  complete  was 

A  Partner,  suited  to  my  Mind, 

Solitary,  pleas'd  and  kind ; 

Who,  partially,  may  something  see 

Preferred  to  all  the  World,  in  me ; 

Slighting,  by  my  humble  Side, 

Fame  and  Splendour,  Wealth  and  Pride. 

Inasmuch  as  this  was  a  description  after  the  event,  the 
lines  may  be  counted  a  fairly  accurate,  though  they  are  not 


Intboduotion  xlv 


an  adequate,  picture  of  Heneage  Finch  in  this  Eastwell  life. 
In  a  poetical  appeal  to  Dafnis  written  about  1700,  in  which 
Ardelia  urges  him  to  leave  his  usual  occupations  for  a  walk 
in  the  fields,  we  have  incidentally  a  summary  of  the  interests 
of  this  retired  courtier  and  soldier.  He  follows  with  steady 
attention  all  the  details  of  the  campaigns  in  behalf  of  his 
old  Master  James,  and  the  work  of  Yauban,  Lewis's  chief 
engineer,  is  minutely  studied.  But  there  are  other  and  more 
peaceful  interests.  Mr.  Finch  is  attracted  by  geographical  re- 
search and  is  absorbed  in  the  work  of  Nicolas  and  Guillaume 
Sanson,  the  French  geographers.  He  busies  himself  with 
mathematical  drawing.  He  particularly  enjoys  doing  illu- 
minations on  vellum.  Against  the  tyranny  of  these  pursuits 
Ardelia  makes  playful  protest.  The  partner  entirely  suited 
to  her  mind  should  discover  that  reading  even  the  softest 
poetry  about  nature  could  not  vie  with  seeing  nature  itself, 
that  the  best  ''carmine  and  imported  blew''  cannot  compete 
with  the  bright  colors  of  the  corn-flower  and  the  poppy,  that 
faery  circles  on  the  green  are  of  more  worth  than  the  truest 
line  compasses  can  draw,  and  that  all  Sanson's  facts  about 
the  universe  are  as  naught  before  the  joy  of  one  perfect 
English  day  spent  among  the  fields  and  groves.  So  eager  a 
delight  in  outdoor  life  must  have  been  infectious,  and  we  can 
hardly  imagine  Dafnis  insensible  to  Ardelia's  pleadings. 
His  interest  in  Eastwell,  however,  took  another  and  more 
learned  direction,  that  of  antiquarian  research.  He  was  an 
enthusiastic  believer,  for  instance,  in  the  legend  that  Kichard 
Plantagenet  had  served  as  a  brick-layer  at  Eastwell  when 
the  house  of  Sir  Moyle  Finch  was  built;  that  Sir  Moyle,  on 
discovering  the  royal  workman,  had  granted  him  his  wish 
for  a  palace  of  one  room  built  in  a  field;  and  that  an  ancient 
unmarked  tomb  in  Eastwell  Church  covered  the  remains  of 
the  hapless  Kichard.  It  was  through  Mr.  Finch  that  the 
legend  first  saw  light.     Dr.  Brett  related  the  story  in  a  let- 


xlvi  Intboduction 


ter  published  in  Peck's  Desiderata  Curiosa  (1732),  saying 
that  he  had  his  information  from  Heneage,  Earl  of  Win- 
chilsea,  whom  he  visited  at  Eastwell  Park  in  1720.  An  anony- 
mous tract,  entitled  The  Parallel^  and  published  in  London, 
1744,  tells  the  story  of  Bichard,  and  closes  with  these  words: 

This  house  of  Eastwell  Place  came  afterwards  into  possession 
of  the  eldest  Branch  of  the  noble  Family  of  Finch«  and  it  is  to  the 
laudable  curiosity  of  the  late  Heneage,  Earl  of  Winchilsea,  a  Noble- 
man whose  virtues  threw  a  Shade  on  the  age  in  which  he  lived, 
that  we  owe  the  several  particulars  I  have  given  the  Reader.  They 
were  frequently  the  topic  of  that  good  man's  Conversation,  who 
would  sometimes  show  that  Spot  in  his  Park,  upon  which  the 
House  of  old  Richard  stood,  and  which  had  been  pulled  down  by 
the  Earl's  Father.  "But  I,"  said  the  most  worthy  Lord,  "had  it 
reached  my  Time,  would  sooner  have  pulled  down  that,"  pointing 
to  his  own  House.  As  a  testimony  to  the  Truth  of  this  remarkable 
History  he  was  wont  to  produce  the  following  Entry  in  the  Register 
of  the  Parish  Church  at  Eastwell:  "Anno  Domini  1555  Richard 
Plantagenet  was  buried  the  22nd  December,  Anno  ut  supra." 

Mr.  Finch's  antiquarian  tastes  and  learning  received 
early  and  frequent  recognition.  Harris,  in  his  History  of 
Kentj  records  the  accidental  discovery,  in  1703,  of  a  small 
urn  of  reddish  earth  and  of  the  skeleton  of  a  child,  in  a 
cutting  along  the  wagon- way  near  Wye.  Li  1713  he 
writes  of  it : 

The  Report  of  this  Discovery  brought  the  Right  Honourable 
Colonel  Heneage  Finch  (now  Earl  of  Winchilsea)  whose  inquisitive 
genius  inclines  him  to  a  curious  search  after  Antiquities,  and  of 
which  he  hath  a  nice  Relish  and  is  an  excellent  Judge,  to  come  out 
and  examine  this  place  more  narrowly  which  was  done  the  same 
year. 

The  results  of  this  investigation  were  all  left  in  the  hands 
of  Lord  Winchilsea.  Dr.  Stukeley  says  that  during  the  nine 
years  he  lived  in  London  (1717-1726)  he  had  "the  greatest 
intimacy  with  Thomas,  L^  Pembroke,  Heneage  Earl  of 
Winchelsea,  Sir  Isaac  Newton — in  short  with  the  whole  sett 


Intboduotion  xlvii 


of  learned  men  and  Vertuoso's  w^at  that  time  abounded," 
and  his  memoirs  contain  numerous  references  to  Lord  Win- 
ohilsea^s  antiquarian  zeal  and  learning. 

Lord  Winchilsea's  closest  associates,  besides  his  chaplain, 
Mr.  Creyk,  were  Lord  Hertford  and  Dr.  Stukeley.  They 
styled  themselves  Druids  and  had  fanciful  names.  Dr.  Stukeley 
being  Chyndonax ;  Lord  Hertford,  Segonax ;  and  Lord 
Winchilsea,  Cyngetorix.  Their  special  search  was  for  Duro- 
lenum,  and  Lord  Winchilsea  enthusiastically  declared  that 
if  he  should  be  so  happy  as  to  succeed  in  the  search  he 
would  have  "  O  brave  Cyngetorix  "  engraved  on  his  tomb- 
stone. 

Another  form  of  antiquarian  research  carried  on  in  the 
main  by  Charles,  and  one  perhaps  more  in  accord  with 
Ardelia^s  taste,  was  the  hunt  for  old  books  and  manuscripts. 
Li  an  account  of  Thomas  Britton,  the  famous  musical  small- 
coal  man,  we  have  a  very  pleasant  picture  in  which  the  Earl 
of  Winchilsea  is  one  of  the  figures : 

About  the  beginning  of  this  century,  a  passion  for  collecting 
old  books  and  manuscripts  reigned  among  the  nobility.  The  chief 
of  those  who  soiight  after  them  were  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
Edward,  Earl  of  Oxford,  and  the  Earls  of  Pembroke,  Sunderland 
and  Winchilsea.  These  persons  in  the  winter  season,  on  Satur- 
days, the  Parliament  not  sitting  on  that  day,  were  used  to  resort  to 
the  city,  and,  dividing  themselves,  took  several  routes,  some  to 
Little  Britain,  some  to  Moorfields,  and  others  to  different  parts  of 
the  town,  inhabited  by  book-sellers;  there  they  would  enquire  into 
the  several  shops  as  they  passed  along  for  old  books  and  man- 
uscripts; and  sometime  before  noon  would  assemble  at  the  shop  of 
Christopher  Bateman,  a  book-seller,  at  the  corner  of  Ave-Maria- 
lane  in  Paternoster-row;  and  here  they  were  frequently  met  by 
Bagford,  and  other  persons  engaged  in  the  same  pursuits,  and  a 
conversation  always  commenced  on  the  subject  of  their  inquiries. 

And  presently  along  would  come  Thomas  Britton  in  his 
blue  linen  frock  and  with  his  sack  of  small  coal  on  his  back, 
and  join  them. 


xlviii  Intboduotion 


Most  of  the  antiquarian  research  of  which  we  find  definite 
record  occurred  in  the  years  1720-1726,  or  after  Lady  Win- 
chilsea's  death,  but  inasmuch  as  Lord  Winchilsea  was  elected 
president  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  as  early  as  1717,  and 
was  recognized  as  early  as  1703  as  the  natural  judge  and 
custodian  of  antiquarian  treasures  found  in  that  region,  we 
cannot  escape  the  conclusion  that  Roman  roads,  Roman 
ruins,  mortuary  urns,  ancient  brasses  and  coins,  and  worm- 
eaten  manuscripts  loomed  large  among  the  interests  of  this 
Eastwell  life. 

Prom  Lord  Winchilsea's  antiquarian  labors  and  letters 
we  get  more  than  a  hint  of  his  character.  He  shows  him- 
self capable  of  strong  enthusiasms,  and  he  is  prompt,  ener- 
getic, and  optimistic  in  carrying  them  out.  He  is,  withal, 
gay  in  spirit,  and  with  a  sense  of  humor  that  turns  even  his 
failures  into  fun.  He  lives  an  easy,  genial,  unambitious 
life.  His  interests  are  varied  and  dilletante.  If  Durolenum 
remains  elusive,  why  there  are  still  manuscripts  to  be  illumi- 
nated. If  the  "blew  and  carmine"  fail,  the  rabbit  burrows 
still  hold  out  possibilities  in  the  way  of  urns  and  rings  and 
bones.  He  has  no  occupation  so  strenuous  or  important  as 
to  interrupt  the  peaceful  tenor  of  his  days. 

But  antiquarian  research  was  far  from  being  his  only 
interest.  From  a  leather-bound,  silver-clasped  duodecimo 
copy  of  Rider's  Almanac^  on  the  blank  pages  of  which 
Lord  Winchilsea  recorded  important  domestic  incidents,  we 
gain  many  suggestive  hints  concerning  life  at  Eastwell. 
The  Almanac  is  for  1723,  but  the  events  recorded  are  not 
merely  of  that  year.  He  apparently  made  the  little  book 
a  repository  for  any  family  dates  or  happenings  that 
seemed  interesting  to  him.  The  dates  from  1713  to 
1719  have  chiefly  to  do  with  "my  several  Tryalls  in  Chan- 
cery," and  there  are  dates  of  important  deeds  of  sale, 
showing  that  after  the  death  of  Charles  there  were  many 


\ 


Introduction  xlix 


imperative  demands  on  the  time  and  thought  of  the  new 
earl  in  the  way  of  business  management.  The  dates  of 
births,  marriages,  and  deaths  in  the  families  of  various 
friends  are  also  carefully  noted.  He  sets  down  the  day  he 
was  weighed  and  the  '^  16  stone  and  12  Ibs.'^  registered  by 
the  sc€des.  We  find  that  a  '^horse-hair  peruque"  costs  £2, 
lOs.  Among  scattered  financial  transactions  is  a  list  of  fees 
headed,  "Given  away  at  Marlborough  House,  Aug.  18, 1723." 
These  fees  range  from  a  guinea  each  to  seven  of  the  more 
important  servants  down  to  2s  6d  for  the  "  Kitchin-Boy ;"  and 
aggregate  £14  6s.  6d.  An  interesting  list  of  *'  Books  which  I 
have  Subscribed  for  "  certainly  shows,  in  spite  of  the  incor- 
rect citation  of  titles,  some  learning  and  a  catholic  taste, 
for  it  includes  such  volumes  as  ^^Carmina  QuadragesimUaf* 
^^Recuille  des  Piers  antique  gravea;^^  ^^Monfaucons  Supplim^ 
5  vol.;^^  ^^King  of  Stoeden's  Travels/^  ^^  Cardinal  Wolsey^a 
Life;''  ''Querels  Testament;''  "/Sr.  Ba.  Winnuoood'a  Let- 
tera;''  ''Rev.  Lewis'  Isle  of  Thanet;"  ''Mr.  BrevaVa  Book;" 
and  "Dr.  Barwick'a  lAfe."  If  any  room  in  the  present 
house  can  be  definitely  associated  with  Ardelia  it  must  be 
the  stately  library,  where  are  doubtless  still  many  of  the 
books  selected  by  Anne  Finch  and  her  husband,  and  perhaps 
also  some  of  those  illuminated  by  him. 

Along  with  notes  on  books  are  jottings  of  another  sort,  as  a 
record  of  the  ''large  ripe  scarlet  strawberrys  from  Brook  Gar- 
den," presented  to  Mr.  Pinch,  October  8 ;  or  the  account  of 
"a  Buck  which,  having  been  almost  killed  by  another  Buck 
in  the  Park,  had  been  gott  by  the  Keeper  into  the  Green 
Garden"  where  "from  being  a  very  lean  Buck — after  his 
recovery  he  grew  so  f att  that  he  cutt  as  deep  as  the  length 
of  this  mark  on  the  Haunches,  viz.  two  inches  and  a  half." 

Through  the  pleasant  intimacy  of  this  little  book  we  gain 
confirmations  of  the  attractive  impression  already  made  by 
Mr.  Finch  through  his  wife's  poems  and  his  own  letters,  an 


1  Intboduotion 


impression  further  confirmed  by  G.  Vertne's  print  of  his 
lordship,  which  shows  a  portly  man  with  straight  nose,  dark 
eyes,  a  white,  cnrled  wig,  and  a  very  kindly  expression. 

Lord  Winchilsea  died  in  1726.  A  Latin  eulogy  of  him 
is  quoted  in  The  Oentleman's  Magazine  for  October,  1783. 
It  is  entitled  ^^In  Obitum  Proenobilis  Viri,  Heneagii  Pinch, 
Comitis  de  Winchilsea^  Epicedium  et  Apotheosi,  Prid.  Cat 
Oct  1726.^^  But  this  tribute  is  less  satisfying  than  the  fol- 
lowing brief  note  from  Lord  Hertford  to  Dr.  Stukeley: 

The  oonoem  you  express  for  the  loss  of  Lord  Winchelsea  can- 
not but  be  pleasing  to  me;  for  I  should  be  very  sorry  that  you,  for 
whom  he  had  a  just  value,  should  not  have  grieved  with  the  rest  of 
his  friends;  and  I  think  I  may  call  the  whole  world  so,  for  sure  he 
had  no  enemy  nor  was  he  one  to  anybody. 

The  final  impression  made  by  these  scattered  facts  con- 
cerning Lord  Winchilsea  is  that  he  was  as  well  fitted  by 
temperament  and  tastes  to  find  permanent  joy  in  the  retire- 
ment at  Eastwell  as  was  Ardelia  herself.  If  she  loved  nature 
and  poetry  with  emphasis  on  the  nature,  and  he  loved  nature 
and  antiquities  with  emphasis  on  the  antiquities,  that  was 
only  enough  of  a  difference  to  give  needed  variety.  They 
were  both  simple  and  unambitious  in  their  desires.  They 
were  loyal  to  their  friends.  Their  minds  were  alert  and 
their  interests  always  along  scholarly  or  poetical  lines.  They 
very  nearly  made  real  Wordsworth's  maxim  of  plain  living 
and  high  thinking. 

Lady  Winchilsea   died  six   years   before   her 
ehUiea't  husband.       Her   death   is    thus    recorded    in 

^••^^  ^'Mawson's  Obits:' 

On  Friday,  5^  of  August,  1720,  dyed  at  her  own  house  in 
Cleveland  Row  the  Right  Hon^e  Anne  Countess  of  Winchilsea,  and 
was  on  Tuesday  following  privately  Interred  according  to  her  desire 
at  Eastwell  in  Kent,  the  ancient  seat  of  that  noble  family.  She 
was  Dau'r  of  S^  W™  Kingsmill  of  Sidmonton,  a  very  ancient  fomily 
in  Hantshire. 


Intboduotion  li 


The  facts  in  this  notice  and  in  parts  its  phraseology 
are  identical  with  a  brief  statement  in  Lord  Winchilsea's 
joomal,  from  which  I  have  already  freely  quoted.  The 
authorship  of  the  little  sketch  is  left  doubtful,  but  the  fact 
that  Lord  Winchilsea  preserved  it  shows  that  it  was  sat- 
isfactory to  him.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  more  fitting  way  to 
close  this  outline  of  Ardelia's  life  than  by  quoting  the  exact 
words  recorded  in  her  husband's  private  journal: 

My  Dear  Wife's  just  character  finely  drawn  by and  pub- 
lished in  the  publick  prints  after  her  Decease. 

On  Friday  the  fifth  instant  died  at  her  own  house  in  Cleaveland 
Bow  the  R^  Honourable  Anne  Countess  of  Winchilsea  and  was  on 
Tuesday  following  (privately  according  to  her  own  desire)  carried 
down  to  Eastwell  in  Kent,  the  ancient  seat  of  that  noble  Family, 
and  Interred  there.  She  was  a  Daiighter  of  S^  W°^  Eingsmill  of 
Sidmonton,  a  very  ancient  Family  in  Hampshire,  and  had  been  Maid 
of  Honour  to  her  late  Majesty  Queen  Mary  when  Dutchess  of  York, 
till  married  to  the  Hon^i^  Coll.  Heneage  Finch  who  on  the  death  of 
his  Nephew  the  late  Earl  of  Winchelsea  succeeded  to  that  Hon- 
our: To  draw  her  Ldysp's  just  character  requires  a  masterly  pen 
like  her  own.  We  shall  only  presume  to  say  she  was  the  most 
faithfull  servant  to  her  Royall  Mistresse,  the  best  wife  to  her  noble 
Lord,  and  in  every  other  relation  public  and  private  so  illustrious 
an  example  of  all  moral  and  divine  virtues:  in  one  word  a  Person  of 
such  extraordinary  endowments  both  of  Body  and  Mind  that  the 
Court  of  England  never  bred  a  more  accomplished  Lady  nor  the 
Qiurch  of  England  a  better  Christian. 


II 

THB   PBOGBESS   OF   LADT   WINOHILSEA^S   FAME 

The  relation  between  Ardelia  and  contemporary  poets  is 
a  matter  of  considerable  interest     She  early  received  an 
enthusiastic  welcome  into  the  guild  from  sub- 
ordinate craftsmen.     In  a  package   of   manu- 
script poems  in  the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough 


lii  Intboduotion 


at  Blenheim  is  An  Ode  on  Love,  inscribed  to  the  Honoura- 
ble Mrs.  Finch.  It  is  fonr  and  one-half  pages  long,  and  is 
apparently  one  of  the  earliest  tributes  to  her  work.  Another 
example  of  ''  private  homage  from  an  unknown  muse ''  is 
from  the  very  modest  pen  of  honest  Will  Shippen,  a  par- 
liamentary Jacobite  and  a  poet  on  his  own  account.  He 
bases  his  admiration  of  her  "wondrous  sweetness"  and  "  manly 
strength  "  on  the  poems  that  appeared  in  Gildon's  Miscellany 
in  1701,  and  on  All  is  Vanity,  which,  though  not  published 
till  1713,  was  written  before  the  death  of  Dryden  in  1700. 
Shippen  may  have  known  all  these  poems  in  manuscript,  but 
it  seems  probable  that  his  eulogy  was  called  forth  by  Mrs. 
Pinch's  first  appearance  in  print  in  1701. 

A  congratulatory  poem  from  Mrs.  Randolph  and  an  even* 
more  congratulatory  response  from  Mrs.  Pinch  would,  if 
interpreted  as  seriously  as  they  were  written,  enthrone  both 
ladies  high  in  poetic  realms.  The  description  of  Mrs.  Pinch 
as  the  Elisha  on  whom  fell  the  mantle  of  Cowley,  the  recog- 
nition of  her  as  the  rightful  heir  of  Orinda's  fame,  carried 
praise  to  dizzy  heights.  But  the  conventional  extravagance 
of  eulogy  is  so  vague  that  we  cannot  determine  just  which 
poem  Mrs.  Pinch  had  sent  for  Mrs.  Bandolph's  inspection. 
The  only  one  referred  to  is  The  Pastoral  published  by  Gil- 
don.  Of  Mrs.  Randolph's  other  work  I  find  no  trace  except 
a  commonplace  poem.  On  the  much  lamented  death  of  the 
Incomparable  Lady,  the  Honorable  Lady  Oxenden.  A 
Pindarique  Ode.  This  Ode  is  preserved  in  a  curious  old  scrap- 
book  in  the  British  Museum,  a  volume  made  up  of  clippings 
of  verse  by  women,  from  newspapers,  annuals,  books,  and 
with  a  few  manuscript  items.  None  of  these  early  poems 
calls  Mrs.  Finch  "  Ardelia."  This  pen-name  was  not  made 
public,  it  seems,  till  her  fame  was  somewhat  established. 

In  Prior's  Miscellaneous  Works  published  in  1740,  is  a 
little  poem  called   Lines   to  Prior  by   a  Lady   Unknown. 


Intboduotion  liii 


This  poem,  no  trace  of  which  is  to  be  found  elsewhere,  is 
ascribed  by  Mr.  Adrian  Drift,  Prior^s  executor,  to  Anne,  Coun- 
tess of  Winchilsea.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
Lady  Winchilsea  knew  Prior,  nor  can  the  slight 
personal  allusions  in  this  poem  be  taken  asindicating  any  first- 
hand knowledge  of  the  poet.  Such  knowledge  might  easily 
have  come,  however,  with  sufficient  minuteness  and  direct- 
ness from  Longleat  through  Elizabeth  Singer,  to  whom 
Prior,  in  the  intervals  of  his  attendance  on  the  king  as  gen- 
tleman of  the  bed-chamber,  was  paying  vain  addresses.  The 
poem  must  be  an  early  one,  its  spirit  and  phraseology  having 
little  likeness  to  any  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  work  except  her 
first  drama.  Certainly  the  hysterical  emotion  with  which 
the  lady  speaks  of  herself  as  '^  A  Virgin-heart  fraught  with 
secret  wishes,^''* a  love-sick  maid  whose  passion  is  raised  to 
excess  by  the  swelling  numbers  of  the  poet,''  is  quite  out  of 
keeping  with  the  usual  dignified  and  delicate  reticence  of 
Lady  Winchilsea's  personal  allusions.  The  lines  are  an 
acknowledgment  of  poetical  indebtedness  to  Prior,  a  point 
to  be  more  fully  discussed  in  connection  with  Ardelia's 
songs. 

Nicholas  Bowe's  estimate  of  Lady  Winohilsea's  poems  is 
recorded  in  An  Epistle  to  Flatna.     On  the  sight  of  two 

Pindaric    Odes  on  the    Spleen  and  Vanity. 
HieiiolM  Sows 

Written  by  a  Lady,  her  Friend.    This  dates 

before  any  published  work  of  hers,  for  it  is  evident  that  the 
poems  had  been  transmitted  to  Bowe  through  some  trusted 
intermediary  with  many  cautions  as  to  secrecy.  Bowe's 
praise  is  unqualified.  Ardelia  is  a  "  divine  nymph''  whose 
inspiration  comes  from  heaven.  She  alone  has  not  bowed 
the  knee  to  f eJse  gods  of  wit,  she  is  the  only  rival  of  Pin- 
dar short  of  the  celestial  choirs.  Bowe  approved  of  Arde- 
lia's  caution  in  keeping  her  poems  from  the  public  eye,  but 
lines  such  as  his  would  not  have  made  her  averse   to  the 


liv  Intboduotion 


proposals  of  Gildon  in  1701.  Later  Bowe  sent  down  to 
Eastwell  copies  of  his  Imitations  of  Horace^s  Odes.  In 
1713  Ardelia  wrote  a  prologue  to  be  spoken  by  Mrs.  Oldfield, 
at  the  presentation  of  Rowe's  tragedy,  Jane  Shore.  These 
facts  would  seem  to  indicate  a  literary  friendship  of  consid- 
erable strength.  A  personal  acquaintance  is  highly  probable, 
but  of  that  I  find  no  direct  proof. 

Swift's  Letters  and  Journal  to  Stella  show  that  by  1710 
he  was  on  familiar  terms  with  Charles,  the  third  Earl  of 
Winchilsea,  who,  in  spite  of  his  Jacobite  ances* 
tors,  had  so  far  submitted  to  the  revolution 
government  as  to  deserve  and  receive  valuable  public  appoint- 
ments from  William,  and  later  from  Anne.  Swift  says  of 
him,  **  Being  very  poor  he  complied  too  much  with  the  gov- 
ernment he  hated;''  but  that  the  two  men  were  on  especially 
good  terms  is  apparent  from  the  words  in  which  Swift 
informs  Stella  of  the  death  of  the  handsome  young  earl: 
''  Poor  Lord  Winchilsea  is  dead,  to  my  great  grief.  He  was 
an  worthy,  honest  gentleman,  and  particular  friend  of  mine; 
and  what  is  yet  worse,  my  old  acquaintance,  Mrs.  Finch,  is 
now  Countess  of  Winchilsea,  the  title  being  fallen  to  her 
husband  but  without  much  estate."  Swift's  intimacy  with 
Lord  Winchilsea  and  also  with  Lady  Worsley,  one  of  Anne 
Finch's  closest  friends,  would  certainly  imply  that  Swift  had 
frequent  opportunities  of  meeting  the  lady  of  whom  he 
speaks  thus  cavalierly.  To  offset  this  note  to  Stella  we  may 
turn  to  Swift's  poem,  Apollo  Outwitted,  to  Mrs.  Finch  under 
the  name  of  Ardelia  This  was  published  in  Miscellanies 
in  Prose  and  Verse  in  1711,  but  would  seem  to  have  been 
written  some  years  earlier.  It  very  possibly  belongs  to  the 
September-October,  1708,  spent  by  Swift  in  Kent.  Ardelia 
is  represented  as  having  adroitly  won  from  Apollo  the  gift  of 
song  but  without  having  granted  his  suit.  In  revenge  the 
god  exclaims  that,  though  he  cannot  revoke  his  gift,  he  will 


Intboduotion  Iv 


afflict  the  prudish  lady  with  pride  and  modesty  so  stubborn 
that  her  verse  shall  remain  unknown: 

And  last  my  vengeance  to  complete, 
Mayst  thou  descend  to  take  renown, 

Prevailed  on  by  the  thing  you  hate, 
A  Whigl  and  one  that  wears  a  gown! 

The  verses  are,  on  the  whole,  playful  and  gallant  and  would 
indicate  nothing  but  friendly  relations.  But  the  last  lines 
show  that,  whatever  concessions  her  nephew  Charles  felt  to 
be  the  logical  outcome  of  his  necessities,  Ardelia's  allegiance 
to  the  old  order  was  unfaltering  and  outspoken.  It  would 
not,  indeed,  be  difficult  to  imagine  after-dinner  conversations 
in  which  the  statements  of  that  very  positive  defender  of  the 
Whigs,  Dr.  Swift,  might  have  elicited  not  only  those 
"flashes  of  Ardelia's  eyes"  before  which  Apollo  was 
abashed,  but  even  more  emphatic  retorts  not  contributory  to 
final  amity.  The  evidence  is  too  scanty  for  an  exact  state- 
ment of  the  attitude  of  Swift  toward  Mrs.  Finch,  but  it 
would  seem  to  be  more  friendly  than  that  of  Pope. 

The  actual  relationship  between  Lady  Winchilsea  and 
two  others  of  her  fellow  poets.  Pope  and  Gay,  is  not  easily 
Alcimnder  Pope  determined.  In  years  she  was  much  their 
•ad  John  0»y  senior.  When  she  first  braved  the  publicity  of 
Gildon's  Miscellany  in  1701  Pope  was  but  a  lad  of  thirteen, 
studying  versification  xmder  his  father's  strict  tutelage  in 
Binfield,  and  Oay,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  in  the  free  grammar 
school  of  Barnstaple,  was  devoting  himself  to  dramatic  per- 
formances under  his  "  rhyming  pedagogue,"  R.  Luck,  A.  M. 
But  the  next  decade  brought  great  changes.  The  young 
men  had  come  to  London  and  were  on  friendly  terms  in  the 
same  literary  coterie.  Oay  was  not  yet  widely  known,  but 
Pope's  Pectorals,  his  Essay  on  Criticism,  and  his  Rape  of 
the  Lock,  had  made  him  the  most  talked-of  poet  in  England. 
Lady  Winchilsea  had  also  advanced.     Not  only  had  her 


Ivi  Intboduotion 


work  been  accepted  by  Oildon,  and  received  flattering 
tributes  from  Bowe  and  Swift,  not  to  mention  minor  bards, 
bnt  her  Spleen  had  attained  to  the  dignity  of  a  second 
edition,  and  she  had  the  inner,  supporting  consciousness  of  a 
stately  volume  of  verse  practically  ready  for  publication. 
Yet  in  comparison  with  Pope  Ardelia  was  hardly  even  the 
*' minor  excelsitude  ^'  Mr.  Gtoaae  has  so  aptly  called  her. 
When  her  volume  of  verse  appeared  in  1713  it  was  Pope^s 
criticism  that  she  coveted  and  which  she  proceeded  in  a 
feminine  fashion  to  obtain.  Perhaps  her  husband's  recent 
accession  to  the  title  gave  her  courage.  At  any  rate  she 
issued  a  bold  invitation,  which  Pope  accepted  but  which  he 
commemorated  in  the  following  words  in  a  letter  to  CaryU, 
dated  December  15,  1713  : 

The  fact  is,  I  was  invited  to  dinner  to  my  Lady  Winchilsea,  and 
after  dinner  to  hear  a  play  read,  at  both  which  I  sat  in  great  dis- 
order with  sickness  at  my  head  and  stomach. 

The  situation  has  picturesque  possibilities  Did  Ardelia  do 
the  reading  ?  Did  Pope  adopt  the  suiffering  posture  of  the 
portrait  by  E[neller  ?  Evidently  the  trials  inseparable  from 
literary  dictatorship  began  early  with  Pope,  and  Lady 
Winchilsea's  dinner  was  one  of  the  experiences  that  later 
occasioned  the  humorous  complaints  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot : 

A  dire  dilemmal  either  way  I'm  sped, 
If  foes  they  write,  if  friends  they  read  me  dead. 
Siezed  and  tied  down  to  judge,  how  wretched  II 
Who  can't  be  silent,  and  who  will  not  lie ; 


I  sit  with  sad  civility,  I  read 

With  honest  anguish  and  an  aching  head. 

Courthope  conjectures  that  the  play  read  to  Pope  was 
^ristomenes.  But  this  play  was  already  in  print  and  Pope 
(^ould  have  read  it  at  his  leisure.  It  is  more  probable  that 
it  was  Love  and  Innocence^  the  play  still  in  manuscript    In 


Intboduotion  Ivii 


either  case  the  strain  on  Pope's  stock  of  ''sad  civility ''  must 
have  been  considerable,  and  it  may  be  set  down  to  his  credit 
that  author  and  critic  parted  on  good  terms.  They  were 
certainly  friends  in  1714  when  the  first  separate  edition  of 
the  Rape  of  the  Lock  came  out.  To  Ardelia's  playful  pro- 
test against  the  satiric  lines  on  women,  Pope  responded  in  a 
highly  eulogistic  Impromptu  in  which,  even  if  perchance  the 
''  sickness  at  his  head  and  stomach  "  had  proved  too  much 
for  his  gallantry  at  the  memorable  dinner,  he  made  amends 
by  acknowledging  Ardelia  the  bright  particular  star  among 
female  wits.  Her  gay  answer  is  written  in  an  intimate, 
friendly,  bantering  tone  such  as  she  could  not  assume.  It 
marks  the  moments  when  she  was  least  self-conscious  and 
restrained,  when  she  was  most  at  ease,  most  certain  of  pleas- 
ing. Another  evidence  of  literary  amity  is  that  when  the 
quarto  edition  of  Pope's  Works  came  out  in  1717,  one  of  the 
seven  commendatory  poems  he  saw  fit  to  print  was  by  Lady 
Winchilsea.  This  poem,  doubtless  with  Pope's  consent, 
appeared  also  in  the  publications  of  1727  and  1732.  Either 
Pope  liked  the  lady,  or  he  liked  the  lady's  verses,  or  he  liked 
to  have  a  countess  speak  well  of  him,  even  if  her  admiration 
found  but  bald  and  prosaic  expression. 

There  is,  however,  another  side  to  the  picture.  There 
are  certain  serious  lapses  from  this  attitude  of  friendship. 
In  the  second  Epistle^  written  about  twelve  years  after  Lady 
Winchilsea's  death,  the  lines, 

Arcadia's  Countess  here  in  ermined  pride. 
Is  there,  Pastora  by  a  fountain  side, 

are  said  by  Croker  to  refer  to  Lady  Winchilsea.  "  She  is," 
he  adds,  "here  and  elsewhere  sneered  at."  The  ''else- 
where "  in  Croker's  note,  if  it  is  not  a  mere  guess,  probably 
refers  to  the  farce  Three  Hours  after  Marriage  which  is 
commented  on  in  the  next  section.  In  this  farce  the  satiric 
flings  at  Lady  Winchilsea  doubtless  express  more  exactly  the 


Iviii  Intboduotion 


attitude  of  Pope  and  Gay  toward  her  as  a  female  wit,  and 
toward  female  wits  in  general,  than  does  the  gallant  eulogy 
of  Pope's  Impromptu.  And  that  their  attitude  is  but  the 
attitude  of  their  age,  may  be  indicated  by  a  brief  statement 
of  the  position  accorded  the  learned  lady  by  contemporary 
comedy. 

Mrs.  Behn's  Sir  Patient  Fancy  (1678)  gives  us  in  Lady 
E[nowell  one  of  the  earliest  examples  in  the  restoration 
The  Learned  period  of  the  English  female  pedant.  Lady 
Lady  in  Comedy  Knowell  is  especially  distinguished  by  her  use 
of  big  words  in  the  style  of  Mrs.  Malaprop.  '^  I  have  con- 
sented to  marry  him ''  she  says,  "  in  spite  of  your  Exproba- 
tions;"  "I  saw  your  reclinations  from  my  Addresses;'^ 
"There  is  much  Volubility  and  Vicissitude  in  Mundane 
Affaira'^  Her  devotion  to  the  classics  is  of  the  most  effusive 
sort.     To  Leander  she  exclaims, 

Oh  the  delight  of  Books  I  When  I  was  their  age  I  always 
employed  my  looser  hours  in  reading — if  serious,  'twas  Tacitus^ 
Seneca,  Plutarch^s  MoralSy  or  some  such  useful  Author ;  if  in  an 
Humour  gay,  I  was  for  Poetry,  Virgil,  Homer,  or  Tasso. 

Yet  this  classical  lady  is  represented  as  rivaling  her 
frivolous  daughter  in  the  pursuit  of  amorous  adventure.  Mrs. 
Behn  doubtless  took  the  suggestion  for  this  character  from 
Moli6re's  Femmes  Savantes  (1672),  the  acknowledged  source 
of  Wright's  Female  Virtuosos  (1693).  Wright's  Lady 
Meanwell,  Mrs.  Lovewit,  and  Catchat,  were  meant  to  be 
English  versions  of  the  Philaminte,  Armande  and  B61ise  of 
the  French  comedy.  But  though  Moli6re's  general  plot 
structure  is  followed  and  the  characters  certainly  find  their 
originals  in  his  play,  yet  the  kind  of  learning  the  ladies  have 
is  based  on  Shad  well's  Virtuoso  (1676),  rather  than  on  the 
Femmes  Savantes.  They  are  scientific  in  their  tastes.  Lady 
Meanwell  is  also  public-spirited,  and  she  invents  a  ''Mathe- 
matical Engin"  to  keep  the  streets  of  London  dry  and  clean. 


Intboduotion  lix 


"'Tie  bat  setting  up  Timber  Posts  round  about  the  City, 
and  then  fixing  a  pair  of  Bellows  on  every  one  of  'em  to 
blow  the  clouds  away."  Mrs.  Lovewit  has  made  an  exact 
collection  of  all  the  plays  that  ever  came  out,  and  she  has 
devised  a  limbeck  where  all  the  quintessence  of  wit  that  is 
in  them  is  to  be  extracted  and  sold  by  drops  to  the  poets  of 
this  age.  Catchat  is  teaching  a  flea  to  sing  by  note  and 
expects  soon  to  have  the  little  creature  ready  for  the  opera. 
Sir  Maurice  Meanwell  embodies  the  protest  against  these 
learned  ladies. 

Lady  M,  How  now,  Sir  Maurice,  is  the  merry  God  Dancing  a 
Jigg  within  the  inclosure  of  your  Brains?  Tou  forget  yourself 
strangely,  methinks. 

Sir  Maur,  Tis  to  you,  Sister,  I  speak,  what  a  Devil  have  you 
to  do  with  Jingling  and  Poetry.    (To  Catchat) 

Catch.  Lord,  Sister,  what  a  strange  compound  your  Husband 
is  of  Vulgar  and  clownish  atoms? 

Sir  Maur.  A  pretty  thing  indeed,  to  see  those  long  spectacles 
of  yours,  set  on  the  top  of  my  house,  for  you  to  peep,  and  tell  how 
many  Hackney  Coaches  are  going  in  the  Moon. 

Lovew.  Oh  the  illiterate  Brute  I  thus  to  affront  a  telescope. 
[Aside.] 

Sir  Maur.  I  am  no  Scholar,  not  I,  and  I  thank  my  Stars  for  it, 
but  with  your  leave,  so  much  common  sense  has  taught  me,  that  all 
the  Study  and  Philosophy  of  a  wife,  should  be  to  please  her  Hus- 
band, instruct  her  Children,  have  a  Vigilant  Eye  over  Domestick 
Affairs,  keep  a  good  order  in  her  Family,  and  stand  as  a  Living 
Pattern  of  Virtue,  and  Discretion  to  all  about  her. 

Lady  M.  Sir  Maurice  like  another  Solon,  is  now  setting  up  for 
a  lawgiver.  Poor  Soul  I 

Sir  Maur.  The  Women  of  Old  did  not  read  so  much,  but  lived 
better;  Housewifery  was  all  the  Ejiowledge  they  aspired  to ;  now- 
adays Wives  must  Write  forsooth,  and  pretend  to  Wit,  with  a  Pox. 

CcUch.  'TIS  the  partial,  and  foolish  Opinion  of  Men,  Brother, 
and  not  our  Fault  has  made  it  ridiculous  nowadays;  for  a  Woman 
to  pretend  to  Wit,  she  was  bom  to  it,  and  can  shew  it  well  enough, 
when  occasion  serves. 

Vanbrugh's  ^sop  (1697)  gives  us  Hortentia,  "the  wise 


Intboduotion 


lady,  the  great  scholar  that  nobody  can  onderstand.^^  Her 
lover  tells  her  ^sop^s  fable  of  the  nightingale  that  tried  to 
imitate  a  linnet,  and  adds  : 

From  that  day  forth  she  chang'd  her  note, 
She  spoil'd  her  voioe,  she  strain'd  her  throat ; 
She  did  as  learned  women  do, 

Till  everything 

That  heard  her  sing 
Would  run  away  from  her — as  I  from  you. 

Wright's  play  was  revived  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields  in 
January,  1721,  in  order  to  anticipate  Gibber's  Refusal^  like- 
wise an  adaptation  of  the  Femmes  SavanteSj  which  appeared 
at  Drury  Lane  the  next  month.  In  the  twenty-eight  years 
between  Wright's  first  production  of  Ttie  Female  Virtuosos 
and  Gibber's  Hie  Refusal,  the  learned  woman  is  a  not  infre- 
quent comic  character,  and  she  is  often  given  pungency  by 
traits  drawn  from  some  well-known  original.  Mrs.  Manley  in 
The  Lost  Lover  (1696)  even  ventured  to  name  her  *' affected 
poetess,"  Orinda,  the  pseudonym  under  which  Mrs.  Gatherine 
Phillips  had  subdued  the  world.  Female  Wits:  or  the 
Triumvirate  of  Poets  at  Rehearsal,  by  W.  M.  (1697)  made 
prompt  use  of  three  ladies  who  had  recently  made  their  lite- 
rary debut.  Galista  was  Gatherine  Trotter,  then  but  eighteen 
years  of  age,  and  the  author  of  but  a  single  poor  tragedy, 
Agnes  de  Castro.  She  was  treated  more  lightly  than  the 
others,  and  was  merely  ''  bantered  for  pretending  to  under- 
stand Greek  and  to  set  herself  up  for  a  critic."  The  hero- 
ine, Marsilia,  was  Mrs.  Manley,  whose  tragedy,  Ttie  Royal 
Mischief  had  appeared  in  1696  and  is  the  drama  sup- 
posed to  be  in  rehearsal  by  the  players.  Mrs.  Fix,  whose 
portly  figure,  good  nature,  and  love  for  wine  were  well 
known,  appeared  as  Mrs.  Wellfed,  ''a  fat  female  author,  a 
good,  sociable,  well-natured  companion  that  will  not  suffer 
martyrdom  rather  than  take  off  three  bumpers  in  a  hand." 


Intboduotion  Ixi 


The  Comparison  betuoeen  the  Two  Stages  (1702),  attributed 
to  Gildon,  is  also  severe  on  the  female  wits  of  his  day,  with 
especial  reference  to  Mrs.  Manley.  A  dialogue  between  Ram- 
bler, Snllen,  and  the  Critick  illustrates  the  attitude  toward 
women  playwrights.  Rambler  brings  forward  Mrs.  Manley's 
Hie  Lost  Lover  for  comment,  but  the  Critick  is  roused  to 
fury  by  the  mere  mention  of  a  play  by  a  lady  and  exclaims: 

I  hate  these  Petticoat- Authors ;  'tis  false  Grammar,  there's  no 
Feminine  for  the  Latin  word,  'tis  entirely  of  the  Masculine  Gbnder, 
and  the  language  won't  bear  such  a  thing  as  a  she-author. 

Sullen  insists  that  '^  Hwas  a  Lady  carry'd  the  Prize  of 
Poetry  in  France  t'other  day,"  and  that  "there  have  been 
some  of  that  sex  in  England  who  have  done  admirably,"  and 
Rambler  proposes  a  toast  to  "  the  Fair  Author  of  the  Fatal 
Friendship,"  but  the  Critick  is  not  so  easily  to  be  appeased. 

Mrs.  Centlivre's  Basset-Table  (1705)  gives  disagreeable 
prominence  to  a  learned  young  lady,  but  Mrs.  Centlivre, 
herself  a  writer  of  plays,  adroitly  places  her  heroine  in  the 
scientific  rather  than  the  literary  realm.  Her  Valeria  is  a 
yoimger  sister  of  Wright's  Lady  Meanwell  in  that  she  pro- 
fesses to  find  a  microscope  more  interesting  than  a  man.  The 
physical  peculiarities  of  flesh-flies  and  tapeworms  rouse  her 
to  an  ecstacy  of  admiration.  Li  her  search  for  knowledge 
she  calmly  dissects  her  pretty  dove,  and  is  with  difficulty 
restrained  from  dissecting  her  lover's  Italian  greyhound. 
She  prefers  the  "immense  pleasures  of  dear,  dear  Philoso- 
phy" to  converse  with  beings  so  unenlightened  and  irrational 
as  would-be  suitors,  and  it  is  not  strange  that  they  declare 
her  "fitter  for  Moorfields  than  Matrimony."  The  lady  who 
represents  "common  sense"  in  the  play  urges  that "  Philosophy 
suits  the  Female  Sex  as  Jack-boots  would  do,"  but  Valeria 
defends  even  the  Jack-boots.  The  character  of  Valeria 
doubtless  gained  in  raciness  from  the  various  references  to 
the  famous  Mary  Astell,  whose   Serious  Proposal  to  the 


Ixii  Intboduotion 


Ladies  appeared  in  two  parts  in  1694  and  1697.  In  1705 
the  third  edition  of  her  Reflections  on  Marriage  was  accom- 
panied by  a  new  Preface^  a  plea  for  women  not  equaled 
before  Mary  Wolstoncraft.  Mary  Astell's  proposed  "  college 
for  the  education  and  improvement  of  the  female  sex^'  was 
for  years  a  theme  provocative  of  coarse  raillery,  and  Mrs. 
Centlivre  was  not  above  throwing  a  stone  or  two  at  so  well 
marked  a  target.  Her  Common  Sense  Lady  says  sarcastic- 
ally to  Valeria: 

Well,  Cousin,  might  I  advise,  you  should  bestow  your  fortime 
on  founding  a  College  for  the  study  of  Philosophy  where  none  but 
women  should  be  admitted;  and  to  immortalize  your  name  they 
should  be  called  Valerians,  ha,  ha,  hal 

Charles  Johnson's  '^ female  philosopher,^'  Florida  {Qen- 
erous  Husband^  1711),  Cibber's  "  female  philosophic  saint," 
Sophronia,  and  her  young  step-mother,  the  learned  "  trans- 
lator of  the  passion  of  Byblis''  (Ttie  Refusal,  1721),  have  less 
direct  personal  reference;  though  the  education  of  Cibber's 
ladies,  who  ostentatiously  read  Latin  and  quote  Latin  and 
who  can  talk  Latin  by  the  hour  with  Lady  Wrangle's  uncle, 
the  bishop,  their  instructor,  doubtless  refers  to  Mary  Astell, 
who,  as  was  well  known,  had  been  early  inducted  into  the 
classics  by  her  uncle,  a  clergyman. 

Li  this  comic  procession  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
century  Minervas  Lady  Winchilsea  was  given  a  bitter  pre- 
ThreeHonn  eminence  by  satirists  so  clever  and  unscrupu- 
after  lUrriage  j^^  ^s  Pope  and  Gay.  On  January  16,  1717, 
there  appeared  on  the  stage  of  Drury  Lane  a  farce  entitled 
Three  Hours  after  Marriage.  It  ran  feebly  seven  nights 
and  was  then  hissed  off  the  stage.  It  was  published  under 
Gay's  name,  but  was  known  to  be  the  joint  work  of  Pope, 
Arbuthnot,  and  Gay.  The  character  of  Phoebe  Clinket  is 
attributed  to  Gay  by  Mr.  Austin  Dobson  in  his  article  on 
Gay  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography,  and  is  there 


Jntboduotion  Ixiii 


said  to  be  a  satire  on  Lady  Winchilsea.  Evidently  the 
authority  for  these  statements  is  Baker's  Biographica  Dra- 
maiica.    In  Baker's  analysis  of  the  farce  occurs  this  passage: 

PhcBbe  Clinket  was  said  to  be  intended  for  the  Countess  of 
Winchilsea,  who  was  so  much  affected  with  the  itch  of  versifying 
that  she  had  implements  of  writing  in  every  room  in  the  house  that 
she  frequented.  She  was  also  reported  to  have  given  offence  to  one 
of  the  triumvirate  by  saying  that  Gay's  Trivia  showed  that  he  was 
more  proper  to  walk  before  a  chair  than  to  ride  in  one. 

Baker's  account  did  not  appear  till  1764,  forty-seven 
years  after  the  play,  and  was  based  on  rather  vague  rumor. 
More  exact  information  as  to  the  apportionment  of  work 
among  the  triumvirate  is  to  be  found  in  a  farce  called  The 
Confederates^  in  which  the  trio  were  savagely  attacked  by 
John  Durant  Breval  under  the  pseudonym  of  "Joseph  Gay." 
Ttie  Confederates  appeared  almost  immediately  after  the 
Three  Hours  after  Marriage  and  doubtless  embodies  the 
general  opinion  at  that  time  as  to  the  authorship  of  different 
parts  of  the  play.  The  first  scene  of  The  Confederates  is  in 
a  room  in  the  Rose-Tavern  near  the  Play-House.  Arbuth- 
not  listens  at  the  door  while  Pope  soliloquizes  as  follows: 

Thus  in  the  Zenith  of  my  Vogue  I  Beign 
And  bless  th'  Abundance  of  my  fertile  Vein; 
My  pointed  Satire  aim  alike  at  All, 
(Foe  to  Mankind)  and  scatter  round  my  Gall: 
With  poyson'd  Quill,  I  keep  the  world  in  Awe. 
And  from  My  Self  my  own  Thebsites  draw. 
This  very  Night,  with  Modem  Strokes  of  Wit, 
I  charm  the  Boxes,  and  divert  the  Pit ; 
Safe  from  the  Cudgel,  stand  secure  of  Praise ; 
Mine  is  the  Credit,  be  the  Danger  Gay's. 
Afh,  {coming  forward). 

Hold,  Brother  I  thou  forget'st  the  Scenes  I  made ; 
TMs  Boast  of  thine,  is  but  a  Gasconade. 

P.     Enow,  Caledonian,  Thine's  a  simple  Part, 

Scarce  anything  but  some  Quack-Terms  of  Art, 


Ixiv  Intboduotion 


Hard  Words,  and  Quibbles;  but  'tis  I  that  sting, 
And  on  the  Stage  th'  Egyptian  Lovers  bring ; 
Miss  Fhcebe,  Plotwell,  Townley,  all  are  Mine, 
And  Sir  Tremendous — Fossile's  only  Thine. 

The  character  of  Fossile  in  the  play  was  meant  as  a  satire 
on  Dr.  Woodward,  a  well-known  geologist,  and  it  may  easily  be 
that  Arbuthnot  was  the  only  one  of  the  triumvirate  suffi- 
ciently versed  in  scientific  terms  to  reel  off  the  jargon  put 
into  the  mouth  of  this  virtuoso.  Sir  Tremendous,  a  satirical 
portrait  of  John  Dennis,  must  almost  certainly  be  the  work 
of  Pope,  who  could  hardly  be  expected  to  keep  his  hands  off 
if  his  arch-enemy  were  thus  to  be  exposed  to  a  drubbing. 
Many  strokes  in  the  character  of  Plotwell  are  said  to  be 
levelled  at  Cibber,  hence  this  character,  too,  may  naturally 
be  ascribed  to  Pope.  Gay  may  have  had  some  private  grudge 
against  Lady  Winchilsea,  as  Baker  says,  and  may  have  had 
a  hand  in  the  portrayal  of  Phoebe  Clinket,  but  that  this 
character  was  virtually  Pope's  is  explicitly  stated,  not  only 
by  Hie  Confederates,  but  also  by  the  Complete  Key  by  "E. 
Parker,  Philomath,"  published  a  few  months  after  the  play. 
It  is  in  this  Key,  too,  that  we  find  Lady  Winchilsea  given 
as  the  original  of  Phoebe.     The  Key  reads  as  follows: 

Phoebe  Clinket,  This  character  is  a  very  silly  Imitation  of  the 
Bays  in  the  Rehearsal,  but  is  design'd  to  Redicule  the  C!ountess  of 
W — n — ea,  who.  Pope  says,  is  so  much  given  to  writing  of  Verses 
that  she  keeps  a  Standish  in  every  Room  of  the  House,  that  she 
may  immediately  clap  down  her  Thoughts,  whether  upon  Pindaric, 
Heroic,  Pastoral  or  Dramatical  Subjects,  This  punning  Char- 
acter was  drawn  by  Pope. 

So  far  as  the  plot  is  concerned  Phoebe  Clinket  is  an 
unimportant  character  in  the  farce.  After  the  first  act  she 
comes  in  but  twice,  once  to  claim  as  her  own  the  much- 
maligned  invention  whereby  the  two  lovers,  disguised  as  a 
mummy  and  a  crocodile,  gain  access  to  their  mistress ;  and 
again  when  a  letter,  which  announces  that  her  play,  the  off- 


Intboduotion  Ixv 


spring  of  her  brain,  has  been  refused  by  the  theater,  is  by 
a  vulgar  series  of  double  meanings  interpreted  into  an 
acknowledgment  by  her  of  a  crime  that  should  be  laid  at  the 
door  of  Mrs.  Townley,  the  immoral  heroine  of  the  farce. 
The  character  of  Phoebe  Clinket  is  drawn  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  caricaturing  a  learned  lady.  A  brief  analysis  of 
the  first  act  will  serve  to  show  the  points  of  general  satire  as 
well  as  the  points  to  be  interpreted  as  especially  applying  to 
Lady  Winchilsea. 

When  Mrs.  Clinket  appears  on  the  stage  she  has  on  an 
ink-stained  dress,  and  pens  are  stuck  in  her  hair.  She  is 
accompanied  by  her  maid  carrying  strapped  to  her  back  a 
desk  on  which  her  mistress  may  write.  The  following  con- 
versation shows  the  authoress  in  the  throes  of  creation: 

Maid.  I  had  as  good  carry  a  raree-show  about  the  street.  Oh  I 
how  my  back  aches! 

Clink.  What  are  the  labours  of  the  back  to  those  of  the  brain? 
Thou  scandal  to  the  muses,  I  have  now  lost  a  thought  worth  a 
folio,  by  thy  impertinence. 

Maid.  Have  I  not  got  a  crick  in  my  back  already,  that  will 
make  me  good  for  nothing,  with  lifting  your  great  books? 

Clink.  Folio's  call  them  and  not  great  books,  thou  monster  of 
impropriety.  But  have  patience,  and  I  will  remember  the  three 
gallery-tickets  I  promised  thee  at  my  new  Tragedy. 

Maid.  I  shall  never  get  my  head-cloaths  clear-starch'd  at  this 
rate. 

Clink.  Thou  destroyer  of  learning,  thou  worse  than  a  book- 
worm I  Thou  hast  put  me  beyond  all  patience.  Bemember  thou 
my  lyric  ode  bound  about  a  tallow-candle;  thy  wrapping  up  snuff 
in  an  epigram;  nay,  the  unworthy  usage  of  my  Hymn  to  ApollOy 
filthy  creature  I  read  me  the  last  lines  I  wrote  upon  the  Deluge,  and 
take  care  to  pronounce  them  as  I  taught  you. 

Maid.    SwelVd  vnth  a  dropsy,  sickly  Nature  lies, 
And  melting  in  a  diabetes,  dies. 

[Beads  ivith  an  affected  Tone.] 

Clink.  Still  without  cadence! 

Maid.  SwelVd  with  a  dropsy — 


Ixvi  Intboduotion 


Clink.  Hold!  I  conceive 

The  roaring  seas  o^er  the  tall  woods  have  broke 
And  Whales  now  perch  upon  the  sturdy  Oak. 
Boaring?  Stay.    Rumbling,  roaring,  rustling. 
No;  raging  seas.    (Writing,) 

The  ranging  seas  o'er  the  tall  woods  have  broke 
NoWy  perch,  thou  whale,  upon  the  sturdy  oak. 
Sturdy  oak?  No ;  steady,  strong,  strapping,  stiff — stiff.   No,  stiff 
is  too  short. 

(^Fossils  and  Totvnley  come  forward.) 
What  feast  for  fish!  Oh  too  luxurious  treai! 
When  hungry  dolphins  feed  on  butcher^s  meat. 
Foss.  Neice,  why  neice,  neicel  Oh,  Melpomene^ihou  goddess  of 
tragedy,  suspend  thy  influence  for  a  moment,  and  suffer  my  niece 
to  give  a  rational  answer.    This  lady  is  a  friend  of  mine. 

Clink.  Madam,  excuse  this  absence  of  mind;  my  animal  spirits 
had  deserted  the  avenues  of  my  senses,  and  retired  to  the  recesses 
of  the  brain,  to  contemplate  a  beautiful  idea.  I  could  not  force  the 
vagrant  creatures  back  again  into  their  posts,  to  move  those  parts 
of  the  body  that  express  civility. 

Mistress  Clinket's  eagerness  to  get  her  play,  the  theme 
of  which  is  The  Universal  Deluge;  or  The  Story  of  Deucalion 
and  Pyrrha,  on  the  stage,  leads  her  to  invite  Sir  Tre- 
mendous and  some  of  the  players  to  a  private  reading  of 
the  tragedy  in  her  own  parlor.  But  in  order  to  escape  the 
prejudices  sure  to  bias  their  judgments  if  the  play  is  known 
to  be  by  a  woman,  she  introduces  young  Mr.  Plotwell  as  the 
author,  while  she  poses  as  a  lady  patroness  of  letters  willing 
to  encourage  obscure  merit  by  this  preliminary  reading  at 
her  tea-table.  The  indifference  with  which  Mr.  Plotwell 
submits  his  supposed  play  to  the  critics,  allowing  them  to 
blot  or  insert  at  their  pleasure ;  Phoebe's  frantic  defense  of 
every  mooted  point;  her  unconcealed  agony  as  the  players 
and  Sir  Tremendous  confide  to  her  that  the  young  gentleman 
knows  nothing  of  poetry,  that  his  play  neither  can  take  nor 
ought  to  take,  make  a  very  clever  situation.     The  stage 


Intboduotion  Ixvii 


directioDB  in  the  tragedy  give  rise  to  a  violent  discussion. 
Clinket  reads  aloud: 

Hie  scene  opena^  and  discovers  the  heavens  cloudy.  A  prodi- 
gious shower  of  rain,  at  a  distance  appears  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tainy  Parnassus,  all  the  fields  beneath  are  overflotoed,  there  are 
seen  cattle  and  men  swimming.  The  tops  of  the  steeples  rise 
CLbove  the  flood,  toith  men  and  vxymen  perching  on  their  weather- 
cocks. 

The  bone  of  contention  here  is  whether  the  use  of  weather- 
cocks must  not  be  regarded  as  an  anachronism;  and  whether, 
indeed,  according  to  the  latest  theories  concerning  the  flood, 
the  stones  were  not  all  dissolved,  in  which  case  the  steeples 
themselves,  being  without  foundations,  could  not  support 
men  and  women.  Plotwell  carelessly  abandons  stones, 
steeples,  weather-cocks,  and  all  to  the  learning  of  the  critics; 
but  Phcebe  declares  that  this  cavil  is  leveled  at  the  whole 
drama,  for  the  theory  of  dissolved  stones  would  make  the 
reparation  of  the  human  race  by  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  an 
impossibility.  Portions  of  the  opening  passage  of  the  tragedy 
are  defended  with  spirit  by  Clinket  as  having  the  fire  of  Lee 
and  the  tenderness  of  Otway.  But  as  the  criticism  grows  in 
severity,  she  exclaims  in  angry  protest:  "Were  the  play  mine, 
you  should  gash  my  flesh,  mangle  my  face,  anything,  sooner 
than  scratch  my  play."  And  when  finally  the  diction,  the 
metaphors,  whole  speeches,  the  fable,  the  characters  are  de- 
clared "monstrous,"  "abominable,"  "execrable,"  her  agony 
overcomes  her  prudence,  and  crying  out,  "Pm  butchered! 
Pm  massacred!"  she  falls  in  a  faint.  But  the  crisis  of  her 
misery  does  not  come  until  her  xmcle  flings  her  papers  into 
the  fire,  declaring  that  thus  only  can  she  be  cured  of  the 
poetical  itch. 

Clink.  Ah  1 1  am  an  undone  woman. 

Plotw.  Has  he  burned  any  bank-bills,  or  a  new  Mechlin  head- 
dress? 

Clink.  My  works!  My  works! 


Ixviii  Intboduotion 


l8t  Play.  Has  he  destroyed  the  writings  of  an  estate,  or  your 
billet-doux? 

Clink.  A  pindaric  odel  five  similesl  and  half  an  epiloguel 

2nd  Player.  Has  he  thrown  a  new  fan,  or  your  pearl  neck-laoe 
into  the  flames? 

Clink.  Worse,  worse  I  The  tags  of  the  acts  of  a  new  Comedy! 
a  Prologue  sent  by  a  person  of  quality  I  three  copies  of  recom- 
mendatory verses  I  and  two  Greek  mottosi 

When  the  play  is  finally  refused,  Phoebe  is  unhappy  but 
philosophicaL  She  refiects  on  the  egregious  stuff  that  passes 
current  on  the  stage,  and  comforts  herself  with  the  thought 
that  she  is  but  one  of  the  famous  daughters  of  Apollo  to 
suffer  because  of  the  "  wrong  gout  of  the  rabblement."  And 
she  felicitates  herself  that  whatever  may  be  said  of  her  judg- 
ment and  correctness,  no  one  excels  her  in  readiness  and 
fertility. 

Mrs.  Clinket  is  a  prude  as  well  as  a  pedant.  She  calls 
herself  a  ''platonic  lady'^  in  matters  of  love,  and  boasts  that 
in  her  plays  she  does  not  allow  ''the  libertinism  of  lip- 
embraces,"  for,  though  Aristotle  never  actually  prohibited 
kissing  on  the  stage,  she  is  ''  unwilling  to  stand  even  on  the 
brink  of  an  indecorum."  Phoebe  is  very  religious  and  very 
severe  on  the  corrupt  plays  so  popular  in  London.  She 
chooses  the  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  version  of  the  "Universal 
Deluge"  for  her  tragedy  because  she  counts  neither  the 
stage  nor  the  actors  of  her  day  **  hallowed  enough  for  sacred 
story."  In  her  attitude  toward  her  own  plays  Phoebe  is  a 
combination  of  pompous  self-conceit  and  of  extreme  sensi- 
tiveness to  criticism.  Her  ruling  passion  is  her  desire  to 
get  her  plays  before  the  public.  For  that  she  scorns  delight 
and  lives  laborious  days. 

We  learn  from  the  Complete  Key  that  some  touches  in 
this  satiric  portrait  refer  to  Margaret,  Duchess  of  Newcastle, 
but  that  in  general  the  Countess  of  Winchilsea  is  the  one 
ridiculed.     Yet  the  authors  of  the  farce  were  careful  not  to 


Intboduotion  Ixix 


make  the  application  too  minutely  exact  In  two  important 
respects  Phoebe  Clinket  does  not  even  remotely  suggest  Lady 
Winchilsea.  The  supposed  tragedy  is,  in  its  theme  and  in 
the  substance  and  style  of  the  quoted  passages,  entirely 
unlike  any  work  of  hers.  It  would  better  serve  as  a  travesty 
of  some  passages  in  Dryden's  heroic  tragedies.  And  then, 
again,  Ardelia  was  as  averse  to  any  public  presentation  of 
her  plays  as  Phoebe  Clinket  was  eager  for  it.  The  impas- 
sioned "Advertisement"  to  Love  and  Innocence^  written 
years  before  the  appearance  of  Pope's  farce,  is  as  genuine  a 
personal  appeal  as  was  ever  buried  away  in  a  manuscript. 
Even  after  the  lapse  of  years,  even  if  her  plays  had  admirable 
dramatic  qualities,  one  would  hardly  feel  at  liberty  to  put 
them  on  the  stage  in  the  face  of  such  a  protest  And 
every  other  indication  in  Ardelia's  poems  or  prose  writings 
emphasizes  her  spirit  of  self -depreciation,  her  morbid  shrink- 
ing from  any  but  the  most  intimate  and  friendly  audience. 
Hence  the  satire  is  in  this,  its  chief  point,  wide  of  the  mark. 
Many  minor  points,  however,  could  easily  be  made  to  apply. 
Lady  Winchilsea's  learning,  her  devotion  to  literary  pur- 
suits, her  fecundity  in  verse,  her  irritable  shrinking  from 
adverse  criticism,  her  determined  opposition  to  amatory 
themes,  her  preference  for  divine  and  moral  songs,  her 
detestation  of  the  modem  stage,  are  traits  that  tally  with 
the  burlesque  portrait.  The  story  of  the  "standish  in 
every  room,"  if  not  a  malicious  invention  of  Pope's,  would 
of  course  be  most  wittily  burlesqued  by  the  desk  strapped 
to  the  maid's  back,  and  would  be  sufficient  to  locate  the  char- 
acter, but  the  story  itself  rests  only  on  the  doubtful 
authority  of  Pope. 

But  in  so  far  as  the  character  did  suggest  Lady  Winchil- 
sea to  hearers  or  readers,  it  was  an  intolerable  affront.  She 
was  made  not  merely  ridiculous,  butodious.  .  Swift's  treat- 
ment of  Mary  Astell  as  Madonella  in  the  Toiler  papers,  and 


Ixx  Intboduotion 


his  vulgar  account  of  the  supposed  foundation  and  disrup- 
tion of  her  college,  were  no  more  unjust  and  libelous  than 
was  Pope's  treatment  of  Lady  Winchilsea  in  this  play.  Lady 
Mary  Wortley  Montagu  as  Sappho  in  Pope's  Epistle  IL  had 
really  less  right  to  complain. 

There  is  probably  a  reference  to  this  play  in  Gay's  WeU 
come  from  Oreece.  Among  the  illustrious  ladies  who  crowd 
the  quay  to  welcome  Pope  are  "Winchilsea,  still  meditating 
song,"  while  "afar  oflp  is  frolic  Bicknell,"  the  actress  who 
played  Phcebe  Clinket.  The  conjunction  of  names  may 
be  fortuitous,  but  it  probably  has  covert  reference  to  the 
play. 

This  play  was,  unhappily,  one  of  the  last  important  notices 
of  Lady  Winchilsea's  work  during  her  lifetime.  But  there 
Raoognition  were  some  minor  indications  of  favorable  recog- 
After  1725  nition.  Steele  and  Fenton  published  some  of 
her  poems  in  their  Miscellanies  of  1714  and  1717 ;  Harris 
in  his  History  of  Kent  (1719)  included  her  Fanscomb  -Bam, 
with  a  laudatory  account  of  her  writings ;  and  immediately 
after  her  death  Dr.  Stukeley  republished  her  Spleen.  Twenty- 
two  years  later,  however,  Pope,  in  the  final  edition  of  his 
works,  omitted  her  previously  published  commendatory  verses, 
because,  says  Mr.  El  win,  they  were  "intrinsically  worthless 
and  the  author's  name  no  longer  carried  weight."  This  note 
probably  represents  the  state  of  the  case,  and  the  revival  of 
interest  in  Lady  Winchilsea  soon  after  Pope's  death  must  be 
due  to  Birch's  General  Dictionary  (1734-1741),  which  pub- 
Birch's  General  l^hed  six  of  her  poems,  five  of  them  being  from 
Dictionary  the  manuscript  in  the  possession  of  the  Countess 
of  Hertford,  and  added  a  brief  life,  giving  the  facts  repeated 
in  later  biographical  notices.  During  the  next  thirty  years 
Lady  Winchilsea's  name  appears  with  some  frequency. 

The  purpose  of  John  Duncomb's  Feminead  (1751)  was 
to  reveal  to  "lordly  m«ui"  the  glories  of  a  sister-choir.     In 


Intboduotion  Ixxi 


this  chivalrous  enterprise  he  connts  himself  but  as  the  coadju- 
tor of  his  friend  Bichardson,  whose  "Pamela"  and  "Clarissa" 
johnDimooiiiVi  ^^^  proved  him  "the  sex's  champion  and 
F«mi]iMd  constant  patron."     Duncomb  heads  the  list  of 

"lettered  nymphs"  with  the  chaste  Orinda,  but  Ardelia,  who 
is  commended  in  a  foot-note  as  a  "lady  of  great  wit  and 
genius,"  makes  a  close  second.  It  is  her  Spleen  that  rouses 
Mr.  Duncomb's  admiration. 

Who  can  unmoved  hear  Winchilsea  reveal 
Thy  horrors,  Spleen  I  which  all,  who  paint,  must  feel. 
My  praises  would  but  wrong  her  sterling  wit, 
Since  Pope  himself  applauds  what  she  has  writ. 

In  1752  George  Ballard  in  his  Memoirs  of  several  Ladies 
who  have  been  celebrated  for  their  writings  or  skill  in  the 
SaUard*!  learned  languages^  arts,  and  sciences,  referred 

^'•■w^  to   Lady  Winchilsea   as  "a  lady  of  excellent 

genius  especially  in  poetry,"  and  quoted  her  answer  to 
Pope's  Impromptu. 

Cibber  in  the  Lives  of  the  Poets  (1753)  quotes  Pope's 
Impromptu  with  the  comment:  "The  answer  which  the 
Cibber'iLivM  co^uitess  makes  to  the  above  is  rather  more 
oftiiaPoeu  exquisite  than  the  lines  of  Mr.  Pope;  he  is 
foiled  at  his  own  weapons,  and  outdone  in  the  elegance 
of  compliment."  Beferring  to  the  poems  in  Birch's  Dic- 
tionary he  says: 

If  all  her  poetical  compositions  are  executed  with  as  much 
spirit  and  elegance  as  these,  the  lovers  of  poetry  have  some  reason 
to  be  sorry  that  her  station  was  such  as  to  exempt  her  from  the 
necessity  of  more  frequently  exercising  a  genius  so  furnished  by 
nature  to  have  made  a  great  figure  in  that  divine  art. 

Of  the  "excellent  picturesqueness"  of  her  Spleen  he 
speaks  in  the  warmest  terms,  and  affirms  that  this  poem 
alone  would  give  her  a  "  very  high  station  among  the  inspired 
tribe." 


Ixxii  Intboduotion 


In  1755  there  appeared  a  compilation  entitled  Poems  by 
Eminent  Ladies.  It  was  designed,  the  preface  tells  ns,  as 
T!iwin>i.t  "a  solid  compliment  to  the  sex,"  and  was  put 

lAdiei  forward  as  a  convincing  proof  that  "  great  abili- 

ties are  not  confined  to  men,  and  that  genius  often  glows 
with  equal  warmth  and  perhaps  with  more  delicacy  in  the 
breast  of  a  female."  Twelve  poems  by  Lady  Winchilsea  are 
quoted  in  this  volume,  and  for  the  first  time  the  selections 
are  made,  not  from  Birch's  Dictionary  but  from  the  Mis- 
cellany Poems  of  1713,  nine  of  the  twelve  being  fables. 
Wordsworth  commented  most  unfavorably  on  the  literary 
insight  that  could  choose  to  represent  Lady  Winchilsea  by 
these  selections. 

In  Walpole's  Royal  and  Noble  Authors  (1758)  is  the 
note  which  Wordsworth  found  so  scanty  and  unsatisfactory 
when  he  was  in  search  of  information  concerning  Ardelia. 

The  Biographia  Brittanica  (1763),  Gough's  Anecdotes 
of  British  Topography  (1768),  Granger's  Biographical 
Dictionary  (1769),  echo  in  brief  and  perfunctory  fashion  the 
critical  dicta  of  their  predecessors. 

There  is,  then,  through  the  century  an  unemphatic, 
uncritical,  but  persistent  literary  tradition  that  Lady  Win- 
chilsea's  claim  to  a  niche  in  the  Temple  of  Fame  could  not 
be  entirely  ignored.  She  was  a  countess,  she  wrote  The 
Spleen,  and  Pope  had  praised  her.  These  are  the  chief 
points  on  which  eulogy  was  based.  But  we  have  also  indi- 
cations of  a  recognition  much  more  spontaneous  and  pleasing. 
In  1763  Anna  Seward,  a  mature  little  lady  of  fifteen,  was 
engaged  in  a  serious  literary  correspondence 
well  calculated  to  awaken  parental  fears  lest 
she  should  become  ''that  dreaded  phenomenon,  a  learned 
lady."  In  the  midst  of  counsel  to  a  friend  "the  morning 
sun  of  whose  youth  is  with  difficulty  escaping  from  the 
unwholesome  mists  of  a  foolish  love  affair,"  we  come  upon 
the  following  bit  of  criticism: 


Intboduotion  Ixxiii 


The  last  words  of  that  sentence  bring  to  my  recollection  a 
pleasing  little  poem,  to  which,  in  infancy,  I  have  often  listened 
with  delight  from  the  lips  of  my  mother,  who  used  frequently  to 
repeat  it  as  she  sat  at  work.  She  had  learnt  it  from  a  lady  who 
was  the  friend  of  her  youth. 

Wholly  without  literary  curiosity,  as  she  never  saw  it  printed, 
so  she  never  asked  after  the  author;  consequently  could  give  me  no 
information  on  that  subject.  She  had  never  taken  the  trouble  of 
copying  it;  therefore  was  it  mine  as  it  was  hers,  by  oral  tradition, 
before  I  attained  my  tenth  year.  Its  easy  and  tuneful  numbers 
charmed;  and,  with  a  great  deal  of  giddy  vivacity  on  a  thousand 
occasions,  I  had  yet  an  inherent  fondness  for  seeing  the  perspec- 
tives of  opening  life  through  the  clare-oscure  of  a  meditative  fancy, 
particularly  where  the  sombre  tints  were  ultimately  prevalent. 

Behold  this  little  orphan  ode  which  I  have  searched  for  in  vain 
through  the  pages  of  our  poets. 

Lady  Winchilsea's  Progress  of  Life  is  then  quoted  entire 
with  many  slight  inaccuracies  such  as  would  result  from  oral 
transmission,  but  substantially  identical  with  the  form  given 
in  the  volume  of  1713.  The  "friend  of  Mrs.  Seward's  youth '* 
must  have  been  alive  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  day.  It  would 
be  interesting  to  know  who  started  the  little  poem  on  its  oral 
way.  It  is  at  any  rate  a  charming  picture  that  we  get  of  the 
gentlewoman  at  her  needlework,  perhaps — like  the  lady  of 
the  ballad, — letting  "her  silken  seam  fall  till  her  tae"  as 
she  yields  her  spirit  to  the  musical  flow  and  pensive  moral- 
izing of  Ardelia's  verse ;  and  of  the  child  lured  from  her 
play  by  the  charm  of  the  words  as  they  fall  from  her 
mother's  lips.  Another  manuscript  copy  of  this  poem  is  to 
be  foimd  in  a  volume  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  George  Finch- 
Hatton.  If  we  may  judge  by  verbal  inaccuracies,  this  poem, 
too,  had  been  orally  transmitted  to  the  writer.  Such  facts 
are  evidences  of  an  undercurrent  of  popularity,  and  popular- 
ity of  the  sort  that  would  have  been  most  pleasing  to  Ardelia. 

Miss  Seward's  letter  continues  in  a  strain  of  elegtmt 
criticism.      She  endeavors  to  date  the   poem   by  internal 


Ixxiv  Intboduotion 


evidence.  She  feels  a  lack  of  "polished  accuracy;"  she 
discovers  one  '^ inadmissible  inversion;"  she  is  conscious  of 
some  failures  in  the  matter  of  "  verbal  perspicuity."  But 
she  rejoices  in  the  truth  and  pathetic  sweetness  of  the  poem^ 
and  she  considers  the  stanzas  after  the  fourth  as  "  poetically 
faultless."  Miss  Seward's  letter  is  the  first  instance  of 
detailed  criticism  applied  to  Lady  Winchilsea's  verse. 

This  letter  was  published  without  comment  in  Walter 
Scott's  edition  of  Miss  Seward's  Poetical  Works.  Scott's 
failure  to  find  parentage  for  the  orphan  ode  is  noted  by 
'*J.H.R."  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  (1812),  and  he 
felicitates  himself  on  having  foimd  the  author.  In  looking 
over  a  volume  of  old  poems  he  chanced  upon  this  one 
ascribed  to  "Anne,  Countess  of  Winchilsea,  who  lived  in  the 
reign  of  Queen  Anne."  He  then  points  out  the  most  inter- 
esting of  the  variations  resulting  from  oral  transmission: 

The  second  stanza  is  thus  printed  m  Miss  Seward's  Works: 

How  pleasing  the  world's  prospect  lies; 

How  tempting  to  look  through! 
Parnassus  to  the  Poet's  eyes. 
Nor  Beauty,  with  her  sweet  surprise. 

Can  more  inviting  shew. 

But  in  the  voliune  I  have  mentioned,  it  is  inserted  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner: 

How  pleasing  the  world's  prospect  lies; 
How  tempting  to  look  through  I 
.  Not  Canaan  to  the  Prophet's  eyes, 

Nor  Pisgah,  with  her  sweet  surprise. 
Can  more  inviting  shew. 

Miss  Seward's  version  certainly  preserves  more  poetical  oeauty, 
though  perhaps  the  latter  one  is  most  correct.  The  Ode  in  general 
is  very  excellent,  and  is  written  in  that  style  of  chaste  simplicity 
which  was  so  peculiar  to  the  Poets  in  the  reign  of  Anne. 

Was  it  the  lady  with  the  needlework,  or  the  friend  of  her 
youth,  or  perhaps  the  swan  of  Lichfield  herself,  that  thus 


Intboduotion  Ixxv 


sabfitituted  a  bit  of  poetical  paganism  for  Ardelia's  hon- 
est Hebraisms?  Scott,  it  seems,  did  not  know  Lady 
8oiit]i07'i  Winchilsea.     Southey  knew  her  but  slightly. 

■P*«*"^»"*  He  includes  her  in  his  Specimens  (1807)  with  the 

laconic  comment:  "Her  poems  were  praised  by  Rowe  and 
by  Pope;  and  they  deserved  praise."  He  publishes  nothing 
of  hers  except  portions  of  her  Petition  for  an  Absolute 
Retreat.  Much  more  space  is  devoted  to  Anne  Killigrew, 
to  Mary  Barber,  to  Constantia  Grierson,  to  Elizabeth  Bowe. 
But  Wordsworth  made  amends  for  all  omissions. 

The  modem  interest  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  work  and  the 
transfer  of  emphasis  from  her  poems  on  man  to  her  hitherto 
WUliam  unnoticed  poems  on  nature  date  from  the  pub- 

Wordfworth  Ucation  of  Wordsworth's  Essay,  Supplementary 
to  the  Preface  (1815),  in  which  occurred  the  well-known 
passage: 

Now  it  is  remarkable  that,  excepting  the  Nocturnal  Reverie  of 
Lady  Winchilsea,  and  a  passage  or  two  in  the  Windsor  Forest  of 
Pope,  the  poetry  intervening  between  the  publication  of  the  Para- 
dise Lost  and  the  Seasons  does  not  contain  a  single  new  image  of 
external  nature,  and  scarcely  presents  a  familiar  one  from  which 
it  can  be  inferred  that  the  eye  of  the  Poet  had  been  steadily  fixed 
upon  his  object,  much  less  that  his  feelings  had  urged  him  to  work 
upon  it  in  the  spirit  of  genuine  imagination. 

In  1820  Wordsworth  sent  Lady  Mary  Lowther  a  unique 
present.  It  was  a  manuscript  volume  of  extracts  from  the 
poems  of  Lady  Winchilsea  and  kindred  writers.  Words- 
worth had  made  the  selections  and  a  "female  friend"  had 
transcribed  them  for  him.  In  the  accompanying  Sonnet  to 
Lady  Mary  Lowther  he  explained  that  he  had  "culled  this 
store  of  lucid  crystals  from  a  Pamassicm  Cave  seldom  trod." 
This  volume  is  probably  the  one  referred  to  by  Christopher 
North  when  he  says,  "  We  never  had  in  our  hands  the  poems 
of  Anne,  Coimtess  of  Winchilsea,  printed  in  1713;  but  we 
well  remember  reading  some  of  them   in   beautiful   manu- 


Ixxvi  Intboduotion 


script  years  ago  at  Rydal  Mount."  This  book  is  probably 
still  in  existence  somewhere,  and  the  publication  of  it  would 
be  a  most  interesting  addition  to  our  stock  of  Words- 
worthiana. 

That  Wordsworth's  interest  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  poems 
was  genuine  and  permanent  is  evinced  in  his  correspondence 
with  the  Rev.  Alexander  Dyce,  whose  Specimens  of  British 
Poetesses  appeared  in  1825.  The  volume  made  its  way 
slowly  and  in  time  attracted  the  favorable  attention  of 
Wordsworth.  He  wrote  from  Eydal  Mount,  October  16, 
1829,  to  Mr.  Dyce  as  follows: 

By  accident,  I  learned  lately  that  you  had  made  a  Book  of 
Extracts,  which  I  had  long  wished  for  opportimity  and  industry 
to  execute  myself.  I  am  happy  it  has  fallen  into  so  much  better 
hands.  I  allude  to  your  Selections  from  the  Poetry  of  English 
Ladies,  I  had  only  a  glance  at  your  work ;  but  I  will  take  this 
opportunity  of  saying,  that  should  a  second  edition  be  called  for, 
I  should  be  pleased  with  the  honor  of  being  consulted  by  you 
about  it.  There  is  oae  poetess  to  whose  writings  I  am  especially 
partial,  the  Countess  of  Winchelsea.  I  have  perused  her  poems 
frequently,  and  should  be  happy  to  name  such  passages  as  I  think 
most  characteristic  of  her  genius,  and  most  fit  to  be  selected. 

Wordsworth's  glance  at  the  book  must  have  been  of  the 
most  casual  sort,  for  he  not  only  misquoted  the  title,  but  he 
is  ignor«uit  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Dyce's  Selections  included 
The  Spleen,  L'ife's  Progress,  The  Atheist  and  the  Acorn, 
and  A  Nocturnal  Reverie  by  Lady  Winchilsea,  and  that  he 
quoted  in  her  praise  Wordsworth's  own  words  in  the  Essay 
of  1815.  But  the  next  letter  to  Mr.  Dyce  shows  that  a  copy 
of  the  Specimens  had  been  sent  Wordsworth,  and  that  he 
had  given  it  diligent  attention.  The  letter  is  undated  but 
bears  the  postmark  1830.  After  some  preliminary  discus- 
sion he  writes: 

I  pow  come  to  Lady  Winchelsea.  First,  however,  let  me  say  a 
few  words  on  one  or  two  other  authoresses  of  your  "  Specimens." 
British  poetesses  make  but  a  poor  figure  in  the  '^  Poems  by  Emi- 


Intboduotion  Ixxvii 


nent  Ladies/'  But  observing  how  injudicious  that  selection  is  in 
the  case  of  Lady  Winchelsea,  and  of  Mrs.  Aphra  Behn  (from  whose 
attempts  they  are  miserably  copious)  I  have  thought  something 
better  might  have  been  chosen  by  more  competent  persons  who  had 
access  to  the  volumes  of  the  several  writers 

Could  you  tell  me  anything  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu 
more  than  is  to  be  learned  from  Pope's  letters  and  her  own?  She 
seems  to  have  been  destined  for  something  much  higher  and  better 
than  she  became.  A  parallel  between  her  character  and  genius 
and  that  of  Lady  Winchelsea,  her  contemporary  (though  somewhat 
prior  to  her)  would  be  well  worth  drawing. 

And  now  at  last  for  the  poems  of  Lady  Winchelsea.  I  will 
transcribe  a  note  from  the  blank  leaf  of  my  own  edition  written 
by  me  before  I  saw  the  scanty  notice  of  her  by  Walpole.  (By  the 
by,  that  book  has  always  disappointed  me  when  I  have  consulted 
it  on  any  particular  occasion.)  The  note  runs  thus:  'The  '^ Frag- 
ment," p.  13,  seems  to  prove  that  she  was  attached  to  James  II., 
as  does  p.  74,  and  that  she  suffered  by  the  Revolution.  The  most 
celebrated  of  these  poems,  but  fax  from  the  best  is  "  The  Spleen." 
"The  Petition  for  an  Absolute  Retreat,"  and  the  "Nocturnal  Reverie," 
are  of  much  sux)erior  merit.  See  also  for  favorable  specimens,  p.  56; 
"On  the  Death  of  Mr.  Thynne,"  p.  IM  [Moral  Song];  and  p.  13, 
"Fragment."  The  Fable  of  *  Love,  Death,  and  Reputation,'  p.  160, 
is  ingeniously  told.'  Thus  far  my  own  note.  I  will  now  be  more 
particular.  P.  4, '  Our  Vanity,'  etc.,  and  p.  153  are  noticeable  as 
giving  some  accoimt  from  herself  of  her  authorship.  See  also  p. 
193,  where  she  alludes  to  '  The  Spleen.'  She  was  unlucky  in  her 
models,  Pindaric  Odes,  and  French  Fables.  But  see  p.  49,  'The 
Blindness  of  Elymas,'  for  proof  that  she  could  write  with  powers  of 
high  order  when  her  own  individual  character  and  personal  feel- 
ings were  not  concerned.  For  less  striking  proofs  of  this  power  see 
p.  238,  'All  is  Vanity; '  omitting  verses  5  and  6,  and  reading  "  clouds 
that  are  lost  and  gone,"  &c.  There  is  merit  in  the  two  next  stan- 
zas; and  the  last  stanza  toward  the  close  contains  a  fine  reproof  for 
the  ostentation  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  one  magnificent  verse. 

Spent  the  astonished  hours,  forgetful  to  adore. 
But  my  paper  is  nearly  out.    As  far  as,  *  For  my  garments,'  p.  70, 
the  poem  is  charming;  it  then  falls  off;  revives  at  p.  72, '  Give  me 
there,'  p.  72  [1. 123],  &c.,  reminds  me  of  Dyer's  'Grongar  Hill;'  it 
revives  p.  76,  toward  the  bottom,  and  concludes  with  sentiments 


Ixxviii  Intboduotion 


worthy  of  the  writer,  though  not  quite  so  happily  expressed  as  other 
parts  of  the  poem.  See  pp.  231,  250,  ^  Whilst  in  the  Muses'  path  I 
stray; 'p.  183  [Ths Sh^herd  and  the  Cairn],* The  Cautious  Lovers,' 
p.  147,  has  little  poetic  merit,  but  is  worth  reading  as  chaiacteristie 
of  the  author.  P.  80, '  Deep  lines  of  honour,'  etc.,  to  *  maturer  age.' 
P.  84  [The  Change],  if  shortened,  would  be  striking;  p.  67  [Enquiry 
after  Peace],  characteristic;  p.  57,  from  *  Meanwhile  ye  living 
parent,'  to  the  close,  omitting  *Nor  could  we  hope,'  and  the  five 
following  verses;  p.  Ill,  last  paragraph  [Oh,  might  I  live,  etc.];  p. 
136  [Life's  Progress],  that  you  have;  pp.  136  [Hope],  134  [Moral 
Song]',  p.  13,  was  Lady  W.  a  R.  Catholic?  p.  267,  *And  to  the  clouds 
procl^m  thy  fall;'  p.  269,  omit  *When  scatter'd  glow-worms,'  and 
the  next  couplet.  I  have  no  more  room.  Pray,  excuse  this  vile  scrawl. 

In  Mr.  Grosart's  edition  Wordsworth's  letter  of  May  10, 
1830,  is  put  before  the  one  just  quoted.  That  letter  has,  to 
be  sure,  no  specific  date  beside  the  postmark,  1830,  but 
internal  evidence  seems  to  demand  that  it  precede  the  one 
of  May  10,  for  Wordsworth  here,  as  will  be  seen,  takes  up 
the  subject  just  where  he  left  it  in  the  undated  letter.  He 
writes: 

My  last  was,  for  want  of  room,  concluded  so  abruptly,  that  I 
avail  myself  of  an  opportunity  of  sending  you  a  few  additional 
words,  free  of  postage,  upon  the  same  subject. 

I  observed  that  Lady  Winchelsea  was  imfortunate  in  her  models 
— Pindarics  and  Fables;  nor  does  it  appear  from  her  Aristomenes 
that  she  would  have  been  more  successful  than  her  contemporaries, 
if  she  had  cultivated  tragedy.  She  had  sensibility  sufficient  for 
the  tender  parts  of  dramatic  writing,  but  in  the  stormy  and  tumult- 
uous she  would  probably  have  failed  altogether.  She  seems  to 
have  made  it  a  moral  and  religious  duty  to  control  her  feelings 
lest  they  should  mislead  her.    I  have  often  applied  two  lines  of 

her  drama  (p.  355)  to  her  affections: 

Love*s  soft  bands, 
His  gentle  cords  of  hyacinths  and  roses, 
Wove  in  the  dewy  Spring  when  storms  are  silent. 

By  the  by,  in  the  next  page  [11.  64-5]  are  two  impassioned  lines 
spoken  to  a  person  fainting: 

Then  let  me  hug  and  press  thee  into  life, 
And  lend  thee  motion  from  my  beating  heart. 


Intboduotion  Ixxix 


From  the  style  and  versification  of  this,  so  much  her  longest  work, 
I  conjecture  that  Lady  Winchelsea  had  but  a  slender  acquaintance 
with  the  drama  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  preceding  century.  Yet 
her  style  in  rhyme  is  often  admirable,  chaste,  tender,  and  vigorous, 
and  entirely  free  from  sparkle,  antithesis,  and  that  over-culture, 
which  reminds  one  by  its  broad  glare,  its  stiffness,  and  heavi- 
ness, of  the  double  daisies  of  the  garden,  compared  with  their 
modest  and  sensitive  kindred  of  the  fields.  Perhaps  I  am  mis- 
taken, but  I  think  there  is  a  good  deal  of  resemblance  in  her 
style  and  versification  to  that  of  Tickell,  to  whom  Dr.  Johnson 
justly  assigns  a  high  place  among  the  minor  poets,  and  of  whom 
Goldsmith  rightly  observes,  that  there  is  a  strain  of  ballad-thinking 
tiirough  all  his  poetry,  and  it  is  very  attractive. 

Mr.  Dyee  was  much  impressed  by  Wordsworth's  minute 
and  apt  criticisms,  and  apparently  suggested  the  advisability 
of  his  publishing  Lady  Winchilsea's  poema  Wordsworth 
answered,  in  a  letter  from  Lowther  Castle,  dated  September 
23,  but  without  any  year.  The  reference  in  the  letter  to  a 
possible  visit  from  Mr.  Dyce  about  the  "  tenth  December," 
throws  doubt  on  even  the  month.  Mr.  Grosart  suggests 
August,  1833.  The  portion  of  the  letter  referring  to  Lady 
Winchilsea  thanks  Mr.  Dyce  for  his  care  in  collecting  and 
transmitting  particulars  concerning  her,  and  concludes: 

I  expected  to  find  at  this  place  my  friend,  Lady  Frederick 
Bentinck,  through  whom  I  intended  to  renew  my  request  for  mate- 
rials, if  any  exist,  among  the  Finch  family,  whether  manuscript 
poems,  or  anything  else  that  would  be  interesting;  but  Lady  F., 
unluckily,  is  not  likely  to  be  in  Westmoreland.  I  shall,  however, 
write  to  her.  Without  some  additional  materials,  I  think  I  should 
scarcely  feel  strong  enough  to  venture  upon  any  species  of  publi- 
cation connected  with  this  very  interesting  woman,  notwithstand- 
ing the  kind  things  you  say  of  the  value  of  my  critical  remarks. 

It  is  a  far  cry  from  this  Three  Hours  after  Marriage  of 
Pope,  Gay,  and  Arbuthnot  to  Wordsworth's  Essay  and 
his  Letters^  but  Ardelia's  fame  could  well  afford  to  wait  a 
century  for  so  pronounced  a  revolution  in  taste.  Words- 
worth knew  her  poems  minutely  and  sympathetically.      He 


Ixxx  Intboduotion 


dwelt  upon  specific  excellences  and  defects.  He  was 
impressed  by  her  high  qualities  as  a  poet.  He  sought  to 
make  her  known.  He  contemplated  editing  her  works  him- 
self. With  Wordsworth  begins  the  modem  appreciation  of 
Ardelia,  and  most  critics  of  her  yerse  after  1815  quote  the 
Nocturnal  Reverie  and  Wordsworth's  comment.  Only  the 
more  significant  of  the  nineteenth  century  notices  of  her 
work  demand  attention  here. 

Of  the  Nocturnal  Reverie  Christopher  North  {Black- 
wood^Sy  March,  1837)  says: 

Christopher  We  find  nothmg  comparable  to  what  we  have  now 
Horth  quoted  in  any  of  the  effusions  of  the  Thirty  Poetesses 

— let  us  by  courtesy  so  call  them — who  flourished  from  the  death 
of  Lady  W.  to  that  of  Charlotte  Smith. 

In  Men,  Women,  and  Books  (1847)  Leigh  Hunt  says  of 
Lady  Winchilsea: 

...  —  We  are  now  come  to  one  of  the  nmnerous  loves  we 

possess  among  our  grandmothers  of  old — or  rather 
not  nmnerous,  but  select,  and  such  as  keep  fresh  with  us  forever, 
like  the  miniature  of  his  ancestress  whom  the  Sultan  took  for  a 
living  beauty.  This  is  Anne,  Countess  of  Winchelsea  (now  written 
Winchilsea),  daughter  of  Sir  William  Eingsmill,  of  Sidmonton,  in 
the  coimty  of  Southampton. 

He  quotes  the  Nocturnal  Reverie  with  the  naive  critical 
method  of  italicizing  the  words  and  phrases  he  especially 
likes.  The  celebrated  Spleen  still  deserves,  according  to 
Mr.  Hunt,  a  place  on  every  toilet,  male  and  female. 

Mrs.  Hale's   Woman^s   Record  (New  York,  1853),  "an 

invaluable  manual  for  the  parlor  table,''  is  interesting  as  the 

first  American  recognition  of  Lady  Winchilsea. 

Mrs  Hftls 

"  It  should  not  be  forgotten,"  Mrs.  Hale  says, 
"  that  she  was  the  first  Englishwoman  who  attempted  to 
scale  the  Parnassian  heights  " —  a  neglect  of  the  matchless 
Orinda  against  which  Ardelia  would  have  been  the  first 
to  protest. 


Intboduotion  Ixxxi 


The  Literary  Women  of  England  (1861)  is  a  compila- 
tion made  by  Jane  Williatns,  usually  known  as  "  YsgafelL" 

Miss  Williams  was  impelled  to  her  work  by  indig- 
JaiM  WUliamf 

nation  that  Campbell  had  included  in  his  one 

hundred  and  seventy  British  poets  but  one  woman,  and 

that  Dr.  Johnson  had  admitted  not  one  into  his  society  of 

fifty-two  English  poet&     Her  commentary  on  Lady  Win- 

chilsea's  work  is  unusually  full  and  interesting: 

Her  verses  on  the  Spleen  are  very  poor,  and  ill  deserve  the 
praise  lavished  on  them  by  contemporary  flatterers.  Her  answer 
to  half  a  dozen  rhymed  couplets,  '^occasioned  by  four  verses  in 
'The  Hape  of  the  Lock,' "  is  sharp-witted  and  adroit,  but  pert  and 
unpleasing.  Her  celebrated  Apologue  of  ''  The  Atheist  and  the 
Acorn "  doubtless  did  good  service  in  its  day.  It  is  also  remark- 
able for  having  su^ested  to  Hannah  More  another  Apologue 
called  "  The  Two  Gardeners,"  and  published  in  the  Cheap  Beposi- 

tory  Tracts Any  one  accustomed  to  contemplate  nnral 

nature  imder  the  shades  of  night,  in  stillness  and  in  solitude,  must 
be  struck  with  smprise  and  won  to  sympathy  by  the  enchanting 
reproduction  of  emotions  peculiar  to  that  hour  and  scene  in  the 
'' Noctiunal  Reverie."  It  is  thoroughly  original;  a  living  land- 
scape redolent  of  sweet  tranquility,  full  of  energy  in  gentlest 
exercise.  The  key-note  of  this  most  musical  combination  of  words, 
thoughts,  and  images,  seems  to  have  been  derived  from  Shakspeare's 
"  Merchant  of  Venice,"  Act  V.,  scene  1,  where  Lorenzo  and  Jessica 
in  quiet  enjoyment  play  upon  the  phrase,  ''In  such  a  night." 
It  is  most  true. 

Soft  stillness  and  the  night 
Become  the  touches  of  sweet  harmony. 

Every  stroke  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  description  is  effective ;  and  the 
horse,  grazing  leisurely  and  wandering  at  will  as  he  crops  the 
inviting  herbage  is  wonderfully  true  to  nature.  The  "  Salisbm^," 
whose  strong  and  steady  luster  is  advantageously  contrasted  with 
the  pale  and  flickering  sparkle  of  the  glow-worm,  was  probably 
Lady  Anne  Tufton,  second  daughter  of  Thomas,  sixth  Earl  of 
Thanet,  who  married  in  1709,  James  Cecil,  fifth  Earl  of  Salisbury. 
Perhaps  these  verses  were  originally  addressed  to  her,  and  perhaps 
she  accompanied  Lady  Winchilsea  in  the  mid-night  stroll  which 


Ixxxii  Intboduotion 


occasioned  them.  Anyhow,  this  allusion  indicates  the  existence  of 
a  friendship  between  the  two  countesses,  and  rescues  the  memory 

of  one  from  the  obscurity  of  ancestral  archives Great 

experimental  knowledge  of  human  life  and  human  feeling  is  mani- 
fested in  this  poem  ^The  Progress  of  Life] ;  and  we  are  induced  by 
it  to  regret  our  ignorance  of  that  particular  course  of  experience  by 
which  Lady  Winchilsea  acquired  the  wisdom  which  enhanced  the 
power  of  her  native  genius. 

Though  there  might  be  additions  to  this  account  of  the 
progress  of  Lady  Winchilsea^s  fame,  enough  has  probably 
been  quoted  to  show  her  place  in  critical 
esteem  up  to  the  time  of  the  publication  of 
Ward's  English  Poets  (1880).  Wordsworth  was  the  first 
man  of  authority  to  pronounce  a  discriminating  eulogy  on 
Ardelia,  and  it  is  evident  that  his  judgment  impressed  itself 
on  all  succeeding  criticism.  But  that  we  have  any  actual 
knowledge  of  her  life  and  poems  is  due  to  Mr.  Edmund 
Gosse.  He  introduced  her  to  a  large  circle  of  readers  by 
securing  for  her  a  place  in  Ward's  English  Poets.  Matthew 
Arnold  was  emphatic  in  his  expression  of  delight  in  Ardelia's 
work  as  it  stood  thus  revealed.  The  feeling  of  surprise  and 
pleasure  was  general,  while  students  of  the  beginnings  of 
romtmticism  were  stirred  to  the  keenest  interest  by  the 
quality  and  significance  of  these  poems.  By  his  suggestive 
introductory  comments  in  English  Poets,  by  a  notice  in  his 
Eighteenth  Century  Literature  (1889),  and  in  other  ways, 
did  Mr.  Gosse  contribute  to  the  popularity  and  the  right 
understanding  of  Ardelia's  verse ;  and,  finally,  in  Gossip  in 
a  Library  (1891)  he  made  the  lady  herself  known  to  ua 
At  his  touch  she  emerged  from  the  shadow-land  of  the  past, 
a  charming  and  most  real  personality. 

But  with  all  this  weight  of  high  poetical  and  expository 
authority  in  favor  of  Ardelia,  there  was  no  opportunity  to 
know  more  of  her  and  her  work  than  Ward's  Selections  and 
Mr.  Gosse's  Essay  revealed.      Dyee   and   Wordsworth   had 


Intboduotion  Ixxxiii 


contemplated  an  edition  of  her  poems  in  1833.  In  1876 
Qrosart,  in  his  edition  of  Wordsworth's  Prose  WorkSy  had 
complained  with  regard  to  Lady  Winchilsea:  ''Sad  to  say,  a 
collection  of  this  remarkable  gentlewoman's  poems  remains 
still  an  nnfnmished  desideratum.'*'*  In  Ward's  English  Poets 
Mr.  Gosse,  referring  to  possible  existing  collections  of  her 
poems  in  MS.,  had  said,  ''If  these  unpublished  poems  are  still 
in  the  possession  of  her  family,  it  is  highly  desirable  that 
they  should  be  given  to  the  world."  In  his  Short  History  of 
English  Literature  (1898)  Mr.  Saintsbury  repeats  the  wish. 
In  his  finely  appreciative  notice,  he  says: 

It  is  a  pity  that  her  poems  have  not  been  reprinted  and  are 
difficult  of  access,  for  it  is  desirable  to  read  the  whole  in  order  to 
appreciate  the  unconscious  clash  of  style  and  taste  in  them. 

That  it  is,  at  last,  possible  to  bring  out  this  much-desired 
complete  edition  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  work  is  but  another 
portion  of  the  debt  she  owes  to  Mr.  Gosse,  as  will  be  seen  in 
the  following  account  of  the  sources  of  the  present  volume. 

The  poems  in  this  edition  have  been  obtained  from  the 
printed  volume  of  1713,  from  two  manuscript  volumes,  an 
octavo  and  a  folio,  and  from  scattered  collections 
tiwlUMMlpu  ^^  various  sorts.  Of  the  manuscripts  the  octavo, 
now  in  the  possession  of  the  Earl  of  Winchilsea, 
is  doubtless  the  earlier  in  date.  Its  beautiful  morocco  binding 
and  gilt  edges,  and  the  exquisitely  clear  and  neat  hand- writing 
of  the  most  of  the  book  show  that  the  compilation  and  tran- 
scription of  the  poems  was  counted  a  matter  worthy  of  elegant 
attention.  But  toward  the  end  there  is  a  lamentable  decline 
from  the  precise  accuracy  of  the  beginning.  The  penman- 
ship changes  and  is  laborious  and  uneven,  with  many 
erasures.  And  a  critical  judgment  seems  to  have  passed 
sentence  on  some  of  the  work,  for  two  poems  have  been 
crossed  out,  letter  by  letter,  in  the  most  ptiinfully  effective 
fashion,  while  several  leaves  have  been  ruthlessly  excised 


Ixxxiv  Introduction 


from  the  center  of  the  volume.  The  title-page  with  its 
crude  sketch  of  a  cherub's  wing-enfolded  head,  and  the  table 
of  contents  are  the  work  apparently  of  the  same  untrained 
hand  employed  in  copying  the  last  poems.  That  the  table 
of  contents  is  an  after-thought  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the 
excised  poems  are  omitted,  so  that  we  do  not  even  know 
their  titles.  There  are  many  slight  indications  that  the 
octavo  is  an  earlier  manuscript  than  the  folio.  For  example, 
most  of  the  interlineations  and  substitutions  in  the  octavo 
appear  in  the  text  of  the  folio.  "  Areta,"  Lady  Winchilsea's 
first-chosen  pen-name,  is  crossed  out  in  the  octavo  and 
"Ardelia"  is  written  above,  while  in  the  folio,  though  here 
also  an  original  ''Areta'^  is  sometimes  changed  to  ''Ardelia,'' 
in  by  far  the  greater  number  of  cases,  the  "  Ardelia"  is  the 
name  first  written.  Then,  too,  no  poem  susceptible  of  a 
date  in  the  octavo  is  later  than  1689,  except  the  last 
one,  which  is  not  the  work  of  the  original  transcriber. 
This  volume  likewise  is  more  intimate  and  personal  in  its 
general  effect  than  the  folio.  The  crossed-out  poems  that 
do  not  reappear  in  the  folio  were  both  personal,  one 
being  from  Anne  Kingsmill's  maid  of  honor  days,  and 
one  being  a  verse-epistle  to  her  husband  in  the  early 
days  of  their  married  life.  Titles  in  the  octavo  carry 
out  this  personal  impression,  for  they  give  information 
as  to  places  and  dates  which  do  not  reappear  in  the 
titles  of  the  folio.  For  its  early  date,  its  beauty  as  a 
manuscript,  and  its  personal  character,  this  volume  is  of 
unique  interest.  It  is  a  satisfaction  to  feel  that  after 
untracked  wanderings  the  little  book  has  at  last  its  natural 
home  in  the  library  of  the  Earl  of  Winchilsea. 

Of  the  fifty-two  poems  in  the  octavo  all  but  five  reap- 
pear in  the  folio,  to  which  we  therefore  turn  as  the  real 
storehouse  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  unpublished  work.  This 
folio  manuscript  is  an  unusually  impressive   volume.     Its 


Intboduotion  Ixxxv 


gize,  its  heavy  calf  binding,  its  fine,  strong  paper,  its  careful 
arrangement,  and  its  expert,  clerkly  penmanship  are  a  dis- 
tinct advance  in  dignity  and  stateliness  of  form  over  the 
fine-lady  elegance  of  the  earlier  volume.  And  there  was 
justification  for  this  advance,  for,  to  the  contents  of  that  vol- 
ume, Ardelia  is  now  ready  to  add  sixty -five  new  poems,  two 
long  plays,  an  important  preface,  and  two  commendatory 
poems.  The  book  was  not  made  up  from  time  to  time  as 
poems  were  written,  for  poems  susceptible  of  dates  do  not 
appear  in  chronological  order.  The  arrangement  is  rather 
according  to  subjects  from  the  mass  of  poems  on  hand,  the 
religious  poetry  making  one  group,  the  songs  another,  the 
fables  a  third,  and  the  plays  a  fourth.  The  poems  of  gen- 
eral or  biographical  interest,  however,  are  not  so  classified,  but 
appear  in  different  portions  of  the  book.  It  is  difficult  to 
assign  an  exact  date  to  this  manuscript,  but  it  probably 
belongs  early  in  the  eighteenth  century,  for  it  contains  at 
least  one  poem,  that  on  the  death  of  James  II.,  written 
after,  and  probably  very  soon  after,  1701.  This  fact, 
together  with  the  omission  of  so  important  a  poem  as  the  one 
on  The  Hurricane  in  1703,  would  seem  to  date  the  manuscript 
about  1702.  The  title-page  of  this  volume  was  not  repro- 
duced in  the  printed  form,  but  is  more  interesting  than  the 
printed  one  because  of  the  characteristic  quotation  from 
Spenser^ 8  Shepherd^ s  Calendar^  June: 

I  never  list  presume  to  Pamass  Hill 
But  pipiag  low,  in  shade  of  lowly  grove 
I  play  to  please  myself,  albeit  ill. 

A  note  in  pencil  at  the  foot  of  the  page  says,  *' Ardelia 
was  Anne,  Countess  of  Winchilsea.  See  her  poems,  printed 
by  John  Barber  on  Lambeth  Hill ;  and  sold  by  John  Mor- 
phew,  near  Stationer's  Hall,  London,  1713."  The  title  given 
is.  Miscellany  Poems  with  two  Plays  by  Ardelia^  neither 
the  title  nor  the  note  being  like  the  corresponding  items  on 


Ixxxvi  Intboduotion 


the  published  title-pages.  The  book  contains  nnmerons 
slight  alterations  in  pencil,  and  since  some  of  these  notes  are 
in  the  first  person,  it  is  probable  that  this  manuscript  was 
corrected  by  Ardelia  herself. 

The  history  of  this  folio  is  also  of  interest.  During  the 
last  years  of  the  life  of  Heneage,  fourth  Earl  of  Winchilsea, 
one  of  his  constant  companions  was  Mr.  John  Creyk,  yicar 
of  Eastwell  and  the  earPs  private  chaplain.  In  the  letters 
of  the  earl  to  Dr.  Stukeley  Mr.  Creyk  is  described  as  "my 
friend,  a  learned  gentleman  and  a  lover  of  antiquities.^'  On 
September  30,  1726,  Mr.  Creyk  wrote  to  Dr.  Stukeley: 

This  morning  at  five  minutes  before  six  I  performed  the  dole- 
ful office  of  closing  the  eyes  of  my  dear  Lord  Winchilsea  who  died 
of  the  Iliac  passion. 

Lord  Hertford,  in  writing  to  Dr.  Stukeley  in  April,  1727, 
says  of  Lord  Winchilsea: 

By  his  will  he  left  me  his  Medals  and  his  Sark  Antiquities ; 
what  he  wrote  upon  them  is  in  possession  of  Mr.  Creyk ;  whether 
he  will  publish  them  or  not  I  do  not  know ;  he  has  the  disposal  of 
everything. 

In  this  fashion  did  the  folio  volume  of  poems  come  into 
the  possession  of  the  Creyk  family,  a  second  one  of  whom, 
also  a  Mr.  John  Creyk,  held  the  vicarage  of  Eastwell  from 
1742  to  1745.  Birch  in  his  General  Dictionary  (1734^1741) 
said  that  a  great  number  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  poems  still 
continued  unpublished  ''in  the  hands  of  the  Bev.  Mr. 
Creake."  And  there  they  apparently  remained.  For  a  hun- 
dred and  forty  years  the  manuscript  quietly  outlived  its 
successive  owners  in  the  Creake  family,  till  some  turn  of  the 
wheel  of  fortune  brought  their  effects  to  public  sala  Mr. 
Qosse,  in  Oossip  in  a  Library,  thus  describes  the  manner  in 
which  the  precious  volume  came  into  his  possession: 

In  1884  I  saw  advertised,  in  an  obscure  book-list,  a  folio  vol- 
waxe  of  old  manuscript  poetry.    Something  excited  my  curiosity. 


Intboduotion  Ixxxvii 


and  I  sent  for  it.  It  proved  to  be  a  vast  collection  of  the  poems  of 
my  beloved  Anne  Finch.  I  immediately  communicated  with  the 
bookseller  and  asked  him  whence  it  came.  He  replied  that  it  had 
been  sold,  with  furniture,  pictiu-es,  and  books,  at  the  dispersing  of 
the  effects  of  a  &mily  of  the  name  of  Creake. 

The  progress  of  the  gentle  lady  from  the  sumptuous  retire- 
ment of  the  library  at  Eastwell  Park  down  the  long  proces- 
sion of  the  years  had  been  lonely  and  unheralded,  but  it  was 
surely  a  gracious  and  benignant  fate  that  brought  her  at  last 
to  the  company  of  her  peers  in  the  library  of  the  man  who 
had  years  before  constituted  himself  her  champion.  And 
now  two  hundred  years  after  the  last  words  were  added  to 
the  book  by  the  pen  of  the  scribe,  the  poems  speak  for  the 
first  time  from  the  printed  page. 

In  1713  Lady  Winchilsea  published  a  volume  of  selec- 
tions from  her  poems.  There  was  apparently  but  one  edition 
The  Yolnme  ^^  ^^^  book,  yet  in  the  slow  progress  of  publi- 
ofl7l8  cation  two  title-pages  were   used.     The   one 

dated  1713  has,  in  the  center  of  the  page,  a  wood-cut  of  two 
flying  cherubs  bearing  palm  branches  and  laurel  wreaths. 
The  title  reads  Miscellany  Poems  on  Several  Occasions. 
Written  by  a  Lady.  The  second  title-page  is  dated  1714. 
It  omits  the  cherubs.  Written  by  a  Lady  is  changed  to 
Written  by  the  Right  Hon^^  Anne,  Countess  of  Winchilsea^ 
a  change  showing  probably  a  favorable  reception  of  the 
earlier  volumes,  and  certainly  an  advance  in  self-confidence. 
Of  the  eighty-one  poems  in  this  volume,  forty-five  are  in 
neither  of  the  manuscripts.  It  would  not  be  entirely  safe 
to  assert  that  these  new  poems  were  all  written  between 
1702  and  1713,  but  the  four  to  which  dates  may  be  assigned 
do  belong  after  1708. 

Still  other  poems  by  Lady  Winchilsea  are  to  be  found 
scattered  through  various  publications.  In  Steele^s  MisceU 
lany^  1714,  there  is  one  poem,  To  Mr.  Jervas,  by  the  Countess 


Ixxxviii  Introduction 


of  W ,  that   I   have  not  found  elsewhere.     Another 

unsigned  poem,  The  Sigh,  is  by  her,  and  between  these  two 
poems  are  four  unsigned  poems  that  cannot 
be  certainly  ascribed  to  Lady  Winchilsea,  but 
that  resemble  her  work  and  may  be  by  her.  Her  Lines  to 
Prior  appear  only  in  Prior's  Miscellaneous  Works,  To  Mr. 
Pope  is  found  in  the  early  collected  editions  of  his  works. 
Four  poems  are  to  be  found  only  in  Birch's  General 
Dictionary.  The  endeavor  has  been  to  make  this  edi- 
tion of  the  poems  complete,  but  there  may  be  fugitive 
poems  that  have  not  been  discovered.  There  is  a  possibility 
that  Birch  did  not  quote  all  the  new  poems  in  the  manu- 
script belonging  to  Lady  Hertford,  but  of  that  manuscript, 
if  it  is  still  in  existence,  I  can  get  no  trace.  A  more  valu- 
able possible  discovery  would  be  the  letters  of  Ardelia.  She 
was  highly  esteemed  as  a  correspondent  and  she  wrote  much 
to  various  members  of  the  Thynne  family  at  Longleat,  to 
Lady  Tufton  and  her  daughters,  to  her  cousin.  Lady  Hatton, 
to  her  sister  Dorothy,  and  to  many  others.  The  publication 
of  such  letters,  if  there  are  any  extant,  would  almost 
certainly  be  a  valuable  contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  the 
period  of  William  and  Mary  and  of  Anne. 


Ill 

LADT    WINOHILSEA'S   POEMS 

What  has  called  attention  to  Lady  Winchilsea's  work  is 
not  so  much  its  intrinsic  worth  as  its  place  in  literary 
evolution.  The  chief  attempt  of  the  following  brief  study 
will  therefore  be  to  show  the  relation  of  her  poems  to  those 
of  other  writers  both  before  and  after  her  day. 

A  minute  study  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  versification  is  not 
imperative,  but  some  points  are  of  considerable  interest  in 


Intboduotion  Ixxxix 


connection  with  the  work  of  Dryden  and  of  Pope.  When 
Pope's  Pastorals  came  out  Lady  Winchilsea  was  forty-eight 
years  old,  and  by  far  the  greater  number  of  her 
poems  had  been  written;  hence  her  heroic 
couplets  are  to  be  judged  by  the  standards  of  Dryden  rather 
than  by  the  stricter  canons  of  Pope.  Swift,  for  instance, 
boasted  that  his  ofPensive  triplet  at  the  end  of  the  City 
Shower  in  1710  had  killed  triplets  in  English  verse.  Pope 
had  likewise  expressed  his  dislike  for  this  break  in  the  regu- 
larity of  the  couplet,  and  both  Swift  and  Pope  had  made 
war  on  the  Alexandrine.  But  Dryden,  in  the  Preface  to 
his  ^neis  (1697),  had  said  of  triplets  and  Alexandrines,  ''I 
regard  them  now  as  the  Magna  Charta  of  heroic  poetry." 
Writing  under  the  segis  of  Dryden,  Lady  Winchilsea  would 
come  strongly  under  the  condemnation  of  Pope,  for  she  used 
these  two  devices  for  varying  the  couplet  so  frequently  as 
sometimes  almost  to  destroy  the  couplet  effect  for  a  page  at 
a  time.  Again,  Dryden  protests  vigorously  against  the 
"  shock  of  two  vowels  immediately  following  each  other." 
"The  army"  leaves,  he  thinks,  "a  horrid,  ill-sounding  gap 
betwixt  the  words,"  while  "  th'  army  "  is  smooth.  He  there- 
fore almost  invariably  made  use  of  "  synalcephas,"  as  he 
called  elisions.  Pope  also  disliked  the  hiatus  but  said  that 
it  was  frequently  to  be  preferred  to  elision,  as,  for  example, 
"the  old "  is  ** smoother  and  less  constrained"  than  "th' 
old."  Lady  Winchilsea  holds  by  the  canon  of  Dryden  even 
when  it  gives  rise  to  combinations  so  difficult  as  "  t'  attempt," 
"sh'  extorts,"  or  so  broken  in  appearance  as  "th'  o'r- 
shadowing,"  "t'o'r-match,"  but  she  rather  inconsistently 
admits  the  hiatus  sometimes  when  "the"  is  needed  as 
filling  for  the  verse,  as 

We  wait  on  the  event  with  ease. 
In  the  endeavor  to  hold  a  line  to  ten  syllables  she  follows 
the  fashion  of  her  day  in  preferring  elisions  to  slurring  or 


xc  Intboduotion 


the  subetitution  of  the  trisyllabic  foot.  To  modem  taste 
the  custom  of  marking  all  metrical  variations  so  that  the 
eye  as  well  as  the  ear  must  recognize  them  is  annoying. 
The  brackets  that  indicate  triplets,  and  the  apostrophes 
with  which  all  elisions  and  contractions  are  marked  seem 
to  be  especially  in  evidence  in  Ardelia^s  pages.  Not  only 
do  all  preterites  and  past  participles  where  the  ''ed"  is  not 
to  be  separately  pronounced  have  the  "e"  elided,  but  many 
trisyllables  with  an  unaccented  middle  vowel  have  this 
vowel  elided.  Most  forms  of  "to  be"  and  "to  have"  are 
contracted  with  pronominal  subjects,  contractions  so  diffi- 
cult as  "t'had,"  "t'have,"  "thou'dst,"  being  not  infrequent, 
while  colloquial  contractions,  such  as  "'tis,"  "Hwas,"  and 
"sha'nt"  are  much  used  even  in  serious  verse.  In  "could" 
and  similar  words  the  "1"  is  elided,  and  "does"  is  written 
^^do's,"  though  for  what  reason  is  not  apparent 

Pope  also  objected  to  expletives,  but  Dryden's  more 
rapid  and  freer  verse  did  not  always  disdain  "  these  fillers- 
up  of  unnecessary  syllables,"  while  Lady  Winchilsea  certainly 
carried  the  easy  device  so  far  as  distinctly  to  enfeeble  her 
verse. 

In  one  interesting  point  Lady  Winchilsea's  verse  is  at 
variance  with  both  the  theory  and  the  practice  of  Pope  and 
of  Dryden.     Dryden  says  in  the  Prefa/ce  to  his  ^neis^ 

It  is  possible,  I  confess,  though  it  rarely  happens,  that  a  verse 
of  monosyllables  may  sound  harmonious,  and  some  examples  of  it 

I  have  seen.    My  first  line  of  the  JSneis  is  not  harsh It 

seldom  happens  but  a  monosyllabic  line  turns  verse  to  prose,  and 
even  that  prose  is  rugged  and  inharmonious.  Philarchus,  I 
remember,  taxes  Balzac  for  placing  twenty  monosyllables  in  a  file 
without  one  dissyllable  betwixt  them. 

And  Pope  says  that  monosyllabic  lines  unless  "artfully 
managed"  are  "stiff,  languishing,  and  hard."  Now,  mono- 
syllabic lines  are  of  constant  occurrence  in  Lady  Winchilsea's 
verse.      In  short-line  stanzaic  forms  or  in  octosyllabics  a 


Intboduotion  xci 


line  made  up  of  monosyllables  is  not  nnnsaal  in  the  work  of 
any  poet,  but  even  in  such  cases  Lady  Winchilsea^s  use  of 
monosyllables  is  excessive.  In  the  second  stanza  of  The  Wit 
and  the  Beau  there  are  twenty-four  monosyllables  before  the 
first  dissyllable  is  reached.  There  are  frequent  octosyllabic 
couplets  with  no  dissyllables,  as, 

Love  when  next  his'^leave  he  took 
Cast  on  both  so  sweet  a  look. 

Cloath  me  O  Fate,  tho'  not  so  gay, 
Cloath  me  light  and  fresh  as  May. 

There  are  also  frequent  pentameter  couplets  with  but  a 
single  dissyllable,  and  some  without  even  the  one  dis- 
syllable, as. 

Thus  washed  in  tears,  as  fair  my  soid  does  shew 
As  the  first  fleece,  which  on  the  Lamb  does  grow. 

In  the  Poor  Maris  Lamb^  a  poem  of  fifty-seven  lines, 
from  which  this  couplet  is  taken,  there  are  eight  monosylla- 
bic lines  besides  the  couplet.  Single  pentameter  mono- 
syllabic lines  may  be  counted  by  the  hundred.  Even 
Alexandrines  are  sometimes  monosyllabic,  as, 

Urg'd  him  to  keep  his  word  and  still  he  swoie  the  same. 

Though  some  of  the  monosyllabic  lines  have  vowels  and 
consonants  so  cunningly  linked,  or  are  so  placed  in  connec- 
tion with  others  of  different  composition  that  the  ear  is  not 
conscious  of  any  break  in  the  general  harmony,  yet  often  the 
recurring  monosyllables  give  an  unpleasantly  staccato  effect, 
or  they  make  the  verse  seem  childish. 

In  a  consideration  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  rhymes  their  cor- 
rectness must,  of  course,  be  judged  by  the  pronunciations 
current  in  her  day.  Certain  variations  from  modem  pro- 
nunciation are  of  especial  interest.  She  almost  invariably,  for 
instance,  rhymes  "oi"  or  "oy  "  with  "  i."  We  find  the  follow- 
ing as  regular  rhymes :  join,  coin  +  fine ;  join'd,  coined  -f-  kind ; 


xcii  Intboduotion 


enjoy  +  lie;  joys,  noise  +  devise;  oyl,  spoil,  toil  +  smile; 
spoil'd  +  wild.  "Ea"  and  "ai"  usually  rhyme  with  "  a," 
but  with  interesting  variations.  Meat,  treat,  seat  and  other 
similar  words  rhyme  with  cate,  but  also  sometimes  with  meet; 
we  find  reveal,  conceal  +  vale,  but  also  +  feel ;  said  +  made  or 
+  wed;  sais  (for  says)  +  plays;  again  +  vain  or  +  men  (in 
which  case  it  is  usually  written  "  agen") ;  tea  and  sea  always 
rhyme  with  day;  but  seas  rhymes  with  ease,  which  in  turn 
rhymes  with  these,  but  easy  rhymes  with  lazy.  We  find  also 
pleas'd +rais'd  or  +  seiz'd;  leave  +  grave  or  +  receive  (but 
receive,  conceit,  seize,  and  similar  words  apparently  often  had 
in  her  poems  the  sound  of  "a") ;  ceased,  feast,  east,  and  beast 
rhyme  with  rest.  Divert  +  art,  reserv'd+starv'd,  wrecks- 
back,  wreck'd  +  pack'd  are  frequent  combinations.  Are  is  fre- 
quently used  with  care,  and  were  with  air;  wind  always 
rhymes  with  mind.  We  find  shew  +  foe  or  +  new,  been  + 
sin  or  +  seen,  fault  (sometimes  written  f aught)  +  taught. 
The  fact  that  all  of  these  rhymes  occur  in  Dryden  and  in 
Pope  would  indicate  that  the  pronunciation  of  the  day 
sanctioned  them. 

In  general  it  may  be  said  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  rhymed 
heroics  that,  according  to  the  standard  of  her  days  they  were 
more  than  respectably  correct,  but  that  she  never  attained  to 
a  conception  of  the  couplet  as  the  unit  of  verse.  She  has 
almost  no  enjambmentj  but  she  mars  the  couplet  efiPect,  as 
Pope  conceived  it,  by  full  stops  in  the  middle  of  a  line  or  of 
a  couplet,  by  triplets  and  by  Alexandrines,  by  the  use  of 
feminine  rhymes  and  by  combinations  of  couplets  with  stan- 
zaic  eflPects.  Nor  does  she  have,  except  faintly,  the  antithesis 
of  idea,  the  structural  balance  of  line  and  phrase,  and  the 
sharp,  closing  word  that  mark  the  couplet  in  its  highest 
development.  When  her  heroic  verse  is  good  its  excellences 
arise  from  vigor  and  ease  rather  than  from  minute  finish. 

Less  than  half  of  Lady  Winchilsea^s  non-dramatic  verse 


Intboduotion  xciii 


is  in  the  heroic  couplet.  Her  dramas  are  in  blank  verse, 
she  makes  large  nse  of  octosyllabics,  her  hymns  and  songs 
show  many  stanzaic  forms,  and  she  has  numerous  pindaric 
and  other  irregular  metrical  combinations.  In  general  the 
movement  in  all  her  lines  is  iambic,  but  An  Enquiry  after 
Peace  is  a  pretty  good  example  of  the  catalectic  trochaic 
tetrameter,  a  line  effectively  combined  with  iambic  tetrame- 
ters in  the  Petition  for  an  Absolute  Retreat  AnapsBstic 
movement  is  found  in  Le  Passion  VaincuSj  and  in  The 
Circuit  of  Apollo^  where  the  anapsBst  is  lightly  handled  for 
humorous  effects.  One  song  in  this  measure.  Let  the 
Fool  still  he  true^  only  now  and  then  catches  the  right 
anapeestic  dance,  but  the  Lines  on  a  Punch  Bowlj  a  slightly 
modified  form  of  the  same  stanza,  is  a  capital  bit  of  versi- 
fication. Most  of  the  stanzas  are  in  tetrameter  lines,  but 
with  trimeters  and  pentameters  in  frequent  combinations. 
At  least  six  stanzaic  forms  close  with  an  Alexandrine,  the 
sinuous  length  of  which  was  apparently  pleasing  to  Ardelia's 
ear.  The  stanza  of  The  Sigh  is  the  one  most  often  used,  but 
that  of  Lifers  Progress  is  more  novel  and  used  with  more 
smoothness  and  grace.  In  several  long  stanzas  there  are 
sustained  rhyme  schemes  that  show  a  good  deal  of  skill. 

Of  Lady  Winchilsea's  style  not  much  need  be  said. 
"  Poetry  requires  adornment,"  said Dryden,  "and  that  is  not 
to  be  had  from  our  old  Teuton  monosyllables, ''  and  hence 
his  avowed  attempt  to  naturalize  "elegant  words"  from 
classic  authors.  But  Lady  Winchilsea  remained  strangely 
content  with  the  Teuton  monosyllables.  Her  diction  has 
absolutely  no  pedantry.  She  errs  rather  on  the  side  of 
colloquialisms,  and  in  her  humorous  poems  she  is  not  afraid 
of  slang.  She  seems  always  to  seek  for  the  simplest,  plainest 
words  she  can  find.  Her  sentences,  too,  are  straightforward 
and  intelligible.  Not  even  her  pindarics  have  involutions 
that  really  obscure  the  sense.     She   has  no  conceits,   no 


xciv  Intboduotion 


preciosity f  almost  no  periphrases,  and  little  poetic  diction. 
She  has  snrprisingly  few  metaphors  or  similes.  There  is  no 
abundance  or  richness  of  descriptive  epithets.  It  would, 
indeed,  be  difficult  to  find  so  large  a  body  of  work  with  less 
adornment.  Frequently  this  extreme  plainness  of  style 
results  in  long  passages  that  are  dull,  commonplace,  prosaic; 
but  now  and  then,  when  Lady  Winchilsea  is  at  her  best, 
when  her  ideas  are  based  on  deep  and  rich  experience,  her 
honesty,  her  reticence,  her  inability  to  say  any  more  than 
just  what  she  sees  or  feels,  flowers  out  into  an  exact,  lovely 
simplicity  like  that  of  the  facts  she  records. 

Among  Lady  Winchilsea's  earliest  works  are  her  transla- 
tions from  the  Italian.  In  spite  of  her  association  with 
Mary  of  Modena,  she  never  gained  more  than 
a  cursory  knowledge  of  the  Italian  language, 
and  she  was  obliged  to  make  her  translations  through 
French  or  English  versions.  But  it  was,  doubtless,  while 
at  court  that  she  became  acquainted  with  Tasso's  Aminta^ 
which  so  fascinated  her  that  she  at  once  secured  a  verbal 
translation  and  proceeded  to  turn  it  into  verse.  When,  however, 
she  had  ^'finished  the  first  Act  extreamly  to  her  satisfaction,'^ 
and  was  convinced  that  the  original  "  must  be  as  soft  and  full 
of  beautys  as  ever  anything  of  that  nature  was,"  her  conscience 
asserted  itself,  pointing  out  that  there  was  nothing  of  '^  a 
serious  morality  or  usefullnesse"  in  this  soft  Italian  pastoral, 
and  remanding  her  to  the  '^more  sollid  reasonings''  of 
her  own  mind.  In  the  Preface  to  the  folio  she  austerely 
recorded  her  repentance,  and  her  determination  to  devote 
herself  to  strictly  religious  verse,  but  she  is  obliged  to  admit 
in  a  footnote  that  she  was  later  beguiled  into  "  a  scene  or 
two  more,"  and  when  she  selects  poems  for  publication  five 
"  pieces  "  out  of  the  Aminta  are  chosen.  This  translation 
and  the  tragi-comedy,  Love  and  Innocence j  seem  to  belong 
to  the  same  early  period  of  Ardelia^s  work.     They  are  both 


Intboduotion  xcv 


marked  by  a  soft,  yagne  emotionaliBm,  a  hurry  and  abund- 
ance of  detail,  a  luxuriance  of  phrase,  not  characteristic  of 
later  poems. 

Lady  Winchilsea  had  a  competent  knowledge  of  the 
French  language  and  literature,  but  none  of  her  translations 
£rom  the  French  shows  the  eager  delight  apparent  in  the 
extracts  from  Tasso.  Many  of  the  earlier  translations  from 
the  French  read  like  mere  exercises  in  versification,  yet  even 
here  her  choice  of  passages  is  rather  significant.  Mathurin 
Regnier  caught  her  attention  not  by  his  clever  social  satire,  but 
by  the  rarer,  half -pensive  moralizing  of  his  occasional  verse, 
and  she  reproduced  his  somewhat  stiffly  allegorical  Equipage. 
So,  too,  in  Montaigne  it  is  not  the  homely  common  sense, 
the  sly  wit,  the  shrewdness,  that  interest  her  as  these  quali- 
ties certainly  would  have  done  later  in  life,  but  she  chooses 
for  translation  the  fanciful  love-song  of  the  young  cannibal 
chieftain.  From  Bussy-Rabutin  she  selects  some  of  the 
rather  cynical  maxims  on  love.  Another  author  in  whom 
she  was  interested  was  Madame  Deshouli^res,  whose  Idyls, 
especially  Lea  Moutons,  had  gained  for  her  the  appellations  of 
^^  la  Calliope  Frangaisej'*'^  ^^la  dixi^me  Muse^  ShewasaPre- 
cieusej  the  leader  of  a  brilliant  salon,  and  at  the  same  time  '^  a 
faithful  wife,  tender  mother,  and  generous  friend,"  qualities  of 
a  sort  to  appeal  to  Ardelia.  Perhaps,  too,  the  cruel  frankness 
with  which  Madame  Deshouli^res  was  advised,  on  the  appear- 
ance of  her  tragedy,  to  retoumer  a  ses  moutonSj  touched  a 
sympathetic  chord.  The  most  important  of  the  translations 
from  the  French  is  the  fragment  from  Racine's  Athalie. 
When  this  play  was  first  acted  in  1691  it  was  far  from  a 
success.  In  book-form  in  the  same  year  it  likewise  met  with 
neglect  or  disapproval  Boileau  alone  among  critics  prophe- 
sied its  final  victory,  a  victory  that  did  not  come  till  1716. 
It  therefore  speaks  well  for  Lady  Winchilsea's  insight  and 
independence  that  she   should,  before  1713,  choose  it  to 


xcvi  Intboduotion 


translate.  Probably  the  whole  drama  proved  a  task  to  which 
she  was  unequal,  but  the  published  fragment  has  real  merit. 
The  heroic  couplet  necessitated  some  padding;  at  any 
rate  she  regarded  her  material  with  the  freedom  inculcated 
by  Dryden,  and  so  did  not  hesitate  to  introduce  fresh  details 
suggested  by  her  knowledge  of  the  Bible  story.  There  is 
inevitable  a  loss  of  vigor,  a  slight  blurring  of  clear-cut  out- 
lines, but  in  general  the  imperious  dignity,  the  superstitious 
terror  of  the  beautiful  and  wicked  daughter  of  the  painted 
Jezebel  is  well  maintained.  Doubtless  the  scriptural  theme 
and  the  elevated  tone  of  the  drama  made  it  especially  con- 
genial to  Lady  Winchilsea. 

"Our  most  vertuous  Orinda"  translated  plays,  hence 
Ardelia  feels  that  her  own  dramatic  attempts  cannot  be  alto- 
gether reprehensible.  Her  two  plays  can  be 
dated  with  some  exactness.  Her  account  of 
the  writing  of  Artstomenes  as  given  in  the  Preface  definitely 
puts  the  composition  of  this  play  very  soon  after  1688.  In 
the  Epilogue  she  adds  that  it  was  written  at  ''  lonely  God- 
meersham."  The  Prologue  commemorates  the  first  reading 
of  the  play  to  Lord  Winchilsea.  If  this  were  the  second 
earl,  the  tragedy  was  completed  before  September  1689,  the 
date  of  his  death.  If  the  reference  is  to  Charles,  the  young 
earl — and  it  almost  certainly  is — the  reading  of  the  com- 
pleted work  was  somewhat  later,  but  in  either  case  the  actual 
composition  belongs  in  1688-91.  Of  Love  and  Innocence 
Ardelia  says  that  it  was  written  as  an  experiment  to  see 
whether  she  could  carry  through  such  an  attempt;  hence 
this  play  probably  was  written  before  Artstomenes. 

The  fable  of  Love  and  Innocence  consists  of  a  main 
plot  and  a  sub-plot  organically  interwoven.  The  inter- 
Love  and  ®®*  ^^  suspense  is  well  mcdntained,  the  double 
Innocence  denouement  not  occuring  till  within  a  page 
or  two  of  the  end  of  the  play.     The  minor  crises  of  each 


Intboduotion  xcvii 


action  are  clearly  marked  and  they  contribute  to  bring 
about  the  catastrophe  toward  which  each  plot  seems  tend- 
ing. The  deu8  ex  machiTWL^  whereby  the  main  plot  escapes 
the  apparently  inevitable  tragic  end,  is  an  opportunely 
furious  storm  by  means  of  which  the  parted  lovers  are 
brought  together,  and  saved,  the  one  from  suicide,  the  other 
from  impending  death.  In  the  sub-plot  the  interfering 
providence  is  a  soldier  who  awakens  from  a  drunken  stupor 
at  just  the  time  and  place  to  arrest  the  villain  and  save  the 
lady.  The  villain  is  the  center  of  each  story.  His  evil 
plans,  if  successful,  would  compass  the  destruction  of  both 
pairs  of  lovers.  Most  of  the  crises  in  the  story  are  the 
forward  steps  of  his  machinations.  The  drama  observes  the 
unities  of  time  and  place.  It  is  indeed,  for  a  first  attempt, 
a  surprisingly  well-knit  piece  of  work.  Of  the  characteri- 
zation less  can  be  said.  Innocence  is  too  innocent,  virtue 
too  virtuous,  villainy  too  villainous.  There  is  no  shading. 
Everything  is  marked  off  in  black  and  white.  Ardelia's 
"factious  suttle  villain"  is  not  a  success.  He  is  sufficiently 
armed  with  evil  deeds,  but  he  fails  to  arouse  interest  There 
are  in  his  case  none  of  the  inciting,  half-excusing  causes 
apparent  in  Macbeth  or  Richard  III.,  nor  are  we  for  a 
moment  blinded  by  poetic  charm  or  over-mastering  person- 
ality. Rivalto  is  merely  a  vulgar,  bad  man  who  wishes  to  be 
revenged  on  his  prince  for  a  deserved  rebuke,  to  steal  the 
money  of  his  confederates,  and  to  kidnap  a  girl  who  detests 
him.     His  motto  is: 

To  all  my  senses  their  full  pleasure  give, 
I  care  not  how  reproached  or  scorned  I  live. 

He  has  not  even  intellectual  supremacy  in  his  low  plots. 
He  succeeds  less  through  his  own  subtlety  than  through  the 
abnormal  stupidity  or  credulity  of  his  victims.  Even  the 
greatness  of  his  contemplated  crimes  seldom  raises  him  out 
of  the  commonplace.     His  most  vigorous  speech  comes  when 


xcviii  Introduction 


he  rejoices   over   the   probable  outcome  of  his  scheme  to 
defame  the  virtnoos  Great  Master  of  Bhodes: 

Think  how  twill  feed  revenge. 
To  see  this  Saint,  this  praying  fighting  Saint, 
This  child  of  Fame,  this  cloud  of  Holy  Licence, 
Exposed  a  profligate,  and  secret  sinner. 
And  like  an  o'er  spent  taper  stink  and  vanish. 

Capriccio,  the  comic  character,  is  elephantine  in  his 
attempted  quips  and  cranka  The  comedy  scenes  are  not 
offensive  like  those  of  Venice  Preserved,  but  they  are  crude 
and  amateurish.  Cappriccio  as  a  drunkard  would  never 
deceive  the  initiated.  His  tipsy  jokes  and  thirsty  raptures, 
and  even  his  slang,  have  a  premeditated,  calculated  air. 
There  is  no  abandon.  His  best  speech  is  the  description  of 
the  bacchanalian  and  sensual  orgy  that  broke  out  in  Bhodes 
with  most  improbable  celerity  on  the  report  of  Aubusson^s 
sin:  .  * 

Tis  a  rare  world,  a  brave  world, 

A  ranting,  flantiog,  shining  world; 
***** 

Never  such  a  time  in  Rhodes,  never  such  an  example. 

Every  one  quoting  the  Great  Master, 

And  trooping  on  to  sin,  imder  his  banner. 

As  if  they  were  beating  up  volunteers  for  the  Devil. 

The  triumph  of  innocence  is  typified  by  Aubusson  the 
Great  Master  of  Bhodes.  For  a  nice  courtesy,  a  delicately 
fastidious  sense  of  honor,  he  could  set  the  pace  for  Sir 
Charles  Grandison,  and  in  absolute,  spotless,  untempted  vir- 
tue he  walks  in  the  footsteps  of  King  Arthur.  As  a  general 
he  equals  the  splendid  exploits  of  Dryden's  heroes.  As  a 
ruler  he  is  sumamed  "  The  Just"  But  before  an  accusation 
of  hypocrisy  and  secret  sin  he  has  no  force,  he  attempts  no 
dafense.  He  withdraws  like  the  traditional  deer  struck  by 
the  hunter^s  dart.  He  is  irritatingly  meek  and  inefficient 
His  plaintive,  "Tell  them  I  am  not  wicked,"  when  accused, 


Introduction  xcix 


and  his  triumphant,  *'  I  am  not  wicked/'  when  his  innocence 
has  been  attested,  are  without  dignity  or  pathos.  The  tri- 
umph of  love  is  illustrated  by  the  Queen  of  Cyprus  and  her 
lover  Lauredan.  The  women  are  more  successfully  repre- 
sented than  the  men.  There  is  the  real  play  of  contending 
emotions  in  the  portrayal  of  the  Queen.  Love,  jealousy, 
hope,  suspicion,  despair,  claim  her  in  turn,  and  one  of  the 
most  spontaneous  passages  in  the  play  is  expressive  of  her 
anger  and  grief  when  she  discovers  the  deceptions  that  have 
induced  her  to  banish  her  lover.  In  Blanfort  we  see  pictured 
one  of  the  astonishingly  rapid  emotional  developments  so 
frequent  in  contemporary  tragedy.  His  hot-headed  love  for 
the  queen  reaches  its  height,  and  declines,  and  the  old  love 
for  Marina  reasserts  itself  with  pristine  vigor,  all  within 
seven  hours.  Marina  is  the  most  interesting  personality  in 
the  play.  She  is  a  strictly  romantic  heroine.  She  would 
be  an  appropriate  Sylvia,  for  instance,  for  the  Daphne  of  the 
Aminta.  She  is  apparently  Ardelia  in  the  stage  of  expe- 
rience represented  by  the  Lines  to  Prior  and  the  translations 
from  Tasso.  The  character  of  Marina  reminds  one  of 
Wordsworth's  conjecture  that  Lady  Winchilsea  gave  up 
love-poetry  because  she  could  not  sufficiently  temper  its 
transports.  The  chief  characteristics  of  Marina's  love  are 
its  extravagance  and  self-abnegation.  Her  conception  of 
"  immortal  blisse  "  is  to  have  "her  lover  stretch  at  her  feet  for 
hours  imprinting  kisses  on  her  hand  by  thousands."  Soft, 
modest,  tender  by  nature,  poetic,  sensitive,  dreamy,  she  lives 
in  her  emotions,  but  in  endurance  of  injuries  inflicted  by  a 
false  lover  she  is  a  very  patient  Q-riselda.  With  none  of  the 
dash,  sparkle,  and  independence  of  Bosalind,  with  no  abet- 
tors like  Celia  and  the  Fool,  Marina  is  driven  by  love  to  a 
more  strenuous  enterprise  than  their  holiday  visit  to  the 
Forest  of  Arden.  Alone,  disguised  as  a  man,  she  seeks 
a  foreign  court,  consorts  with  rough  soldiers,  listens  to  the 


Introduction 


raptures  of  her  recreant  lover  for  the  Queen,  and  meanwhile 
is  defenceless  before  the  tempestuous  and  vulgar  wooing 
of  the  villain,  Kivalto.  Finally,  last  test  of  the  romantic 
heroine,  she  can  submit  to  poverty  and  shame,  can  give  her 
lover  up  to  a  rival  Fair  One  if  he  so  decrees,  and  c€m  die  with 
prayers  for  their  happiness  on  her  lips.  Most  of  the  effective 
passages  in  the  play  have  to  do  with  Marina.  Take,  for 
example,  this  description  of  the  love-nest  at  Bome  where 
Blanfort  won  her  heart: 

The  place,  oh  I  twas  most  fit  for  the  occasion. 
Secret  and  blooming  with  the  verdant  spring ; 
A  Grove  of  mirtles,  compassed  itt  about. 
Which  gave  no  more  admittance  to  the  Sun 
Then  served  to  chear  the  new  appearing  flowers, 
And  tell  the  birds  itt  was  their  time  to  sing. 
A  crystal  spring,  stole  through  the  tufted  grasse, 
Hasting  to  reach  a  f oimtain  which  itt  fed. 
But  murmur'd  still,  when  'ere  it  found  a  stop. 

The  description  of  Marina  herself  is  almost  as  charming 
as  Marveirs  lines  on  Maria  and  not  unlike  them: 

'Twas  here,  my  lord,  neer  to  this  fountain's  side, 

I  saw  the  Maid,  the  soft,  the  charming  maid. 

That  seemed  to  give  the  sweetness  to  the  place. 

And  in  herself  possesst  all  I've  described. 

The  season's  youth,  and  freshnesse  of  the  flowers, 

The  harmony  of  all  the  timefull  birds, 

And  clearness  of  the  Spring  on  which  she  ga^'d. 

Marina  is,  in  truth,  a  winning  and  pathetic  character,  and 
it  is  a  pity  that  her  fidelity  could  not  have  a  better  reward 
than  the  regained  love  of  the  handsome,  inconstant,  selfish 
Blanfort. 

The  play  closes  with  a  proper  distribution  of  rewarda 
Punishments  are  not,  however,  so  meted  out.  The  villain, 
Eivalto,  is  romantically,  and  in  the  grand  style,  forgiven,  and 
even  furnished  with  funds.     But  he  takes  himself  off  with 


Introduction  ci 


a  not  altogether  unintelligible  distate  for  the  abundant,  self- 
conscious,  successful  virtue  blooming  about  him. 

Aristomenea  follows  the  fashion  set  by  Dryden,  Lee,  and 
Otway,  in  presenting  as  its  hero  a  noted  historical  character. 
Most  of  the  events  and  most  of  the  personages 
come  with  little  change  from  the  narrative  of 
Pausanias,  but  Ardelia  successfully  manipulates  dates  and 
places  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  the  more  picturesque  por- 
tions of  the  life  of  Aristomenes  very  nearly  within  the  compass 
prescribed  by  the  unities,  and  that  without  too  great  sacrifice 
of  probability  or  ordered  sequence.  The  escape  of  Aristo- 
menes from  the  cave  by  means  of  the  fox,  and  his  rescue 
through  the  assistance  of  Amalintha,  the  daughter  of  his 
enemy,  are  cleverly  made  parts  of  a  single  incident,  and 
Amalintha's  act  is  motived  by  the  love  she  bears  Aristor, 
the  son  of  Aristomenes.  This  love  is  also  elaborated  into 
one  of  the  sub-intrigues,  another  being  the  love  between 
Demagetus,  son  to  the  Prince  of  Rhodes,  and  Herminia, 
daughter  to  Aristomenes.  The  play  is  curiously  constructed, 
all  the  complications  of  the  two  subordinate  love-stories  hav- 
ing reached  an  apparently  happy  termination  before  the 
fifth  act,  and  the  hero,  likewise,  having  succeeded  in 
his  contest  with  Sparta.  But  then  a  new  set  of  cir- 
cumstances brings  about  a  tragic  end.  Ardelia  calls  this 
play  "wholly  tragical,"  but  till  near  the  end  it  certainly 
moves  likes  a  tragi-comedy.  The  real  purpose  of  the  play 
is  to  present  the  character  rather  than  the  fortunes  of  Aris- 
tomenes. He  is  shown  in  success  and  in  failure,  in  joy 
and  in  sorrow,  always  with  the  intent  that  he  may  prove 
himself  the  best  of  men  and  serve  as  an  incitement  to  virtue 
and  to  wisdom.  He  is  the  Aubusson  of  Love  and  Innocence. 
We  see  him  idolized  by  the  soldiers,  loved  and  reverenced 
by  his  children,  adored  by  the  people.  In  war  he  is  a  lion. 
In  captivity  he  speaks  out  brave  words  of  defiance.     His 


cii  Introduction 


wits  are  keen,  his  nerves  steady,  his  personal  resource 
unfailing.  Just,  generous,  forgiving,  with  high  spirit  and 
passionate  emotions,  he  yet  is  but  an  aggregation  of  virtues, 
not  a  man. 

There  are  more  reminisences  of  the  heroic  tragedy  in  this 
play  than  in  Love  and  Innocence.  The  prison-scene  between 
Aristor  and  Amalintha  is  not  without  some  likeness  to  the 
wit-combats  popular  in  Dryden's  day.  The  long  death-scene 
when  Aristor,  mortally  wounded  in  the  battle,  conceals  his 
wound  from  Amalintha,  and  Amalintha,  likewise  mortally 
wounded,  conceals  her  wound  from  Aristor,  until  they  die 
almost  simultaneously,  the  promptness  with  which  the  nurse 
expires  on  seeing  their  dead  bodies,  the  unanimity  with 
which  the  others  prepare  to  fall  on  their  swords,  ccury  us 
into  just  the  air  of  extravagant  unreality  found  in  many 
of  the  tragic  closing  scenes  of  the  heroic  drama.  On  the 
stage  Aristomenes  would  offer  bustle  and  variety,  with  its 
clamor  and  hurry  of  war,  its  pastoral  love-making,  its  assem- 
blies of  state,  its  prison-scenes,  and  its  underground  caves 
with  spectral  musicians;  but  it  would  hardly  hold  interest 
either  by  the  plot  or  the  characters. 

Wordsworth  commented  on  the  lines: 

Love's  soft  bands. 
His  gentle  cords  of  Hyacinths  and  Hoses, 
Wove  in  the  dewy  spring  whem  storms  are  silent, 

as  a  characteristic  passage,  but  more  characteristic  and  quite 
as  charming  are  the  pathetic  words  of  Amalintha: 

But  are  there  none,  none  that  do  Live  and  Love. 
That  early  meet,  and  in  the  Spring  of  Youth, 
Uncrossed,  nor  troubled  in  the  soft  design. 
Set  sweetly  out,  and  travel  on  to  age. 
In  mutual  joys,  that  with  themselves  expira 

Of  great  beauty  is  the  lament  of  Aristomenes  for  his  son 
Aristor: 


Introduction  ciii 


The  Sun  will  Keep  his  pace,  and  Time  revolve, 
Bough  Winters  pass,  and  Springs  come  smiling  on ; 
But  thou  dost  talk  of  Never,  Demagetus: 
Tet  ere  Despair  prevails,  retract  that  word. 
Whose  cloudy  distance  bars  the  reach  of  thought. 
Aristor  rather  subtly  analyzes  the  process  of  falling  in 
love.     He  says  to  Amalintha: 

I  saw  you  Fair,  beyond  the  Fame  of  Helen  ; 

But  Beauty's  vain,  and  fond  of  new  applause. 

Leaving  the  last  Adoarer  in  despair 

At  his  approach,  who  can  but  praise  it  better: 

Whilst  Love,  Narciasua-likej  courts  his  reflection, 

And  seeks  itself  gazing  oU  Mhers  eyes. 

When  this  I  f oimd  in  yomrs,  it  bred  that  passion, 

Which  Time,  nor  Age,  nor  Death,  shaU  ere  diminish. 

Almeria  in  Ardelia  to  Ephelia  says  that  Ardelia 
Speaks  of  Otaway  with  such  delight 
As  if  no  other  pen  could  move  or  write. 

and  various  passages  emphasize  her  partiality  for  The  Orphan 
and  Venice  Preserved,  which  came  out  when  she  was  nine- 
teen and  twenty-one  years  of  age,  at  just  the  right  time  to 
affect  her  taste  and  guide  her  efforts.  Otway's  tragic 
death  occurred  while  she  was  still  in  London,  three  or  four 
years  before  the  composition  of  her  plays.  Her  attention 
was  thus  strongly  directed  to  him,  and  it  is  not  strange  that 
her  work  should  betray  his  influence.  She  read  Lee  vrith 
admiration,  but  she  could  not  have  imitated  the  Rival  Queens. 
Lee  at  his  best  and  at  his  worst  was  out  of  her  range.  But 
the  tenderness  and  delicacy  of  Otway,  the  pathetic  sweetness 
of  his  verse,  and  his  love  of  external  nature,  would  all  strike 
a  responsive  chord  in  her  mind  and  heart. 

Of  the  songs,  eighteen  appear  in  the  first  manuscript 

These  are  copied  into  the  folio  vrith  seven  or  eight  additions, 

but  the  impulse  to  song- writing  died  early,  nor 

did  Lady  Winchilsea  later  set  much  value  on 

this  portion  of  her  worL     Her  acknowledgement  of  indebt- 


civ  Introduction 


edness  to  Prior  must  refer  to  her  conventional  love-lyrics  and 
her  few  convivial  songs;  and  so  far  as  dates  go  it  is  not 
impossible  that  Prior  should  have  been  influential  in  turning 
her  attention  to  this  sort  of  writing,  for  though  his  songs 
were  not  published  till  1709,  many  of  them  were  written  as 
early  as  1692,  and  they  were  well-known  in  manuscript. 
Doubtless  these  songs  would  find  their  way  to  Eastwell  and 
they  might  so  have  caught  Ardelia's  ear  and  attuned  it  to 
novel  melodies.  The  impulse  must,  however,  have  been  one 
quickly  acted  on,  for  Ardelia's  songs  are  very  nearly  con- 
temporary with  Prior's.  Beyond  this  suggestion  or  impulse, 
Prior's  influence  on  Lady  Winchilsea  is  not  apparent  She 
calls  him  the  master-singer,  while  she  is  but  the  bird  crudely 
striving  to  imitate  his  ravishing  notes ;  but  this  is  an  overstate- 
ment. Certainly  where  Prior  is  most  characteristic  it  is 
impossible  that  she  should  imitate  him.  She  was  too  inflexi- 
ble, too  serious,  too  deeply  conscious  of  realities,  to  reproduce 
the  abandon,  the  gayety,  the  dash,  the  moral  indifference,  of 
Prior's  captivating  appeals  to  Chloe.  Let  the  Fool  Still  Be 
True  and  If  for  a  Woman  I  Would  Die  have  something  of 
Prior's  spirit.  But  though  Ardelia  touches  with  some  deft- 
ness the  philosophy  of  the  butterfly  lover  who,  inconstant 

to  one. 

Can  each  Beauty  adore, 
And  love  all,  and  love  aU,  and  love  all,  and  forever, 

she  much  more  effectively  represents  the  dark  obverse, 

Who  make  the  hearts  of  men  their  care 
Will  have  their  own  betrayed. 

Ardelia's  delicately  imaginative  appreciation  of  the  Punch 
Bowl  in  the  lines  to  Leslie  Finch  must  free  her  from  any 
suspicion  of  a  puritanic  rigor  hardly  known  in  her  day,  but 
her  other  poems  on  wine  were  never  inspired  by  the  god  of 
mirth.     The  riotous  glee  of  Prior's 

Tis  the  mistress,  the  friend,  and  the  bottle,  old  boy! 


Introduction  cv 


was  not  only  outside  the  compass  of  her  lyre,  but  typified 
a  bacchanalian  excess  that  aroused  her  strongest  disapprovaL 
According  to  her  theory,  which  is  not  without  a  certain  novel 
pungency,  wine  makes  of  the  heart  ''an  inaccessible  island" 
to  which  no  nymph  need  try  to  win  her  way. 

Ardelia's  best  songs  are  not  in  Prior's  vein  at  alL  The 
Losse^  A  Sigh^  The  Progress  of  Life^  are  marked  by  a 
strain  of  tender,  subdued  melancholy  as  natural  to  Ardelia 
as  the  flippant  gayety  of  the  conventional  love-song  was  alien 
to  her.  To  Chriefy  a  little  poem  inspired  by  the  troubles  of 
1688,  has  dignity,  reserve,  and  genuine  pathos.  It  is  in  sad 
little  poems,  the  direct  and  simple  outcome  of  her  own  expe- 
rience, that  her  lyric  impulse  finds  most  nearly  adequate 
expression. 

Lady  Winchilsea's  religious  poems  are  nearly  all  direct 
paraphrases  from  Scripture  passages,  or  they  are  so  saturated 
Seli^oui  ^^^  biblical  phraseology  as  to  read  like  para- 

Poami  phrasea     In  such  poems  the   simplicity   and 

literary  distinction  of  the  original  must  always  make  the 
smoothest  pindaric,  or  stanzaic,  or  heroic  reproductions  seem, 
to  say  the  least,  superfluous.  But  aside  from  this  objection, 
Ardelia's  religious  poetry  is  of  especial  interest.  The 
delight  with  which  she  wrote  it  resulted  in  an  unusual  vigor 
and  variety  of  versification.  And  in  mood  and  theme  these 
poems  contribute  much  to  a  statement  of  her  philosophy  of 
life.  The  bitter  and  almost  contemptuous  r6sum^  of  human 
ambitions  and  attainments  that  characterizes  the  early  work 
of  both  Mary  of  Modena's  rhyming  maids  of  honor  seems 
to  have  been  a  genuine  expression  of  opinion.  The  lament 
of  the  preacher  was  a  view  of  life  quite  natural  to  detached 
and  sober-minded  observers  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  But 
philosophic  pessimism  was  not  to  be  Ardelia's  permanent 
mental  attitude.  Definite  trials  soon  brought  her  face  to 
face  with  spiritual  experiences  of  a   more   personal   sort 


cvi  Introduction 


Even  in  her  gayest  days  she  was  incapable  temperamentally 
of  drowning  grief  by  an  acceptance  of  the  epicurean  philoso- 
phy. Her  summary  of  this  doctrine  in  The  Wisdom  of 
Solomon  is  probably  her  best  heroic  verse,  but  the  doctrine 
itself  is  vigorously  remanded  to  "th'  industrious  DeviL" 
It  was  impossible  that  carpe  diem  should  be  her  motto.  It 
was  her  tendency  to  look  before  and  after,  and  her  tempta- 
tion when  trials  came  was  to  fall  into  a  state  of  distrust  and 
despair.  The  shortness  of  life,  the  failure  of  the  highest 
hopes,  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  the  affliction  of  the 
righteous,  were  facts  that  stirred  her  to  doubts  and  ques- 
tionings, and  the  supreme  religious  experience  commemorated 
in  her  poems  is  her  struggle  to  interpret  and  accept  sorrow 
according  to  the  Christian  ideal  She  persistently  describes 
grief  as  the  line  by  which  every  saint  is  measured,  as  the 
furnace  fire  that  tries  the  gold  of  true  piety,  as  the  only 
"  certain  purifying  roade  "  that  leads  to  the  Heavenly  City. 
For  the  earthly  life  Ardelia's  ideal  is  the  via  media.  Accord- 
ing to  her  philosophy  *'  all  extreams  to  their  own  Buine 
haste."  To  walk  quietly  and  steadily,  to  hold  oneself  in 
hand,  to  realize  that 

No  Joy  a  Rapture  must  create. 
No  Grief  beget  Despair, 

in  a  word,  to  have  the  sources  of  life  independent  of 
externals,  is  her  creed.  But  in  her  pictures  of  the  final 
happiness  of  victorious  saints,  her  eagerness  and  longing 
find  expression  in  phrases  more  nearly  akin  to  the  '^  enthu- 
siasm" of  Watts  and  the  Wesleys  than  to  the  formal 
morality  of  her  own  day. 

In  an  Ode  to  Cowley  Bishop  Sprat  said, 

yj^^  <  Pindar  has  left  his  barbarous  Greece,  and  thinks  it  just 

Pindaric  To  be  led  by  thee  to  the  English  shore ; 

Odes  An  honour  to  him. 

Pindar  was,  in  fact,  known  to  the  seventeenth  century  only 


Introduction  cvii 


throngh  Cowley  and  his  imitators.  But  Congreve  said  in 
his  Discourse  {circa  1706)  that  Cowley  not  only  had  not 
brought  Pindar  to  England,  but  had,  through  his  "irregular 
Odes,"  been  the  principal,  though  innocent,  cause  of  the 
great  crowd  of  deformed  poems  supposedly  formed  on 
Pindar.  From  this  time  on  there  was  a  reaction  against  the 
more  extreme  licenses  of  the  pindaric  form.  But  the  school 
of  Cowley  held  that  the  true  pindaric  marks  were  exalted 
themes,  striking  and  unusual  figures,  abrupt  transitions, 
impetuosity  and  excitement  of  mood,  with  an  extreme  com- 
plexity and  irregularity  of  stanzaic  structure  and  rhyme 
scheme.  Lady  Winchilsea's  three  Odes  come  between  1694 
and  1703,  hence  they  belong  to  the  last  period  of  Cowley's 
influence  and  just  before  the  reactionary  period  set  in.  She 
called  Cowley  master,  and  theoretically  she  accepted  his 
pindaric  conventions;  but  her  Odes,  while  irregular,  are  not 
markedly  so,  nor  have  they  any  of  the  "flights"  of  Cowley's 
Odes,  nor  any  of  the  conceits.  Lady  Winchilsea  had  an 
inherent  respect  for  order  and  coherence,  and  she  could 
never  quite  trust  herself  to  the  stiff  gale  on  which  the 
Theban  swan  was  supposed  to  stretch  his  wings.  Hence 
her  pindarics  seldom  "  toil  too  much  the  reader's  ear."  The 
themes,  moreover,  are  interesting.  All  is  Vanity  is,  to  be 
sure,  timid,  and  too  much  a  versified  r6sum£  of  her  reading, 
but  it  is  well-knit,  and  its  fearless  outlook,  its  dignity  and 
controlled  pathos,  make  it  a  promising  early  poem.  The 
Spleen  has  none  of  the  softness  and  grace  of  All  is  Vanity. 
It  reads  like  more  mature  worL  It  is  more  keenly  analytic, 
the  outlines  are  sharper,  and  the  material  is  more  frankly 
based  on  observation  and  experience.  The  third  ode.  On  the 
Hurricane^  written  in  1703,  immediately  after  the  disas- 
trous storm  of  November  27,  1703,  is  longer  and  much 
looser  in  structure  than  the  other  odes.  It  was  evidently 
written  in  great  haste  and  while  the  events  of  the  storm 


cviii  Introduction 


were  still  fresh  in  memory.     Its  chief  value  is  in  descriptive 

passages  which  will  be  spoken  of  later. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  was  a 

new  and- wide  spread  interest  in  fables.     English  prose  ver- 

_         .  sions  of  ^sop  had  held  their  place  in  popular 

Her  Fablei  r  r   sr 

favor  from  the  days  of  Caxton  down,  and  the 
Latin  ^sop  was  in  use  in  the  schools,  but  it  is  to  La  Fon- 
taine that  this  striking  revival  of  interest  is  chiefly  due.  The 
first  six  books  of  his  Fables  were  published  in  France  in 
1668,  other  parts  appearing  in  1671,  1678,  1679,  and  the 
twelve  books  in  1694.  Their  popularity  in  England  is 
shown  by  a  remark  of  Addison,  who,  writing  in  1711  in 
praise  of  fables,  says  that  La  Fontaine  "  by  this  way  of  writ- 
ing is  come  into  vogue  more  than  any  other  Author  of  our 
times."  In  1692  appeared  the  first  edition  of  Sir  Roger 
L'Estrange's  collection,  in  which  he  added  to  the  fables  of 
^sop  most  of  the  new  sets  of  fables  that  had  been  published 
abroad.  In  spite  of  the  size  of  this  extensive  compilation  it 
quickly  passed  through  seven  editions.  L'Estrange's  idio- 
matic and  telling  prose  versions  of  the  old  tales  were 
weighted  down  by  "morals"  and  "reflexions,"  written 
purely  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  Tory  statesman.  In  1722 
the  ever-useful  -^sop  was  used  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Croxall 
to  establish  Whig  doctrines.  These  versions  served  to  make 
the  fables  widely  known,  but  it  was  not  till  the  appearance 
of  Gay's  Fables  in  1728  that  there  was  any  notable  attempt 
to  follow  in  English  the  versified  fable  of  La  Fontaine,  and 
Gay  has  always  been  counted  the  progenitor  of  the  race  of 
verse  fable-writers  in  England.  It  seems  rather  surprising 
that  the  first  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century  should  not 
have  been  a  fable-writing  as  well  as  a  fable-reading  age. 
One  is  led  to  join  in  Shenstone's  regret  that  Addison  did 
not  write  fables,  his  purity  of  style,  his  dry  humor,  his  easy 
manner,  being  qualities  likely  to  insure  succesa    Swift,  too, 


Introduction  cix 


would  seem  to  have  had  some  natural  affinities  for  the  fable 
form,  but  though  he  said  there  was  no  kind  of  writing  he 
esteemed  more,  he  was  forced  to  acknowledge  that  he  had 
"frequently  endeavoured  at  it  in  vain."  Gay  agrees  in 
counting  the  fable  a  most  difficult  kind  of  writing,  saying 
that  when  he  had  completed  one  he  was  always  in  despair  of 
ever  being  able  to  find  another.  It  is,  perhaps,  this  real 
difficulty  under  the  apparent  ease  and  naturalness  that 
warned  oflF  many  writers  to  whom  the  opportunity  for  effect- 
ive moralizing  would  have  made  the  fable  a  seductive  form. 
At  any  rate  the  fact  stands  that  before  Gay,  Lady  Winchilsea 
holds  a  solitary  pre-eminence  as  an  English  fable-writer  in 
the  manner  of  La  Fontaine.  But  two  of  her  fables  appear 
in  the  folio  and  none  in  the  earlier  manuscript  They  were 
probably  all  written  between  1700  and  1713.  She  formed 
herself  almost  entirely  on  La  Fontaine,  who  had  broken  dis- 
tinctly with  the  literary  tradition  of  his  predecessors.  It 
had  been  said  that  the  ornament  of  the  fable  was  no  orna- 
ment, that  brevity  and  conciseness  were  essential,  that  morals 
must  be  explicitly  stated.  But  La  Fontaine  deliberately 
challenged  this  conception.  He  set  himself  to  ^^egayer^^  the 
tales,  to  add  to  them  something  of  novelty  and  adornment, 
to  show  that  the  fables  would  not  resent  lea  graces  Iac6d6^ 
moniennes.  It  was  to  this  fable  convention  that  Lady 
Winchilsea  gave  allegiance.  She  does  not  attempt,  as  did 
Gay,  originality  of  invention,  but  relies  as  frankly  on  La 
Fontaine  and  L'Estrange  as  they  had  relied  on  their  prede- 
cessors, and  she  follows  her  models  with  as  widely  varying 
degrees  of  fidelity  as  did  they.  Sometimes  her  fable  is  a 
mere  translation  of  La  Fontaine,  holding  as  close  to  the 
original  as  verse  translation  would  allow  ;  but  in  general 
the  material  is  treated  with  great  freedom.  Two  lines  are 
expanded  into  as  many  pages;  there  are  large  omissions  and 
frequent  condensations ;  details  are  replaced  by  others  giv- 


ex  Introduction 


ing  English  local  color;  fables  are  broken  in  two;  morals 
are  added  or  altered;  titles  are  changed.  But,  though  influ- 
enced now  and  again  by  L'Estrange's  racy  idiom,  "the  easy 
words,"  "the  plain  honest  English"  on  which  he  prided 
himself,  she  holds  throughout  to  La  Fontaine^s  ideal  of 
smooth,  graceful,  amplified  narration. 

Lady  Winchilsea's  most  famous  fable  is  The  Atheist  and 
the  Acorn,  This  poem  is  a  brief  and  picturesque  version  of 
La  Fontaine's  La  gland  et  la  citrouille.  It  is  not  an 
^sopic  fable  but  was  based  on  a  tale  found  in  various  forms 
in  several  sources  open  to  La  Fontaine.  It  excited  much 
attention  when  it  first  appeared  in  French  in  1671.  Lady 
Winchilsea's  change  of  the  naive  countryman  into  the 
sophisticated  atheist  involves  much  loss  in  the  way  of  humor- 
ous contrast  But  the  French  Garo  and  the  English 
Atheist  alike  speak  with  scorn  of  the  providential  ordering 
that  could  assign  acorns  to  lordly  oaks  and  pumpkins  to 
slender  vines.  And  each,  reclining  under  the  tree  in  fatu- 
ous self-complacency,  on  being  hit  in  the  eye  by  an  acorn, 
is  led  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  man  by  the  reflection 
that  had  the  acorn  been  a  pumpkin,  not  his  eye  only,  but  his 
precious  brain  itself  would  have  suffered  damage.  Neither 
La  Fontaine  nor  Lady  Winchilsea  nor  any  of  their  readers 
seemed  to  feel  what  Voltaire  pitilessly  pointed  out,  the 
"^grolsme  cowigwe"  of  this  argumentum  ad  hominem.  On 
the  contrary,  Garo  and  the  Atheist  held  their  own  for  a  cen- 
tury as  apt  illustrations  of  the  creed  formulated  by  Pope, 
"Whatever  is,  is  best." 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  fables  constitute  one-third  of 
her  published  work.  Lady  Winchilsea  speaks  lightly  of  them 
in  general,  calling  them  "childish  Tales"  by  which  "lazy 
Triflers"  seek  to  purchase  fame.  And  Wordsworth  regretted 
that  she  should  have  spent  so  much  time  on  an  inferior 
species  of  poetry.     Yet  in  a  general  survey  of  her  work  the 


Introduction  cxi 


fables  are  of  importance  for  various  reasons.  They  show 
her  first  in  the  field  with  a  poetic  form  destined  to  great 
popularity  in  succeeding  years;  they  reveal  her  opinions; 
they  are  vignettes  of  social  satire ;  and  they  are  interesting 
examples  of  versification. 

One  line  of  reading  in  which  Lady  Winchilsea  was  much 
interested  was  the  critical  literature  of  her  own  day. 
y,,^  Boileau's  VArt  Po4iique  (1673)   had  stimu- 

Ciitkiim  lated  verse  criticism  in  England  as  well  as  in 

France.  The  Earl  of  Mulgrave's  Essay  on  Satire  (1679), 
his  Essay  on  Poetry  (1682),  Boscommon's  Essay  on  Trans- 
IcUed  Verse  (1681),  his  translation  of  Horace's  Ars  Poetica 
(1680),  Sir  William  Soame's  paraphrase  and  adaptation  of 
Boileau's  UArt  Po6tique  (1683),  were  verse  renderings  of 
the  critical  dicta  counted  most  authoritative  by  the  late 
seventeenth  century  writers.  All  of  these,  with  the  addition 
of  Bapin  and  Madame  Dacier,  Lady  Winchilsea  knew  welL 
Horace  and  the  Stagirite  are  the  critical  law-givers,  but 
Mulgrave  is  their  prophet,  and  she  finds  his  Essay  on 
Poe/rj^  as  *' delightsome''  as  it  is  instructive.  But  it  is 
Dryden,  she  thinks,  who  has  laid  open  the  very  mysteries  of 
poetry  and  made  the  whole  art  so  clear  that  even  females 
should  be  held  accountable  if  they  transgress  the  rules. 

Of  critical  work  on  her  own  account  Lady  Winchilsea 
gives  us  little,  but  that  little  is  not  without  interest.  Poets 
should  "  teach  while  they  divert"  is  her  creed.  Poetry  may 
be  allowed  to  "stir  up  soft  thoughts,"  but  this  must  be 
delicately  and  modestly  done  so  as  to  cause  no  blushes,  and 
poetry  most  successfully  responds  to  its  divine  origin  when 
it  leads  men  "back  to  the  Blissful  Seats  Above."  Yet  she 
seems  to  refer  with  some  regret  to  the  days  of  Charles  II,  when 

Witty  beggars  were  in  fashion, 
And  learning  had  o're-run  the  Nation. 

The  Merry  Monarch,  "so  nice  himself,"  and  the  "  refin'der 


cxii  Introduction 


sort"  knew  a  good  play  when  they  heard  it,  but  the  literary 
standards  of  her  own  day  are,  she  thinks,  much  coarser  and 
less  critical.  The  Miser  and  the  Poet  is  a  humorons 
arraignment  of  the  age  for  its  failure  to  give  poets  due 
recognition,  a  subject  cleverly  worked  up  in  Ardelta's 
Return  Home.  In  the  Critic  and  the  Writer  of  Fables  she 
gives  delightful  little  burlesques  of  the  popular  literary 
forms,  the  pastoral,  the  heroic  poem,  and  the  fable.  In 
the  closing  lines  of  this  poem,  operas  and  panegyrics  are 
coupled  as  the  two  forms  of  literature  most  certain  of  pleas- 
ing. This  fling  at  the  Italian  opera  is  but  an  early  expres- 
sion of  the  critical  attitude  that  found  full  statement  in  the 
Dunciad,  and  that  contributed  to  the  gusto  with  which  TTie 
Beggar's  Opera  was  received.  Panegyric,  though  that  was 
her  own  fertile  vein,  always  awakened  Ardelia's  laughter. 
When  she  went  to  Apollo  once  for  aid,  his  excuse  for  not 
loaning  Pegasus  was  that  this  weary  steed  had  been  of  late 
so  spurred  through  thick  and  thin  in  panegyric,  that  he 
could  no  longer  endure  the  bit — a  sarcastic  reference, 
doubtless,  since  the  poem  was  written  in  1689,  to  the  poeti- 
cal tributes  incident  to  the  revolution.  In  comedy  Lady 
Winchilsea  preferred  Etheredge  and  Wycherley  because 
they  had  more  ''sense  and  nature''  than  their  successors — a 
literary  judgment  enunciated,  however,  before  Congreve  had 
begun  to  write.  In  tragedy  Dryden,  Lee,  and  Otway, 
especially  Otway,  are  her  masters.  It  is  a  pity  that  Lady 
Winchilsea's  critical  remarks  are  so  few,  for  they  show  con- 
siderable acumen  and  an  unexpected  cleverness  in  playfully 
sarcastic  analysis. 

Dr.  Johnson  calls  The  Splendid  Shilling  of  Philips  "  a 
mode  of  writing  new  and  unexpected,"  and  it  is  probable 
Fansoomb  ^^^^  Philips's  poem,  which  came   out  in  1701, 

^^^  gave  Lady  Winchilsea  the  hint  for  her  Fans- 

comb  Bam,  which,  since  this  poem  does  not  appear  in  either 


Intboduotion  cxiii 


the  octavo  or  the  folio  manuscript,  was  probably  written  after 
1701.  The  novelty  of  Philips's  poetical  experiment  in 
applying  the  splendid  diction  and  elaborate  sentence  struc- 
ture of  Milton  to  the  description  of  the  trivial  or  vulgar 
events  of  ordinary  life  caught  Lady  Winchilsea's  fancy,  and 
she  made  use  of  the  Miltonic  blank  verse  to  portray  the 
tramps  that  congregated  in  Fanscomb  Bam.  Her  poem  is 
almost  as  successful  a  parody  of  Milton's  style  as  is  The 
Splendid  Shilling^  and  the  amusing  contrast  between  the  style 
and  the  subject-matter  is  as  well  sustained.  But  the  chief 
importance  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  poem  is  in  the  subject- 
matter  itself.  Stropeledon  and  Bugeta  with  their  "hoof- 
beating"  compeers  of  the  beggars'  fraternity  would  find 
no  worthy  comrades  till  they  could  visit  the  ale-house  of 
Bamsay's  Maggie  Johnstone,  and  they  would  not  feel  quite 
at  home  till  they  could  consort  with  their  kith  and  kin,  the 
jolly  beggars  of  Bums.  Lady  Winchilsea  is  as  free  as 
Bamsay  or  Bums  from  any  display  of  moral  censorship 
toward  her  tramps.  They  lie  and  steal  and  drink  and  brag 
with  a  self-complacency  equal  to  that  of  the  highwaymen 
and  trulls  of  Gay's  Beggar's  Opera.  Stropeledon  counts 
mendicancy  a  profession  with  inevitable  privations  and  hard- 
ships, but  with  well-earned  hours  of  luxurious  repose. 
He  and  his  Bugeta  grow  confidential  and  boozy  over  their 
cups,  recount  their  lawless  deeds,  and  finally  fall  down  in  a 
drunken  stupor,  without  a  word  of  condemnation  from  their 
lady  chronicler.  A  subsidiary  little  picture  of  the  children 
drinking  sugared  water  at  Pickersdane  Well  is  also  sympa- 
thetically drawn,  and  approaches  in  eflfectiveness  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  children  at  their  sports  by  Shenstone  in  The 
SchooUMistress.  We  can  hardly  say  with  Dr.  Harris,  pre- 
bendary of  Bochester  and  rector  of  Winchilsea,  that  both 
Pickersdane  Well  and  Fanscomb  Bam  have  been  "dignified" 
by  the  pen  of  a  "notable  Kentish  Poetess;"  but  we  can  say 


cxiv  Introduction 


what  is  far  more  significant,  and  that  is  that  the  notable 
poetess  wrote  the  first  of  modem  tramp-poems  and  gave  the 
earliest  effective  modem  picture  of  English  peasant  school- 
children, and  that  she  was  one  of  the  first  to  write  in  blank 
verse  of  the  Miltonic  pattern. 

During  Lady  Winchilsea's  early  maid  of  honor  days  the 
chief  literary  sensation  in  the  court  circle  was  Dryden's 
satires  and  the  ensuing  host  of  lampoons  and 
libels.  No  personal  portraits  so  masterly  and 
so  malicious  as  those  by  Dryden  had  before  appeared  in 
English  literature.  Nor  during  Lady  Winchilsea's  period 
of  poetical  production  did  any  other  portraits  so  masterly 
appear,  but  the  malice  remained  as  the  possession  of  all  the 
Grub-street  race.  There  were  no  more  great  satiric  poems  till 
Pope,  but  there  was,  in  the  meantime,  plenty  of  snarling  and 
snapping.  The  detracting,  censorious  spirit  was  pervasive. 
Against  this  Ardelia  uttered  her  protest.  Indeed,  she 
rather  plumed  herself  on  the  fact  that  her  own  resentments 
had  never  but  once  lured  her  into  personal  satiric  verse. 
And  this,  too,  in  spite  of  the  tempting  inner  consciousness 
that  she  could  tag  rhymes  in  abuse  of  her  neighbors  as  well 
as  another  if  she  would  but  set  her  hand  to  such  business. 
Yet  Lady  Winchilsea  was  much  more  of  a  satirist  than  she 
was  willing  to  admit,  for  besides  the  one  satiric  poem  to 
which  she  confesses,  there  is  a  vein  of  satiric  comment 
giving  tang  and  pungency  to  many  poems. 

The  more  we  study  Lady  Winchilsea's  work,  the  more 
certain  it  becomes  that,  in  her  youth  at  least,  the  phrase 
"the  gentle  Ardelia,"  could  never  have  been  rightly  applied 
to  her.  Life  at  Eastwell  brought  serenity,  but  her  young 
womanhood  seems  to  have  been  one  of  smothered  revolt. 
Bred  at  court,  she  was  yet  mentally  at  war  with  contempo- 
rary social,  religious,  and  literary  ideals,  and,  on  a  surprising 
number  of  topics,  she  expresses  herself  with  caustic  severity. 


Intboduotion  cxv 


The  Fair  Sex,  and  especially  the  dominant  ideal  concern- 
ing woman's  work  and  woman's  education,  was  the  theme 
most  certain  to  touch  her  pen  with  bitterness.  In  her 
famous  Prefa/oe  of  1703,  Mary  Astell  says: 

In  the  first  place,  Boys  have  much  Time  and  Pains,  Care  and 
Cost  bestowed  on  then:  education,  Girls  have  Uttle  or  none.  The 
former  are  early  initiated  in  the  Sciences,  are  made  acquainted  with 
Antient  and  Modem  Discoveries,  they  Study  Books  and  Men,  have 
all  imaginable  encouragement;  not  only  Fame,  a  dry  reward  now- 
a-days,  but  also  Title,  Authority,  Power,  and  Riches  themselves 
whidi  purchase  all  things,  are  the  reward  of  their  improvement. 
The  latter  are  restricted,  frown'd  upon,  beat,  not  for  but  from  the 
Muses;  Laughter  and  Ridicule  that  never-failing  Scare-Crow  is  set 
up  to  drive  them  from  the  Tree  of  Ejiowledge.  But  if  in  spite  of 
aU  difficulties  Nature  prevails,  and  they  can't  be  kept  so  ignorant 
as  their  masters  would  have  them,  they  are  stared  upon  as  Mon- 
sters, Censured,  Envyd  and  every  way  discouraged,  or  at  the  best 
they  have  the  Fate  the  Proverb  assigns  them:  Virtue  is  praised 
and  starved. 

These  words  must  have  been  read  with  secret  satisfaction 
by  Lady  Winchilsea,  for  she  had,  years  before,  confided 
similar  ideas  to  that  gilt-edged,  morocco-bound,  diffident 
first  manuscript  of  hers,  and  had  summed  up  the  situation 
in  the  epigrammatic  phrase,  '^  Women  are  Education's  and 
not  Nature's  Foola"  To  read,  to  write,  to  think,  to  study — 
these,  she  indignantly  exclaims,  are  tabooed  lest  they  should 
cloud  a  woman's  beauty,  and  exhaust  the  time  more  profit- 
ably spent  in  adorning  herself  for  conquest.  She  resents 
the  commonly  received  opinion  that  dressing  and  dancing, 
fashions  and  theaters,  are  woman's  only  legitimate  interests. 
She  resents  with  equal  emphasis  the  ultra-domestic  ideaL 
She  frankly  declares  that  she,  at  least,  was  never  meant  for 
''the  dull  manage  of  a  servile  house."  Her  own  tastes  are 
of  the  simplest  Of  her  table  she  asks  little  except  that  it 
be  "set  without  her  care."  She  can  dispense  with  "orto- 
lane,"   "treufles,"  and  "morilia,"  but   leisure   and  a  free 


cxvi  Intboduotion 


mind  are  necessities.  For  fashion  she  cares  not  at  all,  and 
discussions  concerning  brocades  and  laces  infinitely  weary 
her.  A  new  gown  in  spring,  when  the  lilies  and  the  birds 
put  on  fresh  attire,  quite  satisfies  her  ambition  in  the  way  of 
appareL  Against  the  so-called  feminine  accomplishments 
of  her  day  she  puts  herself  definitely  on  record.  She 
simply  will  not,  she  declares, 

in  foding  silks  compose. 
Faintly,  the  inimitable  Rose, 
Fill  up  an  iU-drawn  Bird,  or  paint  on  Glass, 
The  Sovereign's  blurred  and  undistinguished  face, 
The  threatening  Angel  and  the  Speaking  Asa. 

The  courageous  expression  of  tastes  so  unconventional 
inevitably  made  Ardelia  the  target  for  ill-natured  jests,  and 
the  jests  bore  their  natural  fruit  in  bitterness  of  spirit.  It 
is,  however,  the  prejudice  against  women  authors  of  which 
Ardelia  is  most  acutely  conscious.  During  her  memorably 
unhappy  visit  to  London,  shortly  after  her  retirement  to 
Eastwell,  the  caustic  social  commentary  that  fell  trippingly 
from  the  gay  Almeria's  tongue  reached  its  unendurable 
climax  when  that  young  gossip  pointed  out  with  a  sneer,  "  a 
poetess!  a  woman  who  writes,  a  common  jest!"  Then 
Ardelia's  prudence  and  politeness  give  way  to  an  indignant 
sense  of  justice.  "Why,"  she  exclaims,  "should  this 
poetess  be  a  common  jest?  Does  she  make  pubKc  boast  of 
her  skill  ?  Does  she  write  a  song  so  popular  that  the  car-men 
sing  it,  and  then  allow  her  name  to  be  fiourished  above  it? 
Does  she  cause  herself  to  be  painted  with  a  laurel  wreath 
and  with  commendatory  verses  encircling  her  picture? 
Does  she  write  lampoons?  "  So  the  badgered  Ardelia,  stung 
by  the  secret  knowledge  of  a  tell-tale  portfolio  of  rhymes 
down  at  Eastwell,  frees  her  mind  for  the  nonce.  But  she 
can  never  quite  escape  the  benumbing  conviction  that  a 
woman  who  delights  in  the  groves  and  secret  springs  of  the 
muses,  who  thus  '^  deviates  from  the  known  and  common 


Intboduotion  cxvii 


way,"  who  dares  to  trace  "  anusnal  things,"  will  be  con- 
sidered an  intruder  on  the  rights  of  men,  a  presumptuous 
creature  whom  no  excellence  of  work  can  justify,  and  in 
many  a  dark  moment  she  is  ready  to  confess  that  ''a 
woman's  way  to  charm  is  not  by  writing."  But  when  the 
splenetic  mood  is  past  she  brings  forth  all  sorts  of  defensive 
arguments,  her  best  weapons  being  always  drawn  from  the 
arsenal  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  was,  in  fact,  almost 
imperative  to  carry  on  the  contest  with  Hebrew  arguments, 
for  the  foes  to  the  advancement  of  women  had  from  the  out- 
set massed  their  forces  in  the  Qarden  of  Eden.  This  sort 
of  discussion  is  well  illustrated  in  some  contemporary 
anonymous  letters  between  a  certain  Chloe  and  Urania  who 
are  discussing  woman's  education.  Chloe,  being  a  repre- 
sentative Fair  One,  c€innot  argue  for  herself,  but  she  repeats 
with  pretty  docility,  and  much  apparent  loss  of  force,  the 
arguments  of  her  lover,  Lysander.  His  reasoning  is  to  the 
effect  that  "in  the  Beginning  Woman  was  created  for 
Obedience  and  Man  for  Rule,'*^  but  that  if  to  the  beauty  of 
woman  reason  should  be  added,  not  Deity  itself  could  main- 
tain the  order  of  precedence.  Urania  in  answer  merely 
expresses  a  laconic  surprise  that  Lysander  should  be  so  inti- 
mately in  the  secret  counsels  of  the  Almighty.  But  Mary 
Astell  takes  up,  in  a  minute  and  exhaustive  manner,  the  texts 
commonly  quoted  against  female  education,  and  she  reaches 
the  comforting  conclusion  that  the  '^  Bible  is  for,  and  not 
against  us,  and  cannot,  without  great  violence  done  to  it,  be 
urg'd  to  our  prejudice."  And  Lady  Winchilsea  earnestly 
reminds  her  readers  that  holy  virgins  joined  in  the  song 
when  the  ark  was  brought  back ;  that  conquering  David  was 
welcomed  by  a  bright  chorus  of  women ;  that  Deborah  led 
the  fainting  hosts  of  Israel  to  victory,  and  so  on  through  the 
convincing  proofs  that  if  Ardelias  wish  to  write  pindarics 
they  should  be  given  pen  and  inL 


cxviii  Intboduotion 


This  sense  of  injustice,  this  self-doubt  and  unrest,  are  the 
fit  background  for  Ardelia's  one  confessedly  satirical  poem, 
Ardelia^s  Answer  to  Ephelia.  It  is  a  clever  piece  of  work, 
vigorous,  racy,  colloquial  The  portraits  of  the  London 
beau  and  belle  show  that  in  the  beautiful  and  witty  maid 
of  honor  there  had  lurked  a  "chiel"  whose  note-taking  was 
minute,  keen,  and  even  contemptuous.  Ardelia^s  Almeria 
is  the  London  woman  of  fashion  in  1690,  but,  by  unmistaka- 
ble traits  of  family  likeness,  she  betrays  her  kinship  with 
heroines  of  a  later  date.  She  has  not,  to  be  sure,  the 
bewildering  fascination  of  C!ongreve's  Millamant,  nor  the 
dazzling  beauty  of  Pope^s  Belinda,  but  whatever  in  these 
ladies  was  vain,  pert,  flippant,  and  frivolous  found  its  well- 
developed  prototype  in  Almeria.  She  was  not  a  whit  behind 
Belinda,  in  devotion  to  flounces,  ftirbelows,  and  feathered 
gowns,  and  in  the  ecstacy  with  which  she  regarded  her 
toilet-table,  and  she  excelled  Addison's  Leonora  in  her 
energetic  pursuit  of  gewgaws  and  rare  china.  She  had, 
furthermore,  what  these  other  fair  dames  had  not,  a  carping, 
envious  spirit,  an  eye  keen  to  see  all  failings  but  her  own,  a 
tongue  fluent  in  evil-minded  gossip.  Lady  Winchilsea  does 
not  regard  female  foibles  with  amused  tolerance.  The 
severity  of  the  portrait  she  draws  does  not  belie  her  feeling. 
To  her  the  Almerias  of  life  were  utterly  distasteful,  an  insult 
to  all  true  womanhood,  and  not  to  be  laughed  at,  but 
scourged. 

There  are  other  slight  pictures  of  women  much  in  the 
spirit  of  this  portrait  of  Almeria.  A  Pastoral  Dialogue^ 
presents  two  ladies,  one  young,  vain,  eager  in  pursuit  of 
masculine  admiration,  the  other  old,  vain,  jealous,  eager  to 
recount  past  triumphs.  The  sketches  of  the  artful  coquette 
and  the  imperious  wife  in  The  Spleen  read  like  studies  for 
the  Rape  of  the  Locky  and  Adam  Pos'd  would  surely  do  as 
a  text  for  Pope's  "  Most  women  have  no  characters  at  alL" 


Intboduotion  cxix 


The  picture  of  the  belles  at  Tunbridge  in  1706  is  of  the 
most  sarcastic  sort.  The  blasS  indifference  of  the  men,  and 
the  too  willing,  too  grateful  reception  of  slight  masculine 
attentions  on  the  part  of  the  maidens  aroused  Lady  Win- 
chilsea^s  indignation.  The  pert,  shallow,  forward  hoydens 
of  the  fashionable  watering-place  were  even  more  obnoxious 
to  her  than  the  trifling  fops  whose  admiration  they  were 
courting.  Especially  open  to  Ardelia^s  scorn  is  the  wife  of 
the  rich  parvenu,  who,  without  birth  or  breeding,  displays 
her  husband's  wealth  by  wearing  more  gold  and  lace  than  a 
duchess.  In  her  rooms,  which  are  "drest  anew  at  every 
Christening," 

Grinning  MaloUoa  in  true  Ermin  staie. 

The  best  Japarij  and  clearest  China-ware 

Are  but  as  common  Delft  and  English  Laquer  there. 

Such  is  the  contemptuous  triplet  with  which  Ardelia  dis- 
misses this  lady's  pretension  to  gentility.  The  foolish  old 
owl  in  the  fable  is  a  playful  but  searching  portrayal  of 
many  a  doating  mother.  The  wrangling  woman  with  the 
"  eternal  clack  "  in  Reformation  is  the  typical  vulgar  scold 
and  busy-body.  And  so  on  throngh  the  slight  portraits 
which  show  that  Ardelia,  howsoever  "gentle,"  had  yet  a  keen 
eye  and  quick  word  for  all  that  fell  below  her  standards. 

A  second  general  topic  never  touched  upon  without 
severity  is  the  mobile.  Lady  Winchilsea  was  an  aristocrat 
and  a  royalist.  She  always  deprecates  an  appeal  to  the 
publia     "  How  can  we,"  she  exclaims, 

with  their  opinions  join. 
Who  to  promote  some  interest  would  define. 
The  People^a  Voice  to  be  the  Voice  Divine. 

She  pities  the  man  of  sense  who  must  be  judged  by  a 
" Crowd  of  Fools."  "The  Vulgar  Throng,"  she  says,  must 
not  be  cajoled  or  reasoned  with,  but  governed  "  by  stated 
laws."     L'Estrange  searched  through  the  beast-world  for 


cxx  Intboduotion 


similitudes  expressive  of  his  detestation  of  the  mob.  They 
are  asses,  and  asses  they  will  be,  no  matter  who  rides  them; 
they  are  '^mungril  curs''  that  bawl,  snarl,  and  snap;  they 
are  "  hares  that  wish  to  secure  universal  parity  by  leveling 
all  beasts  to  their  own  state  of  weakness,"  and  so  on.  With 
less  boldness  and  less  contempt,  Lady  Winchilsea  is  entirely 
in  accord  with  Sir  Roger's  views. 

"  Pocket- Arguments  "  likewise  quickly  irritated  Ardelia. 
The  man  who  grants 

no  worth  in  anything 
But  so  much  money  as  'twill  bring, 

the  man  whose  interests  are  in  the  price  of  com  and  stand- 
ing market  laws,  are  outside  the  pale  of  her  sympathies 
Marriage  based  on  considerations  of  dowry  or  jointure  is 
ofiPensive  to  her.  In  her  judgment  an  impecunious  scholar 
always  outranks  the  successful  business  man  or  even  the 
successful  professional  man.  The  best  illustration  of  this 
attitude  is  the  poem  to  Dr.  Waldron,  who  had  given  up  a 
fellowship  at  Oxford  that  he  might  make  a  better  income 
through  the  practice  of  medicine.  Ardelia  admits  that 
money,  that  sordid  plant,  does  not  flourish  near  the  odor  of 
the  bays,  but  she  cannot  understand  how  any  hope  of  gain 
could  induce  a  wit  to  leave  Oxford,  "  that  Eden  to  the  Fruit- 
ful Mind."  Dr.  Waldron's  accomplishments  did  not  extend 
apparently  beyond  gay  discourse,  witty  extempore  eflFusions 
in  verse  or  prose  for  table-books,  and  an  occasional  poem  in 
some  Miscellany,  but  even  this  dilettante  consorting  with  the 
muses  was  superior  to  "druggery,"  even  though  druggery 
led  to  "glittering  profit."  Ardelia's  satiric  list  is  really  a 
long  one  and  comprises  "rallying  wits,"  "greedy  parasites," 
flatterers  when  they  "  fawn  and  leer,"  knavish  lawyers,  travel- 
ing fops,  and  such  social  bores  as  buffoons,  "mimmicks," 
"  quoters  of  old  saws,"  and  retailers  of  second-hand  jokes.  Her 
antipathies  were  lively  and  her  insight  acute,  yet  her  satire 


Intboduotion  cxxi 


was  seldom  personal,  and  seldom  really  acrimonious.  Much 
of  it  is  in  the  fables  and  even  those  with  the  most  caustic 
morals  are  often  marked  in  the  narrative  portions  by  a 
gayety,  a  humorous  lightness  of  touch,  and  a  tolerance  far 
enough  removed  from  a  genuinely  pessimistic  view  of  human 
natura 

The  satiric  poems  are  enlivened  by  many  realistic  details 
of  value  to  the  student  of  social  life  in  the  years  from  1680 
to  1714.  Ardelia  had  almost  as  keen  an  eye  for  manners 
and  customs,  for  personal  idiosyncrasy,  for  trifling  indica- 
tions of  moral  standards  and  motives,  as  she  showed  later  in 
her  treatment  of  external  nature. 

That  Lady  Winchilsea,  in  her  attitude  toward  external 
nature,  was  so  far  in  advance  of  her  age  as  to  be  isolated 
Attitude  from  it,  is  put  beyond  dispute  by  a  detailed 

J?JJ^*  study  of  her  poems.     This  forms,  in  fact,  her 

Vatnra  principal  claim  to  the  notice  of  posterity. 

Her  preference  for  the  country  and  her  correspondingly 
strong  dislike  for  the  city  find  emphatic  expression  in 
Ardelia^ 8  Answer  to  Ephelia,  about  1690,  and  the  Preface^ 
about  1702.  The  "Almeria"  of  the  first  of  these  poems 
belongs  to  the  true  apostolic  succession  of  poetical  heroines 
who  abhorred  the  country.  Isabella  in  Dryden's  Wild  Gal- 
lant says,  ''I  cannot  abide  to  be  in  the  country  like  a  wild 
beast  in  the  wilderness."  Harriet  in  Etheredge's  Man  of 
Mode  counted  all  beyond  Hyde  Park  a  desert,  and  she  said 
that  her  love  of  the  town  was  so  intense  that  she  hated  the 
country  even  in  tapestry  and  in  pictures.  Sylvia  in  Shad- 
well's  Epsom  Wells  assures  the  boor,  Clodpate,  the  apostle 
of  "a  pretty  innocent  country  life,"  that  people  really  live 
nowhere  but  in  London,  for  the  "insipid  dull  being"  of 
country  folk  cannot  be  called  living.  The  list  could  be 
increased  indefinitely  and  goes  far  down  into  the  eighteenth 
century.      Pope's  "fond  virgin"  whose  unhappy  fate  com- 


cxxii  Intboduotion 


pelled  her  to  seek  wholesome  country  air,  Shenstone's  lady 
who  **  could  not  breath  anywhere  else  but  in  town,"  Little- 
ton's fair  maiden  to  whom  country  life  is  '^  supinely  calm 
and  dully  innocent,"  Young's  Fulvia  who  preferred  ''smoke 
and  dust  and  noise  and  crowds  "  to  ''  odious  larks  and  night- 
ingales," Browne's  Celia  who  makes  her  banishment  from 
the  city  endurable  by  not  giving  herself  up  to  ''  dull  land- 
scape" but  by  thinking  of  the  country  as  the  "town  in 
miniature" — these  ladies  represent  in  varying  phases  the 
traditions  of  their  fathers,  and  Almeria  is  legitimately  of 
their  kin.  She  secretly  ridicules  Ardelia's  "rural  tastes" 
and  "rustic"  clothes,  and  wonders  how  anyone  can  leave 
"the  beaux-monde  and  the  dull  country  love,"  yet,  "if  but 
an  afternoon  'twould  cost,"  she  really  could  bring  herself  to 
visit  Ardelia  in  the  country,  "  to  quit  the  town,  and  for  that 
Time  be  lost"  The  attitude  of  these  ladies  toward  the  coun- 
try was  but  the  attitude  of  their  time.  Ardelia's  feeling 
toward  city  and  country  becomes,  then,  novel  in  the  extreme. 
In  the  midst  of  all  the  social  delights  Almeria  can  offer  her, 
she  longs  for  her  "groves  and  country  walks"  where  "trees 
blast  not  trees  nor  flow'rs  envenom  flow'rs,"  and  she  returns 
to  Eastwell  with  a  haste  and  pleasure  hardly  to  be  under- 
stood by  her  contemporaries.  The  antithesis  between  the 
town  and  the  country  was  not  so  sharply  defined  by  any 
succeeding  poet  before  Cowper. 

The  importance  of  Lady  Winchilsea's  contributions  to 
the  poetry  of  external  nature  depends  not  so  much  on  the 
The  Moontaini  number  as  upon  the  characteristics  of  the 
and  the  Sea  poems  that  have  to  do  with  the  out-door  world. 
In  some  respects  these  characteristics  are  like  those  of  her 
contemporaries.  The  mountains  and  the  aea,  for  instance, 
are  treated  by  her  in  conventional  fashion.  She  uses  the 
sea  in  similitudes  where  storms  rage  and  where  tides  swal- 
low up  brooks,  much  in  the  manner  of  Dryden  and  Waller. 


Intboduction  cxxiii 


There  are  no  good  descriptions  except,  possibly,  this  line  on 
the  ocean  in  a  calm, 

For  smooth  it  lay  as  if  one  wave  made  all  the  sea. 

The  treatment  of  mountains  is  equally  ineflfective.  In 
her  Hymn  she  does,  however,  address  mountains  as  "Ye 
native  altars  of  the  Earth,''  a  phrase  which  in  the  midst  of 
utilitarian  and  theological  objections  to  mountains  as  ''  huge, 
monstrous  excrescences  of  nature,''  as  mere  ''barriers  between 
one  sweet  plain  and  another,"  as  ''wild,  vast,  undigested 
heaps  of  stone  and  earth,"  "  great  ruins,  the  result  of  sin," 
has  a  strangely  exalted  and  Hebraic  sound. 

Dryden  and  his  followers  used  storm  similes  with  weari- 
some frequency  and  monotony,  but  storms  themselves  were 
not  counted  poetical  property  till  Thomson 
called  attention  to  them  in  The  Seasons,  after 
which  they  became  part  of  the  stock  in  trade  of  every  poet- 
aster who  could  make  the  elements  crash  and  hurtle.  Lady 
Winchilsea's  one  storm  is  her  description  of  the  hurricane 
that  swept  over  England  in  November,  1703,  devastating 
the  southern  counties,  uprooting  fine  old  trees,  unroofing 
palaces,  destroying  a  third  of  the  navy,  and  causing  the 
death  of  fifteen  hundred  seamen.  Eastwell  was  within  the 
storm  radius,  and  the  poem  is  doubtless  based  on  actual  obser- 
vation. This  poem  was  subjected  to  much  revision  in  the 
manuscript,  but  even  in  the  printed  form  it  is  still  unequal 
and  disjointed.  It  was  written  too  near  to  the  event.  It  is 
marred  by  much  that  is  local,  personal,  temporary  in  inter- 
est The  best  passages  are  descriptive  of  external  nature 
pure  and  simple,  the  fierce  and  turbulent  winds,  the  ruined 
trees,  the  storm-beaten  birds.  But  one  point  calls  for 
especial  comment  here,  and  that  is  the  emphasis  put  on  the 
sounds  of  the  tempest.  They  are  so  appalling  and  tremen- 
dous as  to  "  wound  the  listening  sense."    They  have  the  effect 


cxxiv  Introduction 


of  a  battle  symphony.  The  winds  beat  against  solid  sur- 
faces with  a  drum-like  resonance,  they  are  their  own  fifes 
and  clarions ;  each  cavity  and  hollow  tube  becomes  a  trumpet. 
Crude  though  the  poem  is,  it  now  and  then  has  in  it  some- 
thing of  the  stress  and  strain,  something  of  the  sweep  of  the 
storm  itself. 

No  object  in  inanimate  nature  attracted  Lady  Winchilsea 
more  strongly  than  trees.  A  charming  early  poem  is  called 
simply  The  Tree.  The  kind  of  tree  is  not 
named,  though  it  was  probably  an  oak.  But 
more  important  than  botanic  exactitude  is  the  impression 
made  by  the  regal  personality  of  this  tree  with  its  imposing 
height  and  wide  hospitable  spread  of  branches.  Destruction 
by  the  ax  of  the  common  workman  would  be  degradation. 
Fierce  winds  alone  are  of  a  rank  worthily  to  compass  its 
fall.  And  the  news  of  such  an  event  should  resound  from 
the  earth  to  the  congregated  clouds,  while  in  the  end  con- 
suming flames  would  be  but  as  the  funeral  pyre  of  ancient 
heroes.  The  poem  has  no  "unforgettable  lines,"  but  the 
conception  of  the  patriarchal  tree  is  not  paralleled  in  kind 
before  Christopher  Smart's  oak-tree  in  the  Immensity  of  the 
Supreme  Being. 

In  later  poems  this  interest  in  trees  is  a  frequent  note. 
Ardelia's  petition  for  an  absolute  retreat, 

Mongst  Paths  so  lost  and  Trees  so  high, 
That  the  world  may  ne'er  invade 
Through  such  windings  and  such  shade. 
My  unshaken  Liberty, 

was  practically  answered  at  Eastwell.  During  her  first 
summer  there  she  was  so  enthusiastic  in  her  pleasure  that 
she  was  constantly  overtaxing  her  strength  by  long  walks 
through  the  forest-like  park.  Its  solitude  and  beauty  gave 
her  inexplicable  joy.  Her  released  romantic  tendencies 
found   suddenly   most   happy   activity.     The  silent   forest 


Intboduotion  cxxv 


became  the  home  of  legend  and  myth,  a  reakn  of  Spenserian 
enchantment.  For  hours  at  a  time  she  wandered  about 
alone,  peopling  the  shades  with  fawns  and  sylvans,  convert- 
ing lovely  nooks  into  the  secret  haunts  of  nymphs  and 
fairies.  Toward  individual  trees  or  groups  of  trees  her 
feeling  is  almost  as  intimate  as  that  of  Lowell.  She  addresses 
them  as  ''  numerous  brethren  of  the  leafy  kind/'  she  applies 
the  adjective  "fraternal"  to  a  clump  of  oaks  in  quite  the 
manner  of  Wordsworth  in  his  description  of  the  yew-trees, 
the  "fraternal  four  of  Borrowdale."  In  recounting  the  results 
of  the  great  storm,  the  frustrated  ambitions  of  the  beech, 
the  oak,  and  the  pine  are  sympathetically  recorded  along 
with  human  fatalities.  The  destruction  of  a  fine  old  grove 
at  Eastwell  is  narrated  with  dramatic  liveliness.  The  winds 
sigh  through  the  sentenced  trees.  The  household  awaits  in 
dismayed  silence  the  catastrophe  it  cannot  avert.  Even  the 
hired  clowns  refuse  at  first  to  lift  the  ax.  But  when  to 
his  word  of  command  the  master  adds  his  example  by 
striking  the  first  blow,  all  follow  suit,  and  presently  the 
splendid  trees  lie  helpless  in  the  field  of  their  birth.  This 
disaster  occurred  before  Ardelia  went  to  Eastwell,  but  she 
conmiemorates  it  with  a  sense  of  personal  hurt  and  outrage, 
and  one  of  her  reasons  for  gratitude  to  Charles  was  that  he 
replanted  the  denuded  field. 

Lady  Winchilsea  frequently  "moralized"  her  trees,  but 
on  the  way  to  the  moral  we  find  much  excellent  description, 
the  outcome  of  first-hand  observation.  Willows,  for  instance, 
stand  for  youth,  but  we  discover  likewise  that  they  are 
smooth  of  rind,  straight  of  bough,  moist  of  fiber,  that  they 
throw  out  at  the  top  a  mass  of  leaves,  that  they  gather  in 
social  ranks  along  little  streams.  One  forgets  the  moral  of 
the  dead  tree  in  the  hedge,  in  looking  at  the  picture  of  the 
tree  itself.  Mischievous,  entangling  vines  encompass  it. 
Dismal-fiowered  night-shade,  and  "honesty"  with  its  feath- 


cxxvi  Intboductiom 


erd  down  curl  from  the  topmost  bough,  while  the  honey- 
suckle climbs  by  its  dead  branches  to  the  thorn-trees  above. 
The  oak  is  used  as  a  symbol  for  age,  but  it  is  not  the  pathos 
of  man's  declining  years  that  stays  in  the  memory;  it  is 
rather  the  pathetic  dignity  of  that  "lonely  stubborn  oak" 

whose  • 

distorted  trunk 
Sapless  branches  bent  and  shrunk, 

show  the  force  of  the  imperious  whirl-winds  it  has  defied. 

Lady  Winchilsea's  poems  show  a  delight  in  flowers,  but 
not  at  all  the  conventional  delight.  /\Her  chief  pleasure  in 
^  flowers  arose  from  their  odor.     That  her  olfac- 

tory  sense  was  especially  acute  may  be  inferred 
from  the  description  of  the  physical  effect  of  some  penetrat- 
ing odors,  as  that  of  the  jonquil  She  faints  beneath 
the  ''aromatic  pain.'/  And  she  is  as  pronounced  as 
Cowper  in  her  protest  against  the  perfume  so  lavishly 
used  by  the  beaux  and  belles  of  London.  But  of  the  gener- 
ally diffused  fragrances  wafted  from  gardens  or  fields  she 
speaks  frequently  and  with  great  pleasure.  In  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  wilderness  at  Longleat,  the  entire  stress  was 
put  on  the  ravishing  odors  from  woodbine,  jasmine,  Hes- 
perian broom,  and  the  Assyrian  rose,  which  were  so  cun- 
ningly arranged  that  only  by  detecting  their  separate  odors 
could  one  find  his  way  through  the  maze.  She  observes, 
also,  that  odors  are  more  powerful  on  hot  days,  especially 
"piny"  odors,  and  in  the  evening.  The  colors  of  flowers 
did  not  so  strongly  attract  her.  Most  of  her  color  words 
have  to  do  with  textures  and  gems.  But  even  in  colors  she 
is  much  richer  than  most  of  her  contemporaries  who  describe 
flowers.  One  of  her  most  interesting  notes  is  a  defense  of 
the  common  white  lily  against  the  opinion  of  commentators 
who  think  "that  flower  not  gay  enough"  to  stand  in  the 
famous  comparison  of  Solomon's  attire  to  the  lilies.    But  no 


Intboduotion  cxxvii 


flower,  Bhe  contends,  ''can  have  a  greater  luster  than  the 
common  white  lily." 

On  the  whole,  Lady  Winchilsea's  references  to  flowers 
are  original,  suggestive,  and  pleasing.  The  glowing  poppy, 
the  bright  blue  flowers  among  the  standing  com,  the 
bramble-rose  on  the  banks  of  the  stream,  the  sleepy  cowslip 
in  a  sheltered  nook,  the  foxgloves  that  at  eventide  checker 
the  brakes  with  pale  red,  are  not  flowers  indigenous  to  early 
eighteenth  century  poetry.  In  novelty  of  choice,  in  aptness 
of  phrase,  and  in  directness  and  simplicity  of  effect,  these 
little  flower  pictures  are  of  unique  value  in  the  poetry  of 
their  day. 

The  use  of  birds  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  poetry  is  slight, 
but  of  real  significance.  There  is  one  sympathetically  drawn 
picture  of  a  bird  by  chance  imprisoned  in  a 
room.  In  its  fright  it  dashes  itself  against  the 
ceiling,  beats  with  its  wings  on  the  window-panes,  or  flutters 
about  in  ''endless  circles  of  dismay,''  till  some  kind  hand 
restores  it  to  "ample  space,  the  only  heaven  of  birds." 
Equally  direct  and  sympathetic  is  the  description  of  the 
birds  in  the  great  storm.  The  picture  of  the  "wide  free 
sky,"  "  where  none  from  star  to  star  could  call  the  space  his 
own,"  the  "unentailed  estate  of  birds,"  renders  more  effect- 
ive the  accompanying  picture  of  the  birds  bewildered  by  the 
storm,  beaten  to  earth  by  rough  blasts,  or  tossed  about  by 
the  whirlwind. 

Lady  Winchilsea's  owl  in  the  fable  is  by  no  means  a 
mere  reproduction  of  La  Fontaine's.  She  amplifies  his  brief 
generalized  description  into  many  homely  details.  The 
curiously  shaped  beak,  the  high  shoulders,  the  ruflp  around 
the  neck,  the  frowsy  lids,  the  waddling  steps,  the  dull  eye 
under  its  greenish  film,  are  details  that  in  the  poetry  of  the 
day  certainly  mark  an  unusual  attempt  at  minute,  realistic 
portrayal  of  a  bird.     She  speaks  of  an  "ancient  yew"  that 


cxxviii  Introduction 


has  for  three  hundred  years  belonged  to  "lineal  Heirs" 
of  the  owl  tribe,  and  one  of  the  pleasing  night-sounds  that 
she  records  is  the  clear  "hollowing"  of  the  owl  from  a  tree 
*  famed  for  her  delight."  All  of  this  bears  the  mark  of 
first-hand  and  interested  observation,  as  do  likewise  the  two 
descriptions  which  the  young  rat  and  his  dam  give  of  the 
cock,  in  the  fable  The  young  Rat  and  his  Dam^  the  Cock 
and  the  Cat.  In  Jealousy  the  Rage  of  a  Man  there  is  a 
delightfully  fresh  and  vivid  description  of  the  courtship  of 
two  doves.  The  male  bird  puts  on  his  most  enticing  airs 
while  the  female  carelessly  shifts  her  ground  and  indifferently 
pecks  away  at  the  scattered  grain,  but  on  the  appearance  of 
a  rival  her  seeming  coldness  disappears,  her  feathers  become 
sleek  as  she  prepares  for  a  fight,  and  in  a  rage  she  attacks 
the  parti-colored  neck  of  the  new  favorite.  The  dove  had 
been  long  poetically  relied  upon  as  an  image  of  cooing,  con- 
jugal content,  hence  this  picture  of  a  jealous,  fighting  dove 
is  as  original  as  it  is  effective.  The  observation  in  the  little 
poem  is  strikingly  exact  Wordsworth  himself  could  not 
find  fault  with  it 

The  nightingale  is  immemorially  the  poet's  bird.  English 
verse  has  never  failed  to  give  enthusiastic,  if  somewhat 
monotonous,  recognition  of  Philomela's  claims.  From  Chau- 
cer, Spenser,  Sidney,  Lyly,  Shakespeare,  Carew,  Crashaw, 
Milton,  Marvell,  even  Dryden,  Lady  Winchilsea  might  have 
compiled  an  anthology  of  nightingale  poetry.  From  these 
poets  the  characteristics  of  the  traditional  nightingale  are 
easily  deducible,  and  it  is  interesting  to  discover  in  how  far 
Lady  Winchilsea's  poem  The  Nightingale  is  in  accord  with 
the  work  of  her  predecessors.  She  is  almost  the  only  poet 
in  the  list  to  give  no  note  of  the  time  of  the  song,  but  she  is 
at  one  with  Lyly  and  Milton  in  mentioning  spring  as  its 
season.  Her  nightingale  apparently  sang  in  May.  The 
sweetness  of  the  song  is,  of  course,  generally  observed,  but 


Introduction  cxxix 


Lady  Winchilsea  is  curiously  like  Oarew  and  Orashaw  in 
her  attempt  to  give  a  more  exact  description  of  its  musical 
quality.  As  she  listens  to  the  long,  pure  notes,  the  ecstasy 
of  pleasure  becomes  almost  a  pain,  and  she  implores  the  bird 
to  "let  division  shake  her  throat," — a  seventeenth  century 
phrase  for  the  production  of  runs  and  trills.  Carew  speaks 
of  the  bird's  ''sweet  dividing  throat,"  and  Crashawsays  that 

she  pours 

through  the  sleek  passage  of  her  open  throat 
A  clear  unwrmkled  song;  then  doth  she  point  it  by  short  diminu- 
tions. 

What  Mathew  Arnold  calls  the  "wild,  deep-sunken,  old- 
world  pain''  of  the  song  seldom  escapes  the  ear  or  the  clas- 
sically trained  memory  of  the  poet.  The  early  concrete 
embodiment  of  this  grief,  a  bird  singing  with  a  thorn  "uptill 
her  breast,"  as  given  by  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  and  several  times 
by  Shakespeare,  is  followed  by  Lady  Winchilsea.  The  new 
point  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  poem  is  her  way  of  listening  to 
the  song.  The  traditional  interpretation  of  the  "thorn"  had 
always  been  some  love-longing,  but  to  her  it  is  the  poet's 
despair  in  the  presence  of  a  musical  perfection  to  which  he 
cannot  attain.  In  a  faint,  but  sweet  and  real  way.  Lady 
Winchilsea's  emotional  experience  in  listening  to  the  night- 
ingale was  like  that  of  Shelley  with  the  sky-lark.  She  traces 
the  song  from  point  to  point,  she  listens  with  rapture,  and 
has  a  consciousness  that  such  strains,  "  taught  by  the  for- 
ests," are  beyond  human  skill.  In  none  of  the  earlier  night- 
ingale poetns  does  the  human  emotion  arise  thus  out  of  the 
song.  The  general  plan  is  to  use  the  song  to  illustrate,  to 
augment,  or  to  assuage  some  human  emotion.  But  Lady 
Winchilsea's  experience  wherein  the  song,  heard  first  for  its 
own  sake,  creates  the  emotion  and  suggests  the  human  anal- 
ogy, is  exactly  like  that  of  Shelley  with  the  sky-lark,  Words- 
worth with  the  daffodils,  and  Bums  with  the  mouse  or  the 
daisy. 


cxxx  Intboduotion 


The  song  of  the  bird  in  Eastwell  Park  seems,  it  most  be 
confessed,  tame,  circumscribed,  even  thin,  when  compared 
with  the  rich,  voluptuous,  soul-enthralling  notes  of  the 
nightingale  that  a  century  and  a  quarter  later  sang  in  the 
garden  in  Hampstecul  Heath  and  moved  the  poet  Keats  to 
thoughts  of  easeful  death.  But  when  considered  in  connec- 
tion with  its  predecessors,  and  especially  its  contemporaries, 
Lady  Winchilsea's  poem  becomes  a  remarkable  production. 

Of  other  animals  than  birds  little  is  said  except  in  the 
fablea  Their  first  duty  there  is  loyalty  to  the  moral,  and 
they  are  only  secondarily  independent  animals,  but  they  are 
often  touched  off  with  a  sly,  gay  humor  that  makes  some  of 
them  interesting  even  apart  from  the  fable. 

The  traditional  lover  who  flees  to  the  shades  to  hide  his 
mortal  wound,  who  sees  nothing  in  nature  but  rocks  and 
thorns  and  other  painful  reminders  of  Sylvia's 
cruelty,  and  who,  therefore,  with  rare  good 
sense,  goes  back  to  the  city,  preferring  to  die  by  realities 
rather  than  by  shadows,  is  described  in  By  Love  Persu^d. 
And  in  Aristomenes  are  examples  of  the  subordination  of 
nature  to  man,  as  when  Climander  hears  Herminia  utter  the 
word  "love"  and  exclaims: 

Oh!  speak  it  once  again,  and  the  fond  Vine 
Shall  with  a  stricter  grasp  embrace  the  Elm, 
Whilst  joyful  birds  shall  hail  it  from  the  Branches. 

This  reads  like  a  reminiscence  of  Tasso's  Aminta^  and  is 
an  unusual  note  in  Lady  Winchilsea's  poetry.  Even  in  the 
description  of  Marina  the  lover  said  that  she  seemed  to  give 
all  the  sweetness  to  nature,  not  that  she  did  give  it,  and  the 
lament  of  Aristomenes  for  his  son  distinctly  recognizes  the 
independence  of  Nature.  It  is  especially  in  elegiac  verse 
that  Lady  Winchilsea's  conception  of  the  relation  between 
man  and  nature  is  shown  to  be  widely  diflferent  from  the 
ideas  then  dominant.     In  the  customary  elegy.  Nature  is 


Introduction  cxxxi 


represented  as  "convulsed  with  grief"  at  the  death  of  the 
illostrioas  human  being.  The  rivulets  are  flooded  with  tears 
of  the  water-gods,  brows  of  hills  are  furrowed  by  new 
streams,  the  heavens  weep,  birds  droop,  lilies  hang  their 
heads.  Dr.  Johnson  characterizes  such  passages  as  "sylla- 
bles of  senseless  dolour."  Their  grotesque  extravagance 
and  unreality  become  even  more  apparent  when  they  are  put 
side  by  side  with  the  direct  recognition  of  the  truth,  the 
daring,  almost  painful  frankness  in  such  lines  as  those  in 
which  Wordsworth  declares  the  indifference  of  Nature  to  the 
death  of  sweet  Lucy,  whose  body  is 

Boiled  round  in  Earth's  diurnal  course, 
With  locks  and  stones  and  trees. 

The  transition  from  the  artificial  subordination  of  nature 
to  man,  to  the  conception  of  nature  as  a  vital  and  separate 
entity,  was  the  slow  process  of  a  century.  Lady  Winchil- 
sea^s  place  in  this  historical  sequence  becomes  then  of 
especial  significance,  when  we  find  in  her  poems  not  only 
a  forecast  of  the  modem  thought,  but  a  protest  against 
the  conventional  idea.  In  an  elegy  commemorative  of  her 
relative.  Sir  William  Twysden,  she  says  she  rejects  the  custom- 
ary invocation  to  flocks  and  fields  and  flowers  to  join  her  in 
her  grief  because  to  her  mind  it  is  false  and  but  a  poet's  dream 
that  eternal  nature  is  moved  by  man's  sorrow.  She  is  con- 
scious that  no  human  woe  can  deprive  the  spring  of  joy  in 
her  fragrant  odors  and  purple  violets.  It  is  in  vain  that 
mourners  attempt  to  force  on  inanimate  things  some  portion 
of  their  grief.  Nature,  unconcerned  for  our  sorrows,  "  per- 
sues  her  settled  path,  her  first  and  steady  course."  That  all 
may  seem  to  die  with  the  death  of  a  friend  is,  she  admits, 
true,  but  she  insists,  with  the  emphasis  of  Coleridge  in  the 
Ode  to  Dejection^  that  the  clouds  darkening  over  the  outer 
world  proceed  only  from  the  sad,  awakened  heart 


cxxxii  Intboduotion 


In  BIX  early  poem,  The  EchOy  Lady  Winchilsea  expressed 

a  quite  romantic  pleasure  in  a  walk  taken  on  a  fair  night  to 

hear  a  certain  famous  echo,  but  in  the  actual 

experience  it  was  not  so  much  the  mechanical 

perfection  of  the  sound  that  pleased  her,  as  it  was  its  remote, 

elemental  suggestiveness  when  associated  with  the  loneliness 

and  beauty  of  the  night.     In  Democritiis  one  line, 

Solitary  walks  on  starry  nights, 

seems  to  have  a  personal  touch  as  if  she  had  known  such 

walka     The  Hymn  strikes  a  somewhat  deeper  note  in  its 

address  to  the  moon  as  the  gentle  guide  of 

Silent  night. 
That  does  to  solemn  Praise  and  serious  thoughts  invite. 

Brief  though  these  references  are,  each  one  has  a  quality  of 
originality.  But  they  hardly  even  foreshadow  the  perfection 
of  the  Nocturnal  Reverie.  The  fullness  and  delicate  accuracy 
of  the  observation  in  this  poem  have  already  been  sufficiently 
commented  on.  The  description  is  doubtless  the  outcome  of 
many  a  fair  summer  night  at  Eastwell,  but  the  picturesque 
details  are  unified  into  a  consistent  whole,  so  that  they  give 
the  impression  of  a  single  vivid  experience.  The  style  is 
simple,  straightforward,  unelaborated,  almost  bare.  There 
is  nothing  traditional  or  bookish.  There  is  no  ecstacy,  no 
emphatic  statement  But  in  some  indefinable,  inevitable 
fashion  the  little  poem  is  suffused  with  the  charm  of  the 
lovely  night.  And  not  only  the  charm  of  the  night,  but  its 
significance,  its  message,  its  gift  to  man,  find  adequate 
expression.  The  eight  lines  beginning,  "When  a  sedate 
content  the  spirit  feels,"  present  an  interpretation  of  the 
effect  of  nature  on  the  heart  and  mind  of  man  so  exactly 
Wordsworthian  in  substance  and  mood  that  it  is  hard  to  date 
it  eighty-five  years  before  the  Lyrical  Ballads.  Words- 
worth's strong  interest  in  Lady  Winchilsea  is  justified  by  the 
law  of  affinities.     She  is  like  him  in  that  her  genius  needs 


Introduction  cxxxiii 


no  strong  or  novel  stimulus,  and  in  this  one  poem,  at  least, 
she  has  attcdned  to  his  ''  wise  passiveness,''  his  power  of  fixing 
an  exquisite  regard  on  the  commonest  facts  of  nature,  and 
his  ability  to  state  these  facts  with  fine  precision,  and  to 
interpret  them,  not  allegorically,  but  actually  in  their  rela- 
tion to  human  life. 

In  a  faint  but  not  at  all  fanciful  way.  Lady  Winchilsea's 
poetical  development  is  also  comparable  to  that  of  Words- 
worth. Most  of  the  men  who  wrote  well  of  nature  in  the 
eighteenth  century,  as  Armstrong,  Dyer,  Thomson,  Ram- 
say, Mickle,  Bruce,  Beattie,  spent  their  youth  in  the  country; 
their  poetry  of  nature  was  their  earliest  work  and  was  remi- 
niscent of  their  country  life ;  and  the  large  body  of  their 
later  work  was  didactic  or  dramatic.  In  other  words  they 
wrote  their  poetry  of  nature,  before,  not  after,  they  had  come 
into  close  contact  with  the  complex  and  strenuous  life  of  the 
city.  Lady  Winchilsea's  experience  was  exactly  the  reverse. 
She  first  knew  the  court  and  the  city;  she  first  knew  the 
tragic  realities  of  life,  and  she  first  wrote  dramas  and  satires 
and  odes  ;  and  then  at  fifty  years  of  age  she  wrote  the 
Reverie,  She  was,  in  her  spiritual  history,  like  Wordsworth 
in  that  her  chief  poems  on  nature  were  not  written  in  the 
flush  and  fervor  of  youth.  Personal  deprivations,  frus- 
trated ambitions,  loss  of  faith  in  man,  doubts  of  the  provi- 
dential ordering  of  human  affairs,  were  the  deep  waters 
through  which  she  was  called  to  pass,  and  the  end  of  the 
bitter  experience  found  her  in  a  state  of  dejection  border- 
ing on  despair,  a  condition  similar  in  kind  though  not  in 
degree  to  Wordsworth's  condition  at  the  close  of  the  experi- 
ences connected  with  the  French  revolution.  The  influences 
that  led  to  healing  in  each  case  were  human  affection  and 
the  beauty  and  order  of  the  external  world.  To  her  hus- 
band and  to  Eastwell  Park  Lady  Winchilsea  owed  her  resto- 
ration to  her  birtright  of  serenity  and  joy.     But  the  process 


cxxxiv  Intboduotion 


was  not  an  instantaneous  one.  It  took  time  for  the  delicate 
originality  of  her  taste  to  assert  itself.  And  she  had  not, 
as  had  Wordsworth,  a  fnnd  of  childhood  impressions  on 
which  to  draw.  It  was  only  after  long  and  familiar  contact 
with  nature  that  its  full  effect  was  apparent.  But  yet,  sea- 
son by  season,  year  by  year,  new  lessons  were  being  learned, 
and  insensibly  nature  was  bringing  to  her  its  normal  gift& 
It  is  not  of  the  sweet  surprises,  the  novel  excitements  of  the 
early  life  at  Eastwell  of  which  she  writes  best  The  ade- 
quate poem  comes  only  after  years  of  accumulated  experi- 
ence, when  the  loveliness  of  the  place  is  known  and  taken  for 
granted,  when  love  for  it  is  a  part  of  herself,  when  the  thought 
of  it  has  mellowed  and  ripened.  In  spite  of  many  impor- 
tant differences  that  might  be  insisted  on,  there  is  this  one 
important  point  of  likeness  between  Lady  Winchilsea  and 
Wordsworth — they  both  write  out  of  the  calm  that  follows 
the  storm.  Their  simplicity  and  repose  grow  out  of  the  fact 
that  so  much  of  life  has  been  tested  and  set  aside,  and  that 
the  essentials  of  happy  living  have  been  found  to  be  few  and 
not  difficult  of  access.  In  her  youth  Ardelia  wrote  an 
Enquiry  after  Peace.  It  is  a  brief  version  of  the  world-old 
vanitas  vanitatum,  very  much  in  the  style  of  Pamell's  Hymri^ 
and  there  is  a  suggestion,  reminding  one  inevitably  of  Dyer's 
Orongar  Hill,  that  peace  may  be  found  on  some  mountain- 
top  under  the  wide  arch  of  the  sky,  or  in  some  shut-away 
valley.  This  plaintive  little  poem  is  only  a  fragment,  but  it 
is  beautifully  rounded  out  and  answered  by  the  Reverie.  The 
two  poems  represent  the  extremes  of  the  portion  of  Lady 
Winchilsea's  life  best  known  to  us — its  early  dissatisfactions, 
questionings,  rejections,  its  final  certainties  and  poise. 


POEMS 


MERCURY  AND  THE  ELEPHANT 

A  Prefatory  Fable 

As  Mercery  travell'd  thro'  a  Wood 
(Whose  Errands  are  more  Fleet  than  Good) 
An  Elephant  before  him  lay, 
That  much  encumber'd  had  the  Way: 
The  Messenger,  who's  still  in  heiste, 
Wou'd  fain  have  bow'd,  and  so  have  past ; 
When  up  arose  th'  unweildy  Brute, 
And  wou'd  repeat  a  late  Dispute, 
In  which  (he  said)  he'd  gain'd  the  Prize 
From  a  wild  Boar  of  monstrous  Size:  10 

But  Fame  (quoth  he)  with  all  her  Tongues, 
Who  Lawyers,  Ladies,  Soldiers  wrongs, 
Has,  to  my  Disadvantage,  told 
An  Action  throughly  Bright  and  Bold; 
Has  said,  that  I  foul  Play  had  us'd. 
And  with  my  Weight  th'  Opposer  bruis'd; 
Had  laid  my  Trunk  about  his  Brawn, 
Before  his  Tushes  cou'd  be  drawn ; 
Had  stunn'd  him  with  a  hideous  Roar, 
And  twenty -thousand  Scandals  more:  20 

But  I  defy  the  Talk  of  Men, 
Or.  Voice  of  Brutes  in  ev'ry  Den ; 
Th'  impartial  Skies  are  all  my  Care, 
And  how  it  stands  Recorded  there. 
Amongst  you  Gods,  pray.  What  is  thought? 
Quoth  Mercury — Then  have  you  Fought! 
Solicitous  thus  shou'd  I  be 
For  what's  said  of  my  Verse  and  Me ; 
Or  shou'd  my  Friends  Excuses  frame, 
3 


Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 


And  beg  the  Criticks  not  to  blame  80 

(Since  from  a  Female  Hand  it  came) 
Defects  in  Judgment,  or  in  Wit; 
They'd  but  reply— Then  has  she  Writ  I 

Our  Vanity  we  more  betray, 
In  asking  what  the  World  will  say, 
Than  if,  in  trivial  Things  like  these, 
We  wait  on  the  Event  with  ease; 
Nor  make  long  Pref(we8^  to  show 
What  Men  are  not  concem'd  to  know: 
For  still  untouch'd  how  we  succeed,  40 

'Tis  for  themselves,  not  us,  they  Read; 
Whilst  that  proceeding  to  requite. 
We  own  (who  in  the  Muse  delight) 
'Tis  for  our  Selves,  not  them,  we  Write. 
Betray'd  by  Solitude  to  try 
Amusements,  which  the  Prosp'rous  fly; 
And  only  to  the  Press  repair. 
To  fix  our  scatter'd  Papers  there; 
Tho'  whilst  our  Labours  are  preserv'd. 
The  Printers  may,  indeed,  be  starv'd.  50 

THE  INTRODUCTION 

Did  I,  my  lines  intend  for  publick  view. 

How  many  censures,  wou'd  their  faults  persue, 

Some  wou'd,  because  such  words  they  do  affect, 

Cry  they're  insipid,  empty,  uncorrect. 

And  many,  have  attain'd,  dull  and  untaught 

The  name  of  Witt,  only  by  finding  fault. 

True  judges,  might  condemn  their  want  of  witt. 

And  all  might  say,  they're  by  a  Woman  writt 

Alas!  a  woman  that  attempts  the  pen, 

Such  an  intruder  on  the  rights  of  men,  10 


Countess  op  Winohilsea 


Such  a  presumptaous  Creature,  is  esteemed, 

The  fault,  can  by  no  vertue  be  redeem' d. 

They  tell  us,  we  mistake  our  sex  and  way; 

Good  breeding,  fassion,  dancing,  dressing,  play 

Are  the  accomplishments  we  shou'd  desire; 

To  write,  or  read,  or  think,  or  to  enquire 

Wou'd  cloud  our  beauty,  and  exaust  our  time, 

And  interrupt  the  Conquests  of  our  prime; 

Whilst  the  dull  mannage,  of  a  servile  house 

Is  held  by  some,  our  outmost  art,  and  use.  20 

Sure  'twas  not  ever  thus,  nor  are  we  told 
Fables,  of  Women  that  excell'd  of  old; 
To  whom,  by  the  diffusive  hand  of  Heaven 
Some  share  of  witt,  and  poetry  was  given. 
On  that  glad  day,  on  which  the  Ark  retum'd, 
The  holy  pledge,  for  which  the  Land  had  moum'd. 
The  joyfuU  Tribes,  attend  itt  on  the  way. 
The  Levites  do  the  sacred  Charge  convey. 
Whilst  various  Instruments,  before  itt  play; 
Here,  holy  Virgins  in  the  Concert  joyn,  80 

The  louder  notes,  to  soften,  and  refine. 
And  with  alternate  verse,  compleat  the  Hymn  Devine. 
Loe!  the  yong  Poet,  after  Gods  own  heart. 
By  Him  inspired,  and  taught  the  Muses  Art, 
Setum'd  from  Conquest,  a  bright  Chorus  meets. 
That  sing  his  slayn  ten  thousand  in  the  streets. 
In  such  loud  numbers  they  his  acts  declare. 
Proclaim  the  wonders,  of  his  early  war. 
That  Saul  upon  the  vast  applause  does  frown, 
And  feels,  itts  mighty  thunder  shake  the  Crown.        40 
What,  can  the  threat' n'd  Judgment  now  prolong? 
Half  of  the  Kingdom  is  already  gone ; 
The  fairest  half,  whose  influence  guides  the  rest, 
Have  David's  Empire,  o're  their  hearts  confess't. 


The  Poems  op  Anne 


A  Woman  here,  leads  fainting  Israel  on, 
She  fights,  she  wins,  she  tryumphs  with  a  song, 
Devout,  Majestick,  for  the  subject  fitt, 
And  far  above  her  arms,  exalts  her  witt, 
*    Then,  to  the  peacefuU,  shady  Palm  withdraws, 

And  rules  the  rescu'd  Nation,  with  her  Laws.  50 

How  are  we  fal'n,  fal'n  by  mistaken  rules? 

And  Education's,  more  then  Nature's  fools, 

Debarr'd  from  all  improve-ments  of  the  mind. 

And  to  be  dull,  expected  and  dessigned; 

And  if  some  one,  wou'd  Soar  above  the  rest. 

With  warmer  fancy,  and  ambition  press't, 

So  strong,  th'  opposing  faction  still  appears, 

The  hopes  to  thrive,  can  ne're  outweigh  the  fears. 

Be  caution'd  then  my  Muse,  and  still  retir'd; 

Nor  be  dispis'd,  aiming  to  be  admir'd;  60 

Conscious  of  wants,  still  with  contracted  wing. 

To  some  few  freinds,  and  to  thy  sorrows  sing; 

For  groves  of  Lawrell,  thou  wert  never  meant ; 

Be  dark  enough  thy  shades,  and  be  thou  there  content. 

THE  PREFACE 

Beaumont  in  the  beginni[n]g  of  a  Coppy  of  Verses  to 
his  freind  Fletcher  (upon  the  ill  successe  of  his  FaithfuU 
Shepheardesse)  tells  him, 

I  know  too  well!   that  no  more,  then  the  man 
That  travails  throo'  the  burning  Deserts,  can 
When  he  is  beaten  with  the  raging  Sun, 
Half  smother'd  in  the  dust,  have  power  to  run 
From  a  cool  River,  which  himself  doth  find, 
E're  he  be  slack'd;  no  more  can  he,  whose  mind 
Joys  in  the  Muses,  hold  from  that  delight. 
When  Nature,  and  his  full  thoughts,  bid  him  write. 


OOUNTBSS   OP   WiNOHILSBA 


And  this  indeed,  I  not  only  find  true  by  my  own  experience, 
but  have  also  too  many  wittnesses  of  itt  against  me,  under 
my  own  band  in  the  following  Poems;  which  tho'  never 
meritting  more  then  to  be  once  read>  and  then  carlessly 
scattered  or  consumed;  are  grown  by  the  partiality  of  some 
of  my  freinds,  to  the  formidable  appearance  of  a  Volume ; 
tho'  but  in  Manuscript,  and  have  been  solicited  to  a  more 
daring  manefestation,  which  I  shall  ever  resist,  both  from 
the  knowledge  of  their  incapassity,  of  bearing  a  publick 
tryal;  and  also,  upon  recalling  to  my  memory,  some  of  the 
first  lines  I  ever  writt,  which  were  part  of  an  invocation  of 
Apollo,  whose  wise  and  limitted  answer  to  me,  I  did  there 
suppose  to  be 

I  grant  thee  no  pretence  to  Bays, 
Nor  in  bold  print  do  thou  appear; 

Nor  shalt  thou  reatch  Orinda's  prayse, 
Tho'  all  thy  aim,  be  fixt  on  Her. 

And  tho'  I  have  still  avoided  the  confident  producing  any- 
thing of  mine  in  thatt  manner,  yett  have  I  come  too  neer  itt, 
and  been  like  those  imperfect  penitents,  who  are  ever  relent- 
ing, and  yett  ever  returning  to  the  same  offences.  For  I 
have  writt,  and  exposed  my  uncorrect  Rimes,  and  immediatly 
repented;  and  yett  have  writt  again,  and  again  suffer'd  them 
to  be  seen;  tho'  att  the  expence  of  more  uneasy  reflections, 
till  at  last  (like  them)  wearied  with  uncertainty,  and  irreso- 
lution, I  rather  chuse  to  be  hardened  in  an  errour,  then  to  be 
still  att  the  trouble  of  endeavering  to  over  come  itt:  and  now, 
neither  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  writing,  or  any  longer 
make  a  mistery  of  that  to  my  freinds  and  acquaintance, 
which  does  so  little  deserve  itt;  tho'  itt  is  still  a  great  satis- 
faction to  me,  that  I  was  not  so  far  abandon'd  by  my  pru- 
dence, as  out  of  a  mistaken  vanity,  to  lett  any  attempts  of 
mine  in  Poetry,  shew  themselves  whilst  I  liv'd  in  such  a 
publick  place  as  the  Court,  where  every  one  wou'd  have 


The  Poems  of  Anne 


made  their  remarks  upon  a  Versifying  Maid  of  Honour;  and 
far  the  greater  number  with  prejudice,  if  not  contempt  And 
indeed,  the  apprehension  of  this,  had  so  much  wean'd  me 
from  the  practice  and  inclination  to  itt;  that  had  nott  an 
utter  change  in  my  Condition,  and  Circumstances,  removed 
me  into  the  solitude,  &  security  of  the  Country,  and  the 
generous  kindnesse  of  one  that  possest  the  most  delightfull 
seat  in  itt;  envited  him,  from  whom  I  was  inseperable,  to 
partake  of  the  pleasures  of  itt,  I  think  I  might  have  stopped 
ere  it  was  too  late,  and  suffered  those  few  compositions  I  had 
then  by  me,  to  have  sunk  into  that  oblivion,  which  I  ought 
to  wish  might  be  the  lott  of  all  that  have  succeeded  them. 
But  when  I  came  to  Eastwell,  and  cou'd  fix  my  eyes  only 
upon  objects  naturally  inspiring  soft  and  Poeticall  immagi- 
nations,  and  found  the  Owner  of  itt,  so  indulgent  to  that  Art, 
so  knowing  in  all  the  rules  of  itt,  and  att  his  pleasure,  so 
capable  of  putting  them  in  practice;  and  also  most  obligingly 
favorable  to  some  lines  of  mine,  that  had  falFn  under  his 
Lordship^s  perusal,  I  cou^d  no  longer  keep  within  the  lim- 
mitts  I  had  prescrib'd  myself,  nor  be  wisely  reserv'd,  in  spite 
of  inclination,  and  such  powerfull  temptations  to  the  contrary. 
Again  I  engage  my  self  in  the  service  of  the  Muses,  as 
eagerly  as  if 

From  their  new  Worlds,  I  know  not  where, 
Their  golden  Indies  in  the  air — 

they  cou'd  have  supply'd  the  material  losses,  which  I  had 
lately  sustained  in  this.  And  now,  whenever  I  contemplate 
all  the  several  beautys  of  this  Park,  allow'd  to  be  (if  not  of 
the  Universal  yett)  of  our  British  World  infinitely  the  finest, 

A  pleasing  wonder  throo'  my  fancy  moves, 
Smooth  as  her  lawnes,  and  lofty  as  her  Groves. 
Boundlesse  my  Genius  seems,  when  my  free  sight. 
Finds  only  distant  skys  to  stop  her  flight. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  9 

Like  mighty  Denhams,  then,  methinks  my  hand, 
Might  bid  the  Landskip,  in  strong  numbers  stand. 
Fix  all  itts  charms,  with  a  Poetick  skill, 
And  raise  itts  Fame,  above  his  Cooper's  hill. 

This,  I  confesse,  is  whatt  in  itts  self  itt  deserves,  but  the 
unhappy  difference  is,  that  he  by  being  a  real  Poet,  cou'd 
make  that  place  (as  he  sais)  a  Parnassus  to  him ;  whilst  I, 
that  behold  a  real  Parnassus  here,  in  that  lovely  Hill,  which 
in  this  Park  bears  that  name,  find  in  my  self,  so  little  of  the 
Poet,  that  I  am  still  restrain'd  from  attempting  a  description 
of  itt  in  verse,  tho'  the  agreeablenesse  of  the  subject,  has 
often  prompted  me  most  strongly  to  itt. 

But  now,  having  pleaded  an  irresistable  impulse,  as  my 
excuse  for  writing,  which  was  the  cheif  design  of  this 
Preface,  I  must  also  expresse  my  hopes  of  excaping  all  sus- 
pition  of  vanity,  or  affectation  of  applause  from  itt;  since  I 
have  in  my  introduction,  deliver'd  my  sincere  opinion  that 
when  a  Woman  meddles  with  things  of  this  nature, 
So  strong,  th'  opposing  faction  still  appears, 
The  hopes  to  thrive,  can  ne're  outweigh  the  fears. 

And,  I  am  besides  sensible,  that  Poetry  has  been  of  late  so 
explained,  the  laws  of  itt  being  putt  into  familiar  languages, 
that  even  those  of  my  sex,  (if  they  will  be  so  presumptuous 
as  to  write)  are  very  accountable  for  their  transgressions 
against  them.  For  what  rule  of  Aristotle,  or  Horace  is 
there,  that  has  not  been  given  us  by  Rapin,  Despreaux, 
D'acier,  my  Lord  Roscomon,  etc.  ?  What  has  Mr.  Dryden 
omitted,  that  may  lay  open  the  very  misteries  of  this  Art  ? 
and  can  there  any  where  be  found  a  more  delightsome,  or 
more  usef uU  piece  of  Poetry,  then  that, 

correct  Essay, 
Which  so  repairs,  our  old  Horatian  way." 

If  then,  after  the  perusal  of  these,  we  fail,  we  cannott  plead 


10  The  Poems  of  Anne 

any  want,  bnt  that  of  capacity,  or  care,  in  both  of  which  I 
own  myself  so  very  defective,  y*  whenever  any  things  of 
mine,  escape  a  censure,  I  allways  attribute  itt,  to  the  good 
nature  or  civility  of  the  Reader;  and  not  to  any  meritt  in  the 
Poems,  which  I  am  satisfy^  are  so  very  imperfect,  and  uncor- 
rect,  that  I  shall  not  attempt  their  justifycation. 

For  the  subjects,  I  hope  they  are  att  least  innofensive; 
tho'  sometimes  of  Love ;  for  keeping  within  those  limmitts 
which  I  have  observ'd,  I  know  not  why  itt  shou'd  be  more 
faulty,  to  treat  of  that  passion,  then  of  any  other  violent 
excursion,  or  transport  of  the  mind.  Tho'  I  must  confesse, 
the  great  reservednesse  of  Mrs.  Philips  in  this  particular, 
and  the  prayses  I  have  heard  given  her  upon  that  account, 
together  with  my  desire  not  to  give  scandal  to  the  most 
severe,  has  often  discouragM  me  from  making  use  of  itt,  and 
given  me  some  regrett  for  what  I  had  writt  of  that  kind,  and 
wholy  prevented  me  from  putting  the  Aminta  of  Tasso  into 
English  verse,  from  the  verbal  translation  that  I  procured 
out  of  the  Italian,  after  I  had  finishM  the  first  act  extreamly 
to  my  satisfaction;  and  was  convinc'd,  that  in  the  original, 
itt  must  be  as  soft  and  full  of  beautys,  as  ever  anything  of 
that  nature  was ;  but  there  being  nothing  mixt  with  itt,  of  a 
serious  morality,  or  usefuUnesse,  I  sacrafis'd  the  pleasure  I 
took  in  itt,  to  the  more  soUid  reasonings  of  my  own  mind ; 
and  hope  by  so  doing  to  have  made  an  attonement,  to  my 
gravest  readers,  for  the  two  short  pieces  of  that  Pastoral, 
taken  from  the  French,  the  Songs,  and  other  few  lighter 
things,  which  yett  remain  in  the  following  sheetts. 

As  to  Lampoons,  and  all  sorts  of  abusive  verses,  I  ever  so 
much  detested,  both  the  underhand  dealing  and  unchari- 
tablenesse  which  accompanys  them,  that  I  never  suffered  my 
small  talent,  to  be  that  way  employed;  tho'  the  facility  of 
doing  itt,  is  too  well  known  to  many,  who  can  but  make  two 
words  rime;   and  there  wants  not  some  provocation  often. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  11 

either  from  one's  own  resentments,  or  those  of  others,  to  put 
such  upon  itt,  as  are  any  way  capable  of  that  mean  sort  of 
revenge.  The  only  coppy  of  mine  that  tends  towards  this, 
is  the  letter  to  Ephelia,  in  answer  to  an  invitation  to  the 
Town ;  but,  as  that  appears  to  have  been  long  written,  by  the 
mention  made  of  my  Lord  Roscommon,  under  the  name  of 
Piso,  given  to  him  first,  in  a  Panegerick,  of  Mr.  Wallers, 
before  his  Art  of  Poetry;  so  I  do  declare,  that  att  the  time 
of  composing  itt,  there  was  no  particular  person  meant  by 
any  of  the  disadvantageous  Caracters ;  and  the  whole  inten- 
tion of  itt,  was  in  general  to  expose  the  Censorious  humour, 
foppishnesse  and  coquetterie  that  then  prevail' d.  And  I  am  so 
far  from  thinking  there  is  any  ill  in  this,  that  I  wish  itt  oftener 
done,  by  such  hands  as  might  sufficiently  ridicule,  and  wean 
us  from  those  mistakes  in  our  manners,  and  conversation. 

Plays,  were  translated  by  our  most  vertuous  Orinda;  and 
mine,  tho'  originals,  I  hope  are  not  lesse  reserv'd.  The  Queen 
of  Cyprus,  I  once  thought  to  have  call'd  the  Triumphs  of 
Love  and  Innocence ;  and  doubted  not  but  the  latter  part  of  the 
Title,  wou'd  have  been  as  aptly  apply'd  as  the  former.  Aristo- 
menes  is  wholy  Tragicall,  and,  if  itt  answer  my  intention, 
moral  and  inciting  to  Vertue.  What  they  are  as  to  the  per- 
formance, I  leave  to  the  judgment  of  those  who  shall  read 
them;  and  if  any  one  can  find  more  faults  then  I  think  to  be 
in  y" ;  I  am  much  mistaken.  I  ^ will  only  add,  that  when 
they  were  compos' d,  itt  was  far  from  my  intention  ever  to 
own  them,  the  first  was  for  my  own  private  satisfaction,  only 
an  Essay  wheither  I  cou'd  go  throo'  with  such  a  peice  of 
Poetry.  The  other,  I  was  led  to,  by  the  strong  impressions, 
which  some  wonderfuU  circumstances  in  the  life  of  Aristo- 
menes,  made  upon  my  fancy ;  and  cheifly  the  sweetnesse  of 
his  temper,  observable  in  itt,  wrought  upon  me;  for  which 
reason  tho'  itt  may  be  I  did  not  so  Poetically,  I  chose  rather 
to  represent  him  Good,  then  Great ;  and  pitch'd  upon  such 


12  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

parts  of  the  relation,  and  introduc'd  such  additional  circum- 
stances of  my  own,  as  might  most  illustrate  that,  and  shew 
him  to  be  (as  declared  by  the  Oracle)  the  best  of  Men.  I 
know  not  what  eflFect  they  will  have  upon  others,  but  I  must 
acknowledge,  that  the  giving  some  interruption  to  those 
melancholy  thoughts,  which  posesst  me,  not  only  for  my 
own,  but  much  more  for  the  misfortunes  of  those  to  whom 
I  owe  all  immaginable  duty,  and  gratitude,  was  so  great  a 
benefitt;  that  I  have  reason  to  be  satisfy'd  with  the  under- 
taking, be  the  performance  never  so  inconsiderable.  And 
indeed,  an  absolute  solitude  (which  often  was  my  lott)  under 
such  dejection  of  mind,  cou'd  not  have  been  supported,  had 
I  indulged  myself  (as  was  too  natural  to  me)  only  in  the 
contemplation  of  present  and  real  afflictions,  which  I  hope 
will  plead  my  excuse,  for  turning  them  for  releif ,  upon  such 
as  were  immaginary,  &  relating  to  Persons  no  more  in 
being.  I  had  my  end  in  the  writing,  and  if  they  please  not 
those  who  will  take  the  pains  to  peruse  them,  itt  will  be  a 
just  accusation  to  my  weaknesse,  for  letting  them  escape  out 
of  their  concealment;  but  if  attended  with  a  better  successe, 
the  satisfaction  any  freind  of  mine,  may  take  in  them,  will 
make  me  think  my  time  past,  not  so  unprofitably  bestowed, 
as  otherwise  I  might ;  and  which  I  shall  now  endeavour  to 
redeem,  by  applying  myself  to  better  employments,  and 
when  I  do  write  to  chuse,  my  subjects  generally  out  of 
Devinity,  or  from  moral  and  serious  occasions ;  which  made 
me  place  them  last,  as  capable  of  addition ;  For  when  we 
have  run  throo'  all  the  amusements  of  life,  itt  will  be  found, 
that  there  is  but  one  thing  necessary ;  and  they  only  Wise, 
who  chuse  the  better  part.  But  since  there  must  be  also, 
some  relaxation,  some  entertaining  of  the  spiritts, 

Whilst  Life  by  Fate  is  lent  to  me. 
Whilst  here  below,  I  stay. 
Religion,  my  sole  businesse  be, 
And  Poetry,  my  play. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  13 

THE  APPOLOGY 

'Tis  true  I  write  and  tell  me  by  what  Rule 
I  am  alone  forbid  to  play  the  fool 
To  follow  through  the  Groves  a  wand'ring  Muse 
And  fain'd  Idea's  for  my  pleasures  chuse 
Why  shou'd  it  in  my  Pen  be  held  a  fault 
Whilst  Mira  paints  her  face,  to  paint  a  thought 
Whilst  Lamia  to  the  manly  Bumper  flys 
And  borrow'd  Spiritts  sparkle  in  her  Eyes 
Why  shou'd  itt  be  in  me   a  thing  so  vain 
To  heat  with  Poetry  my  colder  Brain 
But  I  write  ill  and  there-fore  shou'd  forbear 
Does  Flavia  cease  now  at  her  fortieth  year 
In  ev'ry  Place  to  lett  that  face  be  seen 
Which  all  the  Town  rejected  at  fifteen 
Each  Woman  has  her  weaknesse ;  mind  [sic]  indeed 
Is  still  to  write  tho'  hoplesse  to  succeed 
Nor  to  the  Men  is  this  so  easy  found 
Ev'n  in  most  Works  with  which  the  Witts  abound 
(So  weak  are  all  since  our  first  breach  with  Heav'n) 
Ther's  lesse  to  be  Applauded  then  forgiven. 

FRAGMENT       • 

So  here  confin'd,  and  but  to  female  Clay, 

Abdelia's  Soul  mistook  the  rightful  Way: 

Whilst  the  soft  Breeze  of  Pleasure's  tempting  Air 

Made  her  believe,  Felicity  was  there ; 

And  basking  in  the  warmth  of  early  Time, 

To  vain  Ajnusements  dedicate  her  Prime. 

Ambition  next  allur'd  her  tow' ring  Eye ; 

For  Paradice  she  heard  was  plac'd  on  high, 

Then  thought,  the  Court  with  all  its  glorious  Show 

Was  sure  above  the  rest,  and  Paradice  below.  10 

There  plac'd  too  soon  the  flaming  Sword  appear'd 

Remov'd  those  Pow'rs,  whom  justly  she  rever'd, 


14  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Adher'd  too  in  their  Wreck,  and  in  their  Ruin  shar'd. 

Now  by  the  Wheels  inevitable  Round, 

With  them  thrown  prostrate  to  the  humble  Ground, 

No  more  she  takes  (instructed  by  that  Pall) 

For  fix'd,  or  worth  her  thought,  this  rolling  Ball: 

Tow'rds  a  more  certain  Station  she  aspires. 

Unshaken  by  Revolts,  and  owns  no  less  Desires. 

But  all  in  vain  are  Pray'rs,  extatick  Thoughts,  20 

Recover^  Moments,  and  retracted  Faults, 

Retirement,  which  the  World  Moroseness  calls, 

Abandon'd  Pleasures  in  Monastick  Walls: 

These,  but  at  distance,  towards  that  purpose  tend, 

The  lowly  Means  to  an  exalted  End; 

Which  He  must  perfect,  who  allots  her  Stay, 

And  That,  accomplished,  will  direct  the  way. 

Pity  her  restless  Cares,  and  weary  Strife, 

And  point  some  Issue  to  escaping  Life ; 

Which  so  dismissed,  no  Pen  or  Human  Speech  30 

Th'  ineffable  Recess  can  ever  teach: 

Th'  Expanse,  the  Light,  the  Harmony,  the  Throng, 

The  Bride's  Attendance,  and  the  Bridal  Song, 

The  numerous  Mayions,  and  th'  immortal  Tree, 

No  Eye,  unpurg'd  by  Death,  must  ever  see, 

Or  Waves  which  through  that  wond'rous  City  roll. 

Rest  then  content,  my  too  impatient  Soul ; 

Observe  but  here  the  easie  Precepts  given. 

Then  wait  with  chearful  hope,  till  Heaven  be  known  in  Heaven. 

ON  MYSELFE 

Good  Heav'n,  I  thank  thee,  since  it  was  design'd 
I  shou'd  be  fram'd,  but  of  the  weaker  kinde. 
That  yet,  my  Soul,  is  rescu'd  from  the  Love 
Of  all  those  Trifles,  which  their  Passions  move. 
Pleasures,  and  Praise,  and  Plenty  haue  with  me 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  15 

But  their  just  value.     If  allow'd  they  be, 

Freely,  and  thankfully  as  much  I  tast. 

As  will  not  reason,  or  Religion  wast. 

If  they're  deny'd,  I  on  my  selfe  can  Line, 

And  slight  those  aids,  unequal  chance  does  give. 

When  in  the  Sun,  my  wings  can  be  displayed, 

And  in  retirement,  I  can  bless  the  shade. 

ABDELIA  TO  MELANCHOLY 

At  last,  my  old  inveterate  foe. 

No  opposition  shalt  thou  know. 

Since  I  by  struggling,  can  obtain 

Nothing,  but  encrease  of  pain, 

I  will  att  last,  no  more  do  soe, 

Tho'  I  confesse,  I  have  apply'd 

Sweet  mirth,  and  musick,  and  have  try'd 

A  thousand  other  arts  beside. 

To  drive  thee  from  my  darkened  breast. 

Thou,  who  hast  banish'd  all  my  rest  10 

But,  though  sometimes,  a  short  repreive  they  gave. 

Unable  they,  and  far  too  weak,  to  save ; 

All  arts  to  quell,  did  but  augment  thy  force, 

As  rivers  check' d,  break  with  a  wilder  course. 

Freindship,  I  to  my  heart  have  laid, 

Freindship,  th'  applauded  sov'rain  aid, 

And  thought  that  charm  so  strong  wou'd  prove. 

As  to  compell  thee,  to  remove ; 

And  to  myself,  I  boasting  said. 

Now  I  a  conqu'rer  sure  shall  be,  20 

The  end  of  all  my  conflicts,  see. 

And  noble  tryumph,  wait  on  me ; 

My  dusky,  sullen  foe,  will  sure 

N'er  this  united  charge  endure. 


16  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Bnt  leaning  on  this  reed,  ev'n  whilst  I  spoke 
It  peiic^d  my  hand,  and  into  peices  broke. 
Still,  some  new  object,  or  new  interest  came 
And  loosM  the  bonds,  and  qnite  disolvM  the  claim. 

These  failing,  I  invoVd  a  Muse, 

And  Poetry  wou'd  often  use,  30 

To  guard  me  from  thy  Tyrant  pow'r; 

And  to  oppose  thee  ev'ry  hour 

New  troops  of  fancy's,  did  I  chuse. 

AlasI  in  vain,  for  all  agree 

To  yeild  me  Captive  up  to  thee. 

And  heav'n,  alone,  can  sett  me  free. 

Thou,  through  my  life,  wilt  with  me  goe, 

And  make  y*  passage,  sad,  and  slow. 

All,  that  cou'd  ere  thy  ill  gott  rule,  invade, 

Their  uselesse  arms,  before  thy  feet  have  laid;     40 

The  Port  is  thine,  now  ruin'd,  all  within. 

Whilst  by  decays  without,  thy  Conquest  too,  is  seen. 

AN  INVOCATION  TO  SLEEP 

How  shall  I  wooe  thee  gentle  rest. 
To  a  sad  Mind,  with  cares  opress'd? 
By  what  soft  means,  shall  I  invite 
Thy  Pow'rs  into  my  Soul  to  night? 
Yett,  Gentle  sleep,  if  thou  wilt  come, 
Such  darknesse  shall  prepare  the  Room, 
As  thy  own  Pallace  ouerspreads, 
(Thy  Pallace,  stor'd  with  peacefuU  Beds) 
And  Silence  too,  shall  on  thee  waite 
Deep,  as  in  the  Turkish  State ;  10 

Whilst,  still  as  Death,  I  will  be  found. 
My  arms,  by  one  another  bound; 
And  my  dull  lidds,  so  clos'd  shall  be 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  17 

As  if  allready  seaPd  by  thee. 

Thns,  lUl  dispose  the  outward  part, 

Wou'd  I  cou'd  quiet  too  my  Heart. 

But,  in  its  overburthenM  stead 

Behold  I  oflFer  thee,  my  head; 

My  head,  I  better  can  comand, 

And  that,  I  bow  beneath  thy  hand;  20 

Nor  do  I  think,  that  heretofore 

Our  first  great  Father,  gaue  thee  more, 

When,  on  a  flow'ry  bank,  he  lay. 

And  did  thy  strictest  Laws  obey: 

For,  to  compose  his  louely  Bride, 

He  yielded  not  alone  his  side, 

But,  if  we  judge  by  the  event. 

Half  of  his  heart  too,  with  itt  went. 

Which,  wakenM  drew  him  soon  away 

To  Eve's  fair  bosome,  where  itt  lay,  30 

PleasM  to  admitt  his  rightfuU  claim 

And  tending,  still,  towards  whence  itt  came. 

Then,  gentle  sleep,  expect  from  mee 

No  more  then  I  haue  proflFer'd  thee; 

For,  if  thou  wilt  not  hear  my  Pray'rs, 

Till  I  haue  vanquish'd  all  my  cares, 

Thou  'lit  stay,  'till  kinder  Death  supplys  thy  place, 

The  surer  Friend,  tho'  with  the  harsher  face. 

THE  LOSSE 

She  sighd',  but  soon,  itt  mix'd  with  comon  air, 
Too  fleet  a  witnesse,  for  her  deep  dispair; 
She  wept,  but  tears,  no  lasting  greif  can  show, 
For  tears  will  fail,  and  ebb,  as  well  as  flow. 
She  wou'd  her  tongue,  to  the  sad  subject  force. 
But  all  great  passions,  are  above  discourse. 
Thy  heart  alone,  Ardelia,  with  itt  trust, 


18  The  Poems  of  Anne 

There  grave  itt  deep,  alas  I  'twill  fall  to  dust, 

Yrania  is  no  more,  to  me  no  more, 

All  these  combined,  can  n'er  that  losse  deplore. 

THE  CONSOLATION 

See,  Phoebus  breaking  from  the  willing  skies, 
See,  how  the  soaring  Lark,  does  with  him  rise, 
And  through  the  air,  is  such  a  joumy  borne 
As  if  she  never  thought  of  a  return. 
Now,  to  his  noon,  behold  him  proudly  goe. 
And  look  with  scorn,  on  all  that's  great  below. 
A  Monark  he,  and  ruler  of  the  day, 
A  fav'rite  She,  that  in  his  beams  does  play. 
Glorious,  and  high,  but  shall  they  ever  bee. 
Glorious,  and  high,  and  fixt  where  now  we  see? 
No,  both  must  fall,  nor  can  their  stations  keep, 
She  to  the  Earth,  and  he  below  the  Deep, 
At  night  both  fall,  but  the  swift  hand  of  time 
Renews  the  morning,  and  again  they  climb. 
Then  lett  no  cloudy  change,  create  my  sorrow, 
I'll  think  'tis  night,  and  I  may  rise  to-morrow. 

A  SONG  ON  GREIFE 
Sett  by  Mr,  Eattvick 
Oh  greif !  why  hast  thou  so  much  pow'r. 

Why  doe  the  ruling  Fates  decree 
No  state  shou'd  e're  without  the[ej  be. 

Why,  doest  thou  Joys,  and  hopes  devour. 
And  cloath  ev'n  loue  him  self,  in  thy  dark  livery? 

Thou,  and  cold  fear,  thy  close  Allie, 

Do  not  alone  on  life  attend, 
Butt  following  mortalls  to  their  end, 

Do  wrack  the  wretches,  whilst  they  dye ; 
And  to  eternal  shades,  too  often,  with  them  flye. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  19 

To  thee,  great  Monark,  I  submitt, 
Thy  Sables,  and  thy  Cypresse  bring, 

I  own  thy  Pow'r,  I  own  thee  King, 
Thy  title,  in  my  heart  is  writt, 

And  'till  that  breaks,  I  ne'r  shall  freedom  gett. 

Porc'd  smiles,  thy  rigour  will  allow. 
And  whilst  thy  seat  is  in  the  sonl. 
And  there,  all  mirth  thou  doest  controul, 
Thou  can'st  admitt  to  outward  show, 
The  smooth  appearance,  and  disembl'd  brow. 

ON  AFF[L]ICTION 

Wellcome,  what  e're  my  tender  flesh  may  say, 
Welcome  auction,  to  my  reason,  still ; 

Though  hard,  and  ruged  on  that  rock  I  lay 
A  sure  foundation,  which  if  raised  with  skill, 
Shall  compasse  BabePs  aim,  and  reach  th'  Almighty's  hill. 

Wellcome  the  rod,  that  does  adoption  shew, 

The  cup,  whose  wholsome  dregs  are  giv'n  me  here ; 

There  is  a  day  behind,  if  God  be  true, 

When  all  these  Clouds  shall  passe,  &  heav'n  be  clear. 
When  those  whom  most  they  shade,  shall  shine  most  glo- 
rious there. 

Affliction  is  the  line,  which  every  Saint 
Is  measured  by,  his  stature  taken  right ; 

So  much  itt  shrinks,  as  they  repine  or  faint, 
But  if  their  faith  and  Courage  stand  upright, 
By  that  is  made  the  Crown,  and  the  full  robe  of  light 

A  LETTER  TO  DAFNIS  APRIL:  2d  1685 

This  to  the  Crown,  and  blessing  of  my  life. 
The  much  lov'd  husband,  of  a  happy  wife. 
To  him,  whose  constant  passion  found  the  art 


20  The  Poems  of  Anne 

To  win  a  stubborn,  and  nngratefuU  heart; 

And  to  the  World,  by  tend'rest  proof  discovers 

They  err,  who  say  that  husbands  can't  be  lovers. 

With  such  return  of  passion,  as  is  due, 

Daphnis  I  love,  Daphnis  my  thoughts  persue, 

Daphnis,  my  hopes,  my  joys,  are  bounded  all  in  you: 

Ev'n  I,  for  Daphnis,  and  my  promise  sake. 

What  I  in  women  censure,  undertake. 

But  this  from  love,  not  vanity,  proceeds; 

You  know  who  writes ;  and  I  who  'tis  that  reads. 

Judge  not  my  passion,  by  my  want  of  skill. 

Many  love  well,  though  they  express  itt  ill; 

And  I  your  censure  cou'd  with  pleasure  becu*, 

Wou'd  you  but  soon  return,  and  speak  itt  here. 

TO  MR.  F.  NOW  EABL  OF  W. 

Who  going  abroad^  had  desired  Ardelia  to  write  some  Verses  upon 
whatever  Subject  she  thought  flt^  against  his  Eetum  in  the 
Evening 

Written  in  the  Year  1689 

No  sooner,  Flavio,  was  you  gone, 
But,  your  Injunction  thought  upon, 

Abdelia  took  the  Pen ; 
Designing  to  perform  the  Task, 
Her  Flavio  did  so  kindly  ask, 

Ere  he  returned  agen. 

Unto  Parmassus  strait  she  sent. 
And  bid  the  Messenger,  that  went 

Unto  the  Muses  Court, 
Assure  them,  she  their  Aid  did  need,  10 

And  begg'd  they'd  use  their  utmost  Speed, 

Because  the  Time  was  short. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  21 

The  hasty  Summons  was  allowM ; 

And  being  well-bred,  they  rose  and  bow'd, 

And  said,  theyM  poste  away ; 
That  well  they  did  Abdelia  know, 
And  that  no  Female's  Voice  below 

They  sooner  wou'd  obey: 

That  many  of  that  rhiming  Train, 

On  like  Occasions,  sought  in  vain  20 

Their  Industry  t'excite; 
But  for  Abdelia  all  they'd  leave: 
Thus  flatt'ring  can  the  Muse  deceive, 

And  wheedle  us  to  write. 

Yet,  since  there  was  such  haste  requir'd; 
To  know  the  Subject  'twas  desir'd. 

On  which  they  must  infuse ; 
That  they  might  temper  Words  and  Rules, 
And  with  their  Counsel  carry  Tools, 

As  Country-Doctors  use.  30 

Wherefore  to  cut  off  all  Delays, 

'Twas  soon  reply'd,  a  HusbandCa  Praise 

(Tho'  in  these  looser  Times) 
Abdelia  gladly  wou'd  rehearse 
A  HtifibancPs,  who  indulg'd  her  Verse, 

And  now  requir'd  her  Rimes. 

A  Husband!  eccho'd  all  around: 
And  to  Parnassus  sure  that  Sound 

Had  never  yet  been  sent ; 
Amazement  in  each  Face  was  read,  40 

In  haste  th'  affrighted  Sisters  fled, 

And  unto  Council  went. 


22  Thb  Poehs  of  Annb 

Erato  cry'd,  since  GhrizeTs  Days, 

Since  IVot^-Town  pleased,  and  Chivey-chacey 

No  such  Design  was  known ; 
And  Hwas  their  Business  to  take  care, 
It  reached  not  to  the  publick  Ear, 

Or  got  about  the  Town: 

Nor  came  where  Evening  Beatix  were  met 

O'er  Billet-doux  and  Chocolate^  50 

Lest  it  destroy'd  the  House ; 
For  in  that  Place,  who  cou'd  dispence 
(That  wore  his  Cloaths  with  common  Sense) 

With  mention  of  a  Spotcsef 

'Twas  put  unto  the  Vote  at  last. 
And  in  the  Negative  it  past, 

None  to  her  Aid  shou'd  move; 
Yet  since  Abdelia  was  a  Friend, 
Excuses  'twas  agreed  to  send. 

Which  plausible  might  prove:  60 

That  Pegasus  of  late  had  been 
So  often  rid  thro'  thick  and  thin, 

With  neither  Fear  nor  Wit; 
In  Panegyrick  been  so  spurr'd. 
He  cou'd  not  from  the  Stall  be  stirr'd,     . 

Nor  wou'd  endure  the  Bit. 

Melpomene  had  given  a  Bond, 
By  the  new  House  alone  to  stand. 

And  write  of  War  and  Strife; 
Thalia,  she  had  taken  Fees,  70 

And  Stipends  from  the  Patentees, 

And  durst  not  for  her  Life. 


COUNTBSS   OF   WiNOHILSEA  23 

Urania  only  lik'd  the  Choice ; 

Yet  not  to  thwart  the  publick  Voice, 

She  whisp'ring  did  impart: 
They  need  no  Foreign  Aid  invoke, 
No  help  to  draw  a  moving  Stroke, 

Who  dictate  from  the  Heart. 

Enough !  the  pleased  Ardelia  cry'd ; 

And  slighting  ev'ry  Muse  beside,  80 

Consulting  now  her  Breast, 
Perceiv'd  that  ev'ry  tender  Thought, 
Which  from  abroad  she'd  vainly  sought. 

Did  there  in  Silence  rest: 

And  shou'd  unmov'd  that  Post  maintain. 
Till  in  his  quick  Return  again. 

Met  in  some  neighboring  Grove, 
(Where  Vice  nor  Vanity  appear) 
Her  Flavio  them  alone  might  hear, 

In  all  the  Sounds  of  Love.  90 

For  since  the  World  do's  so  despise 
Hymen^s  Endearments  and  its  Ties, 

They  shou'd  mysterious  be ; 
Till  We  that  Pleasure  too  possess 
(Which  makes  their  fancy'd  Happiness) 

Of  stoUen  Secrecy. 

A  LETTER  TO  THE  SAME  PERSON 

Sure  of  Success,  to  You  I  boldly  write 
Whilst  Love  do's  ev'ry  tender  Line  endite ; 
Love,  who  is  justly  President  of  Verse, 
Which  all  his  Servants  write,  or  else  rehearse. 
Phoebus  (howe'er  mistaken  Poets  dream) 


24  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

Ne'er  ns'd  a  Verse,  till  Love  became  his  Theme. 

To  his  stray'd  Son,  still  as  his  Passion  rose. 

He  rais'd  his  hasty  Voice  in  clamorous  Prose: 

But  when  in  Daphne  he  wou'd  Love  inspire. 

He  woo'd  in  Verse,  set  to  his  silver  Lyre.  10 

The  Trojan  Prince  did  pow'rful  Numbers  join 
To  sing  of  War;  but  Love  was  the  Design: 
And  sleeping  Troy  again  in  Flames  was  drest. 
To  light  the  Fires  in  pitying  Didoes  Breast 

Love  without  Poetry's  refining  Aid 
Is  a  dull  Bargain,  and  but  coarsely  made; 
Nor  e'er  cou'd  Poetry  successful  prove, 
Or  touch  the  Soul,  but  when  the  Sense  was  Love. 

Oh!  cou'd  they  both  in  Absence  now  impart 
Skill  to  my  Hand,  but  to  describe  my  Heart;  20 

Then  shou'd  you  see  impatient  of  your  Stay 
Soft  Hopes  contend  with  Fears  of  sad  Delay; 
Love  in  a  thousand  fond  Endearments  there. 
And  lively  Images  of  You  appear. 
But  since  the  Thoughts  of  a  Poetick  Mind 
Will  never  be  to  Syllables  confin'd; 
And  whilst  to  fix  what  is  conceiv'd,  we  try. 
The  purer  Parts  evaporate  and  dye: 
You  must  perform  what  they  want  force  to  do. 
And  think  what  your  Abdelia  thinks  of  you.  30 

October  21, 1690. 

UPON  ARDELIA'S  RETURN  HOME 

{After  tc{o']  long  a  walk  in  Eastwell  Park)  in  a  water  cart  driven 
by  one  of  the  under-keepera  in  his  green  Coat,  with  a  Hazel- 
Bough  for  a  whip,    July,  1689 

What  Fate  within  itts  Bosome  carry's 

For  Him  thats  bom,  or  Him  that  Marry's 

Though  Fate  itts  self  does  not  unfold 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  25 

Is  by  Prognosticaters  told, 

And  some  have  spent  their  Days  in  terrour 

Of  what  has  sprung  from  canting  errour 

From  Gypsies  who  their  speech  confounding 

Have  threaten'd  Hanging,  Horn  or  Drowning 

In  hints  where  doubtful!  sence  has  hover'd 

Which  caus'd  but  laughter  when  discover'd,  10 

So  had  Ardelia  sure  been  troubl'd 
If  when  of  piece  of  silver  bubl'd 
T  had  been  in  broaken  terms  imparted 
That  e're  her  Death  she  shou'd  be  Carted. 
Yett  see  how  Time  had  tum'd  the  Story 
And  tun'd  itt  to  Poetick  Glory 
When  once  reveal'd  that  Phoebus  gave  itt 
And  own'd  the  Cart  and  Swayne  that  drave  itt 
In  his  peculiar  colours  seen 

Both  whip  and  man  array'd  in  Green  20 

That  Hwas  the  Engin  that  did  bring 
The  water  from  his  darling  spring 
Which  for  repose  was  now  convey'd 
Beneath  a  Beeche^s  secret  shade. 
When  poor  Ardelia  weak  and  faint 
Invades  the  air  with  this  complaint 
That  she  from  Home  so  far  had  stray'd 
By  the  aluring  Muse  betray'd 
By  Fancies  light  of  Nymphs  and  Faries 
Bomantick  Notions  and  figary^s  80 

Of  Fawns  and  Sylvans  dark  abodes 
Of  Heroes  rushing  from  the  woods 
Till  length  of  way  no  strength  had  left  her 
And  both  of  feet  and  breath  bereft  her 
Who  now  must  take  for  Bed  and  Cover 
Cold  earth  and  boughs  which  dangPd  over 
Nor  cou'd  return  in  sheets  to  slumber 


26  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

No  more  then  she  the  stars  con'd  number, 

Yett  loth  this  wretched  coarse  to  follow 

For  once  resolv'd  to  move  Apollo.  40 

Misled  by  Him  and  his  vain  Babble, 

To  try  his  Curtesie  and  Stable 

She  then  implored  that  for  this  time 

And  to  be  sure  she  sue'd  in  Rime 

That  he  his  Chariot  wou'd  but  spare  her 

Which  in  a  moment  home  might  bear  her 

Scarse  missed  by  him  or  his  nine  lasses. 

But  he  reply'd  she'd  break  the  Glasses, 

That  late  he  saw  such  Fate  attend  her 

And  vow'd  that  his  he  n'ere  wou'd  lend  her  50 

That  fitter  'twere  she  took  the  air 

Like  Country  Doll  to  neighb'ring  Faire 

Like  harvest  Gill  or  stroling  Player 

For  he'd  not  bear  the  World's  reproaches 

If  Poets  were  allow'd  their  Coaches 

Who  spar'd  on  foot  (with  empty  Purses) 

Nor  Prince  nor  Prelat  in  their  verses 

That  Homer  poor  his  spite  to  smother 

Made  fighting  Fooles  revile  each  other 

Who  had  he  but  been  back'd  with  Pelf  60 

He  had  call'd  Dogs  and  Bogues  himself 

Lampoon'd  Queen  Hellens  well  sung  Flame 

And  giv'n  Her  but  her  coarsest  Name 

For  which  good  cause  and  more  'twas  hinted 

The  Tribe  shou'd  be  kept  bare  and  stinted 

Shou'd  eat  by  manners  and  good  Nature 

Or  starve  on  Epigram  and  Satir. 

She  finding  him  thus  hott  proceed 

Desir'd  then  but  his  winged  steed 

But  he  reply'd  'twou'd  much  disgrace  him  70 

To  lett  a  female  rider  pace  him 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  27 

That  Pegasus,  what  e're  they  fancy'd 

Had  ne'^re  for  them  one  step  adiianced 

Yett  if  that  she  like  Quaker  tir^d 

But  a  conveniency  desir'd 

There  shou'd  from  neer  a  verdant  bush 

With  foot  cloath  matt  and  seat  of  rush 

Be  drawn  a  rev'rend  grave  Machine 

As  slow  as  if  for  Spanish  Queen 

As  safe  as  Litter  gently  led  80 

With  Lady  sleeping  in  her  bed 

And  tho^  the  form  some  might  dispise 

Who  view'd  itt  but  with  outward  Eyes 

Yett  Quixotts  Brancart  till  he  built  itt 

A  Velvett  roof  and  richly  gilt  itt 

With  Fancy's  Pencil  was  not  braver 

And  with  th'invention  which  he  gave  her 

She  might  convert  wou'd  she  not  spare  itt 

This  Roulo  to  tryumphant  Charret 

Turn  wood  to  steel  and  ropes  to  Leather  90 

And  forehead  bough  to  Ostritch  Feather 

Since  all  wfis  as  opinion  made  itt 

Not  as  the  Artists  hand  ore-laid  itt. 

This  said,  he  mixt  with  shining  Day 

And  left  her  to  persue  the  way 

Exalted  high  to  all  beholders 

As  Burgesse  on  ellecting  shoulders 

On  totterring  chair  in  Tumbrill's  middle 

And  wanting  but  fore-running  Fiddle 

To  guide  the  wond'ring  Rabble  right  100 

And  pick  their  Purses  for  the  sight. 


28  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 


AN  INVITATION  TO  DAFNIS 

To  leave  his  study  and  usual  Employments^  —  Mathematicks 
PaintingSj  etc.  and  to  take  the  Pleasures  of  the  feilds  with 
Ardelia 

When  such  a  day,  blesst  the  Arcadian  plaine, 
Warm  without  Sun,  and  shady  without  rain. 
Fanned  by  an  air,  that  scarsly  bent  the  flowers. 
Or  wav'd  the  woodbines,  on  the  summer  bowers. 
The  Nymphs  disordered  beauty  cou'd  not  fear. 
Nor  ruffling  winds  uncurPd  the  Shephecuxls  hair, 
On  the  fresh  grasse,  they  trod  their  measures  light, 
And  a  long  Evening  made,  from  noon,  to  night 
Come  then  my  Dafnis,  from  those  cares  descend 
Which  better  may  the  winter  season  spend.  10 

Come,  and  the  pleasures  of  the  feilds,  survey. 
And  throo'  the  groves,  with  your  Ardelia  stray. 

Beading  the  softest  Poetry,  refuse. 

To  veiw  the  subjects  of  each  rural  muse; 

Nor  lett  the  busy  compasses  go  round. 

When  faery  Cercles  better  mark  the  ground. 

Rich  Colours  on  the  Vellum  cease  to  lay. 

When  ev'ry  lawne  much  nobler  can  display. 

When  on  the  daz'ling  poppy  may  be  seen 

A  glowing  red,  exceeding  your  carmine;  20 

And  for  the  blew  that  o're  the  Sea  is  borne, 

A  brighter  rises  in  our  standing  com. 

Come  then,  my  Dafnis,  and  the  feilds  survey, 
And  throo'  the  groves,  with  your  Ardelia  stray. 

Come,  and  lett  Sansons  World,  no  more  engage, 
Altho'  he  gives  a  Kingdom  in  a  page ; 
O're  all  the  Vniverse  his  lines  may  goe, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  29 

And  not  a  clime,  like  temperate  brittan  show, 
Come  then,  my  Dafnis,  and  her  feilds  survey, 
And  throo'  the  groves,  with  your  Ardelia  stray.      30 

Nor  plead  that  you're  immur'd,  and  cannot  yield, 

That  mighty  Bastions  keep  you  from  the  feild. 

Think  not  tho'  lodged  in  Mons,  or  in  Namur, 

You're  from  my  dangerous  attacks  secure. 

No,  Louis  shall  his  falling  Conquests  fear. 

When  by  succeeding  Courriers  he  shall  hear 

Appollo,  and  the  Muses,  are  drawn  down, 

To  storm  each  fort,  and  take  in  ev'ry  Town. 

Vauban,  the  Orphean  Lyre,  to  mind  shall  call, 

That  drew  the  stones  to  the  old  Theban  Wall,  40 

And  make  no  doubt,  if  itt  against  him  play. 

They,  from  his  works,  will  fly  as  fast  away. 

Which  to  prevent,  he  shall  to  peace  persuade. 

Of  strong,  confederate  Syllables,  affraid. 

Come  then,  my  Dafnis,  and  the  fields  survey. 
And  throo'  the  Groves,  with  your  Ardelia  stray. 

Come,  and  attend,  how  as  we  walk  along. 

Each  chearfull  bird,  shall  treat  us  with  a  song, 

Nott  such  as  Fopps  compose,  where  witt,  nor  art. 

Nor  plainer  Nature,  ever  bear  a  part;  50 

The  Cristall  springs,  shall  murmure  as  we  passe. 

But  not  like  Courtiers,  sinking  to  disgrace; 

Nor,  shall  the  louder  Rivers,  in  their  fall. 

Like  unpaid  Saylers,  or  hoarse  Pleaders  brawle ; 

But  all  shall  form  a  concert  to  delight. 

And  all  to  peace,  and  all  to  love  envite. 

Come  then,  my  Dafnis,  and  the  feilds  survey. 
And  throo'  the  Groves,  with  your  Ardelia  stray. 


90  Ths  Pokxs  of  Awarm 

A»  Baucis  and  'PhSemaik  spent  their  fireo, 
Of  hasbaiids  he,  the  happjest  she,  of  wiTes,  60 

When  throo'  the  paiiited  meads,  their  waj  thej  sought, 
Harmlesse  in  act,  and  nnperplext  in  thought, 
Lett  us  mj  Dafnis,  rural  jojs  peisue. 
And  Courts,  or  Camps,  not  er'n  in  fmin^  view. 
So,  lett  us  throo'  the  Grrores,  mj  Dafnis  straj. 
And  so,  the  pleasures  of  the  feilds,  surrey. 


THE  GOUTE  AND  SPIDEB 

A  Fable 

Imitated  from  Mon*^.  de  la  Fontaine  And  Inscribed  to  Mr.  Finch 
After  hie  first  Fitt  of  thai  Distemper 

When  from  th'  Infernal  pitt  two  Furies  rose 

One  foe  to  Flies  and  one  to  Mans  repose 

Seeking  aboue  to  find  a  place  secure 

Since  Hell  the  Goute  nor  Spider  oou^d  indure 

On  a  rich  Pallace  at  the  first  they  light 

Where  pleased  Arachne  dazzPd  with  the  sight 

In  a  conspiccuous  comer  of  a  Room 

The  hanging  Frett  work  makes  her  active  Looul 

From  leaf  to  leaf  with  every  line  does  trace, 

Admires  the  strange  convenience  of  the  place  10 

Nor  can  beliene  those  Cealings  e're  were  made 

To  other  end  than  to  promote  her  Trade 

Where  prou'd  and  prosper'd  in  her  finished  work 

The  hungry  Fiend  does  in  close  Ambush  lurk 

Untill  some  silly  Insect  shall  repay 

What  from  her  Bowells  she  has  spun  that  day. 

The  wiser  Gout  (for  that's  a  thinking  ill) 

Observing  how  the  splended  chambers  fill 

With  visitors  such  as  abound  below 

Who  from  Hypocrates  and  Gallen  grow  20 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  31 

To  some  unwealthy  shed  resolues  to  fly 
And  there  obscure  and  unmolested  lye 
But  see  how  eithers  project  quickly  fails 
The  Clown  his  new  tormentor  with  him  trayles 
Through  miry  ways  rough  Woods  and  f urrow'd  Lands 
Ne're  cutts  the  Shooe  nor  propp'd  on  Crutches  stands 
With  Phoebus  rising  stays  with  Cynthia  out 
Allows  no  respitt  to  the  harrass'd  Gout. 

Whilst  with  extended  Broom  th'  unpittying  Maid 
Does  the  transparent  Laberynth  invade  30 

Back  stroke  and  fore  the  battering  Engin  went 
Broke  euery  Cord  and  quite  unhinged  the  Tent 
No  truce  the  tall  Virago  e're  admitts 
Contracted  and  abash'd  Arachne'  sitts 
Then  in  conuenient  Time  the  Work  renews 
The  battering  Ram  again  the  work  persuea 
What's  to  be  done?     The  Gout  and  Spider  meet, 
Exchange,  the  Cottage  this;  That  takes  the  feet 
Of  the  rich  Abbott  who  that  Pallace  kept 
And  'till  that  time  in  Velvet  Curtains  slept  40 

Now  Colwort  leaues  and  Cataplasms  (thO  vain) 
Are  hourly  order'd  by  that  griping  traine. 
Who  blush  not  to  Prescribe  t'exhaust  our  Gold 
For  aches  which  incurable  they  hold 
Whil'st  stroak'd  and  fixt  the  pamper'd  Gout  remains 
And  in  an  easy  Chair  euer  the  Preist  detaina 

In  a  thatched  Roof  secure  the  Spider  thrives, 
Both  mending  by  due  place  their  hated  lines. 
From  whose  succeeding  may  this  moral  grow 
That  each  his  propper  Station  learn  to  know.  50 

For  You  my  Dear  whom  late  that  pain  did  seize, 
Not  rich  enough  to  sooth  the  bad  disease 
By  large  expences  to  engage  his  stay 


32  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

Nor  yett  so  poor  to  fright  the  Gout  away 

May  you  but  some  unfrequent  Visits  find 

To  prove  you  patient,  your  Ardelia  kind 

Who  by  a  tender  and  officious  care 

Will  ease  that  Grief  or  her  proportion  bear 

Since  Heaven  does  in  the  Nuptial  state  admitt 

Such  cares  but  new  endearments  to  begett  60 

And  to  allay  the  hard  fatigues  of  life 

Gaue  the  first  Maid  a  Husband,  Him  a  Wife. 

UPON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  RIGHT  HONORABLE  WIL- 
LIAM LORD  MAIDSTON 

Who  wa8  a  Volunteers  in  the  Sol-bay  Fight  and  kilVd  by  a  Ran- 
dom ahott,  after  the  fight  vxia  over  and  the  Fleets  parted. 
On  May  28thy  1672 

Fate  'till  the  Day  was  ours,  wou'd  not  dispense 
With  Maidston's  aid,  for  Brittan's  strong  defence: 
But  then,  least  Pride,  might  by  successe  prevaile. 
Threw  in  His  losse,  to  poize  th'  unequal  skale; 
Giving  us  Sway ;  the  Dutch  a  cause  to  boast 
They'd  kill'd  one  man,  excelling  all  they  lossi 

FROM  THE  MUSES,  AT  PARNASSUS 
(a  hill  80  calVd  in  Eastwell  Park)  to  the  Right  Hon^  y*  Ldy  : 
Maidston  on  my  Lord  Winchilsea^a  Birth-day 

Wonder  not.  Madam,  that  the  Muses  pay 

Their  gratef uU  tribute,  on  this  happy  day ; 

And  in  loud  wishes,  all  their  force  employ. 

That  many  more,  like  this,  you  may  enjoy; 

Since  from  your  own  Parnassus,  they  receive 

Pleasure's,  which  theirs  in  Phocis,  never  gave ; 

And  own,  whilst  here  they  reach  the  height  of  blisse, 

Their  forked  hill,  was  but  a  type  of  this. 

See  where  they  come,  their  brows  with  lawrel  bound, 

And  hear  the  neighbouring  woods,  repeat  the  sound,  10 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  33 

Of  silver  harps,  and  voyces  that  proclame 

To  all  the  expecting  world,  his  growing  fame. 

Whom  you,  this  day,  presented  to  the  earth, 

Whilst  Heav'n  look'd  down,  and  smiPd,  upon  the  birth. 

Hark!  How  they  sing  the  Line  from  whence  he  springs. 

And  trace  his  blood,  until  itt  mix  with  Kings, 

That  Suffolks  soul,  reviv'd  in  him  is  seen. 

And  on  his  face,  the  beautys  of  his  Queen. 

The  air  of  youth,  such  as  Adonis  drest. 

When  Cytherea  lodg'd  him  on  her  brest;  20 

So  yong,  so  gay,  that  when  he  haunts  the  groves, 

The  crouded  shades,  are  throng'd  with  wondring  Loves, 

Who  think  him  bom,  protector  of  their  reign, 

And  boast  what  Conquests  now  they  shall  obtain. 

They  sing  him  Heir,  to  all  your  graces  bom, 

And  full  perfections  by  his  Father  worn. 

They  sing  him  Heir,  to  all  their  shades  and  bowers, 

And  plead  a  Title  to  him,  great  as  yours. 

Call  him  their  Son,  their  darling,  their  delight, 

And  dresse  his  thoughts  with  all  thaf  s  great,  and  bright ;  30 

Their  promis'd  Isack,  sent,  when  with  dispair. 

They  saw  witt  old,  and  hopelesse  of  an  heir. 

Li  him,  they  doubt  not,  their  lost  fame  to  raise. 

Who  has  out-grown  allready,  all  their  praise, 

And  is  above  what  e're  they  can  inspire. 

Leaving  you,  Madam,  nothing  to  desire. 

UPON  MY  LORD  WINCHILSEA'S  CONVERTING  THE 
MOUNT  IN  HIS  GARDEN  TO  A  TERRAS, 

And  other  AlteraiionSy  and  Improvements,  In  His  House,  Park, 

and  Gardens 

If  we  those  Gen'rous  Sons  deserv'dly  Praise 
Who  o're  their  Predecessours  Marble  raise. 
And  by  Inscriptions,  on  their  Deeds,  and  Name, 


34  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

To  late  Poeterity,  convey  their  Fame, 

What  with  more  Admiration,  shall  we  write, 

On  Him,  who  takes  their  Erroors  from  onr  sight  ? 

And  least  their  Judgments  be  in  question  brought, 

Bemoves  a  Mountain,  to  remove  a  fault  ? 

Which  long  had  stood  (though  threatnd  oft  in  vain). 

Concealing  all  the  beautys  of  the  Plaine.  10 

Heedlesse  when  Yong,  cautious  in  their  decline. 

None  gone  before  persu'd  the  vast  dessign. 

Till  ripen'd  Judgment,  joyn'd  with  Youthfull  Flame, 

At  last  but  Came,  and  Saw,  and  Overcame. 

And  as  old  Rome  refined  what  ere  was  rude, 

And  Civilized,  as  fast  as  she  subdued. 

So  lies  this  Hill,  hew'n  from  itts  rugged  height, 

Now  levell'd  to  a  Scene  of  smooth  delight. 

Where  on  a  Terras  of  itts  spoyles  we  walk, 

And  of  the  Task,  and  the  performer  talk;  20 

From  whose  unwearied  Genius  Men  expect 

All  that  can  farther  Pollish  or  Protect; 

To  see  a  sheltring  grove  the  Prospect  bound, 

Just  rising  from  the  same  proliffick  ground, 

Where  late  itt  stood,  the  Glory  of  the  Seat, 

BepellM  the  Winter  blasts,  and  skreen'd  the  Somer's  heat; 

So  praised,  so  lov'd,  that  when  untimely  Fate, 

Sadly  prescribed  itt  a  too  early  Date, 

The  heavy  tidings  cause  a  gen'ral  Grief, 

And  all  combine  to  bring  a  swift  relief.  30 

Some  Plead,  some  Pray,  some  Councel,  some  Dispute, 

Alas  in  vain,  where  Pow'r  is  Absolute. 

Those  whom  Paternal  Awe,  forbid  to  speak. 

Their  sorrows,  in  their  secret  whispers  break. 

Sigh  as  they  passe  beneath  the  sentenc'd  Trees, 

Which  seem  to  answer  in  a  mournfull  Breeze. 

The  very  Clowns  (hir'd  by  his  dayly  Pay), 


OOUNTBSS  OF   WiNOHILSEA  35 

Befuse  to  strike,  nor  will  their  Lord  obey, 

Till  to  his  speech  he  adds  a  leading  stroke, 

And  by  Example  does  their  Rage  provoke.  40 

Then  in  a  moment,  ev'ry  arm  is  rear'd. 

And  the  robVd  Palace  sees,  what  most  she  feared. 

Her  lofty  Grove,  her  ornamental  shield, 

Tum'd  to  a  Desert,  and  forsaken  Field 

So  fell  Persepolis,  bewail'd  of  all 

But  Him,  whose  rash  Resolve  procur'd  her  FalL 

No  longer  now,  we  such  Destructions  fear, 

No  longer  the  resounding  Axe  we  hear. 

But  in  Exchange,  behold  the  Fabrick  stand, 

Built,  and  Adom'd  by  a  supporting  hand;  60 

Compleat,  in  all  itts  late  unequall  Frame, 

No  Loame,  and  Lath,  does  now  the  Building  shame, 

But  gracefull  simetry,  without  is  seen. 

And  Use,  with  Beauty  are  improv'd  within. 

And  though  our  Ancestors  did  gravely  Plott, 

As  if  one  Element  they  vallu'd  nott. 

Nor  yet  the  pleasure  of  the  noblest  sence, 

Gainst  Light  and  Air  to  raise  a  strong  defense ; 

Their  wiser  Offspring  does  those  gifts  renew, 

And  now  we  Breath[e]  and  now  the  eager  View  60 

Through  the  enlarged  Windows  take[s]  her  way. 

Does  beauteous  Fields,  and  scatter'd  Woods  survey, 

Flyes  or^e  th'  extended  Land,  and  sinks  but  in  the  Sea. 

Or  when  contented  with  an  easyer  flight. 

The  new  wrought  Gardens,  give  a  new  delight. 

Where  ev'ry  iault,  that  in  the  Old  was  found. 

Is  mended,  in  the  well  disposed  Ground. 

Such  are  th'  Effects,  when  Wine,  nor  loose  delights. 

Devour  the  Day,  nor  waste  the  thoughtlesse  Nights, 

But  gen'rous  Arts,  the  studious  Hours  engage,  70 

To  blesse  the  present,  and  succeeding  Age. 


36  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Ob !  may  Eastwell,  still  with  their  aid  encrease, 

Plenty  snrroond  her,  and  within  be  peace. 

Still  may  her  template  Air  his  Health  maintain. 

From  whom  she  does  such  Strength  and  Beauty  gain. 

Florish  her  Trees,  and  may  the  Verdant  Grasse 

Again  prevail,  where  late  the  plough  did  passe, 

Still  may  she  boast  a  kind  and  fruitfull  soyle. 

And  still  new  pleasures  give  to  crown  his  Toyle, 

And  may  some  one,  with  Admiration  fiU'd,  80 

In  just  Applauses,  and  in  Numbers  skill'd, 

Not  with  more  Zeal,  but  more  poetick  heat. 

Throughly  Adorn,  what  barely  we  Relate. 

Then,  shou'd  th'  Elysian  Groves  no  more  be  Nam'd, 

Nor  Tempe's  Vale,  be  any  longer  Fam'd, 

She  should  the  Theame,  to  ev'ry  Verse  affoard. 

Until  the  Muse,  when  to  advantage  soar'd. 

Should  take  a  nobler  Aim,  and  dare  describe  her  Lord 


A  SONG 
For  my  Br,  Lea :  Finch,     Upon  a  Punch  Bowl 

From  the  Park,  and  the  Play, 

And  Whitehall  come  away, 
To  the  Punch-bowl,  by  far  more  inviting; 

To  the  Fopps,  and  the  Beauxs, 

Leaue  those  dull  empty  shows. 
And  see  here,  what  is  truly  delighting. 

The  half  Globe  'tis  in  figure ; 

And  wou'd  itt  were  bigger; 
Yett  here's  the  whole  Universe  floating. 

Here's  Titles  and  Places, 

Rich  lands,  and  fair  faces. 
And  all  that  is  worthy  our  doating. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  37 

'Twas  a  World,  like  to  this, 

The  hott  GraBcian  did  misse. 
Of  whom  History's  keep  such  a  pother, 

To  the  bottom  he  sunk. 

And  when  one  he  had  drunk 
Grew  maudlin,  and  wept  for  another. 


THE  BARGAIN 

A  Song  in  dialogue  between  Bacchus  and  Cupid 

Cupid 

Bacchus,  to  thee  that  tum'st  the  brain, 
And  doest  o're  mighty  punch  bowls  reign, 
Enthron'd  upon  thy  lusty  barrell, 
I  drink,  to  drown  the  ancient  quarrell; 
And  mortalls  shall  no  more  dispute 
Which  of  us  two,  is  absolute. 

Bacchus 

I  pledge  thee  Archer,  nor  disdain 

To  own  thou  over  hearts  doest  reign. 

But  tears  thou  drink'st,  drawn  from  low  courage, 

And  cooPd  with  sighs,  instead  of  burrage; 

Were  that  errour  once  ammended. 

All,  might  in  Champaine  be  ended. 

Cupid 

I  am  content,  so  we  may  joyn. 
To  mix  my  waters,  with  thy  wine ; 
Then  henceforth  farwell  all  defying. 
And  thus,  we'll  still  be  found  complying, 
He,  that's  in  love,  shall  fly  to  thee. 
And  he  thats  drunk,  shall  reel  to  mee. 


88  The  Poems  of  Anne 

TO  MY  SISTEB  OGLE,  DECBB  31,  I688 

When  dear  Teresa,  shall  I  be 
By  Heaven,  again  restor'd  to  you? 
Thus,  if  once  more  your  face  I  see, 
Thus,  our  lost  pleasures,  we'll  renew. 

Our  yesterday,  when  kindly  past, 
Shall  teatch  how  this  shou'd  be  enjoy'd. 
And  urge  to  morrows  eager  haste. 
As  longing,  to  be  thus  employed. 

Time,  shall  pay  back  the  years  and  hours, 
That  in  our  absence  posted  by ; 
Time,  shall  submitt  to  freindships  pow'rs, 
And  as  we  please,  shall  rest,  or  fly. 

The  sun,  that  stood  to  look  on  War, 
And  lengthened  out  that  fatal  day, 
For  kindnesse,  more  engaging  far, 
Will  longer  sure,  his  fall  delay. 

At  last,  when  Fate,  the  word  shall  give. 
That  we  no  longer,  here  below, 
This  soft,  endearing  life  shall  live. 
In  Tryumph  we'll  together  go. 

New  arts  to  find,  new  joys  to  try, 
The  height  of  freindship  to  improve; 
Tis'  worth  our  pains,  and  fears  to  dye; 
To  learn  new  misteries  of  Love. 

ARDELIA'S  ANSWER  TO  EPHELIA, 

who  had  invited  her  to  come  to  her  in  town  —  reflecting  on  the 

Coquetterie  and  detracting  humour  of  the  Age 

Me,  dear  Ephelia,  me,  in  vain  you  court 

With  all  your  pow'rfull  influence,  to  resort 

To  that  great  Town,  where  Freindship  can  but  have 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  39 

The  few  spare  honrs,  which  meaner  pleasures  leave. 

No!     Let  some  shade,  or  yonr  large  Pallace  be 

Our  place  of  meeting,  love,  and  liberty ; 

To  thoughts,  and  words,  and  all  endearments  free. 

But,  to  those  walls,  excuse  my  slow  repair; 

Who  have  no  businesse,  or  diversion  there ; 

No  dazzling  beauty,  to  attract  the  gaze  10 

Of  won'd'ring  crouds  to  my  applauded  face ; 

Nor  to  my  little  witt,  th'  ill  nature  joyn'd, 

To  passe  a  gen' rail  censure  on  mankind: 

To  call  the  yong,  and  unaffected,  fools; 

Dull  all  the  grave,  that  live  by  moral  rules; 

To  say  the  souldier  brags,  who  ask'd  declares 

The  nice  escapes  and  dangers  of  his  wars, 

The  Poet's  vain,  that  knows  his  unmatched  worth. 

And  dares  maintain  what  the  best  Muse  brings  forth: 

Tett,  this  the  humour  of  the  age  is  grown,  20 

And  only  conversation  of  the  Town. 

In  Satir  vers'd,  and  sharpe  detraction,  bee. 

And  you're  aocomplish'd,  for  all  company. 

II 

When  my  last  visit,  I  to  London  made. 
Me,  to  Almeria,  wretched  chance,  betray'd; 
The  fair  Almeria,  in  this  art  so  known, 
That  she  discerns  all  failings,  but  her  own. 
With  a  lowd  welcome,  and  a  strict  embrace. 
Kisses  on  kisses,  in  a  publick  place, 
Sh'  extorts  a  promise,  that  next  day  I  dine  30 

With  her,  who  for  my  sight,  did  hourly  pine ; 
And  wonders,  how  so  far  I  can  remove. 
Prom  the  beaux  monde,  and  the  dull  country  love; 
Yet  vows,  if  but  an  afternoon  'twoud  cost 
To  see  me  there,  she  cou'd  resolve  allmost 


40  The  Poems  of  Anne 

To  qnitt  the  Town,  and  for  that  time,  be  lost 
My  word  I  keep,  we  dine,  then  rising  late, 

Take  coach,  which  long  had  waited  at  the  gate. 

Abont  the  streets,  a  tedious  ramble  goe. 

To  see  this  Monster,  or  that  wax  work  show,  40 

Or  any  thing,  that  may  the  time  bestow. 

When  by  a  Church  we  passe,  I  ask  to  stay. 

Go  in,  and  my  devotions,  humbly  pay 

To  that  great  Pow'r,  whom  all  the  wise  obey. 

Whilst  the  gay  thing,  light  as  her  feather'd  dresse, 

Flys  round  the  Coach,  and  does  each  cusheon  presse, 

Through  ev'ry  glasse,  her  several  graces  shows. 

This,  does  her  face,  and  that,  her  shape  expose, 

To  envying  beautys,  and  admiring  beauxs. 

One  stops,  and  as  expected,  all  extolls,  50 

Clings  to  the  door,  and  on  his  elbow  lolls, 

Thrusts  in  his  head,  at  once  to  veiw  the  fair, 

And  keep  his  curls  from  discomposing  air, 

Then  thus  proceeds  — 

My  wonder  itt  is  grown 

To  find  Almeria  here,  and  here  alone. 

Where  are  the  Nymphs,  that  round  you  us'd  to  croud, 

Of  your  long  courted  approbation  proud, 

Learning  from  you,  how  to  erect  their  hair. 

And  in  perfection,  all  their  habitt  wear. 

To  place  a  patch,  in  some  peculiar  way,  60 

That  may  an  unmarked  smile,  to  sight  betray, 

And  the  vast  genius  of  the  Sex,  display? 
Pitty  me  then  (she  crys)  and  learn  the  fate 

That  makes  me  Porter  to  a  Temple  gate ; 

Ardelia  came  to  Town,  some  weeks  agoe, 

Who  does  on  books  her  rural  hours  bestow. 

And  is  so  rustick  in  her  cloaths  and  meen, 

'Tis  with  her  ungenteel  but  to  be  seen. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  41 

Did  not  a  long  acquaintance  plead  excnse ; 

Besides,  she  likes  no  witt,  thats  now  in  use,  70 

Dispises  Courtly  Vice,  and  plainly  sais, 

That  sence  and  Nature  shou'd  be  found  in  Plays, 

And  therefore,  none  will  'ere  be  brought  to  see 

But  those  of  Dryden,  Etheridge,  or  Lee, 

And  some  few  Authors,  old,  and  dull  to  me. 

To  her  I  did  engage  my  coach  and  day. 

And  here  must  wait,  while  she  within  does  pray. 

Ere  twelve  was  struck,  she  calls  me  from  my  bed, 

Nor  once  observes  how  well  my  toilett's  spread ; 

Then,  drinks  the  fragrant  tea  contented  up,  80 

Without  a  complement  upon  the  cup, 

Tho'  to  the  ships,  for  the  first  choice  I  stear'd. 

Through  such  a  storm,  as  the  stout  bargemen  f ear'd ; 

Least  that  a  praise,  which  I  have  long  engrossed 

Of  the  best  china  Equipage,  be  lost. 

Of  fashions  now,  and  colours  I  discours'd, 

Detected  shops  that  wou'd  expose  the  worst. 

What  silks,  what  lace,  what  rubans  she  must  have. 

And  by  my  own,  an  ample  pattern  gave ; 

To  which,  she  cold,  and  unconcem'd  reply'd,  90 

I  deal  with  one  that  does  all  these  provide, 

Hauing  of  other  cares,  enough  beside ; 

And  in  a  cheap,  or  an  ill  chosen  gown. 

Can  valine  blood  that's  nobler  then  my  own, 

And  therefore  hope,  my  self  not  to  be  weigh'd 

By  gold,  or  silver,  on  my  garments  laid; 

Or  that  my  witt,  or  judgment  shou'd  be  read 

In  an  uncomon  colour  on  my  head. 

Stupid!  and  dull,  the  shrugging  Zany  crys; 
When,  service  ended,  me  he  moving  spy's,  100 

Hastes  to  conduct  me  out,  and  in  my  ear 
Drops  some  vile  praise,  too  low  for  her  to  hear; 


42  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Which  to  avoid,  more  then  the  begging  throng, 
I  reach  the  coach,  that  swiftly  rowls  along. 
Least  to  Hide  park,  we  should  too  late  be  brought, 
And  loose  e^re  night,  an  hour  of  finding  fault. 
Arriv'd,  she  crys, — 

that  awkward  creature  see, 
A  fortune  bom,  and  wou'd  a  beauty  bee 
Cou'd  others  but  beleive,  as  fast  as  she. 
Bound  me,  I  look,  some  Monster  to  discry,  110 

Whose  wealthy  acres,  must  a  Title  buye. 
Support  my  Lord,  and  be,  since  his  have  faiPd, 
With  the  high  shoulder,  on  his  race  entayl'd; 
When  to  my  sight,  a  lovely  face  appears. 
Perfect  in  e'vry  thing,  but  growing  years; 
This  I  defend,  to  do  my  judgment  right, 
Can  you  dispraise  a  skin  so  smooth,  so  white. 
That  blush,  which  o're  such  well  tum'd  cheeks  does  rise, 
That  look  of  youth,  and  those  enliven'd  eyes? 
She  soon  replies, —  120 

that  skin,  which  you  admire, 
Is  shrunk,  and  sickly,  cou'd  you  view  itt  nigher. 
The  crimson  lining  and  uncertain  light. 
Reflects  that  blush,  and  paints  her  to  the  sight. 
Trust  me,  the  look,  which  you  comend,  betrays 
A  want  of  sence,  more  then  the  want  of  days. 
And  those  wild  eyes,  that  round  the  cercle  stray. 
Seem,  as  her  witts,  had  but  mistook  their  way. 
As  I  did  mine,  I  to  my  self  repeat, 
When  by  this  envious  side.  I  took  my  seat: 
Oh !  for  my  groves,  my  Country  walks,  and  bow'rs,     130 
Trees  blast  not  trees,  nor  flow'rs  envenom  flow'rs. 
As  beauty  here,  all  beautys  praise  devours. 
But  Noble  Piso  passes, — 

he's  a  witt. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  43 

As  some  (she  sais)  wou'd  have  itt,  the'  as  yett 

No  line  he  in  a  Lady^s  fan  has  writt, 

Were  on  their  dresse,  in  verse,  soft  things  wou'd  say, 

Or  with  loud  clamoar  ouer  powr'd  a  Play, 

And  right  or  wrong,  prenented  the  third  day; 

To  read  in  pnblick  places,  is  not  known, 

Or  in  his  Chariot,  here  appears  alone;  140 

Bestows  no  hasty  praise,  on  all  that's  new. 

When  first  this  Coach  came  ont  to  pnblick  veiw, 

Mett  in  a  visit,  he  presents  his  hand 

And  takes  me  ont,  I  make  a  willfnll  stand. 

Expecting,  sure,  this  won'd  applause  invite. 

And  often  turned,  that  way,  to  guide  his  sight; 

Till  finding  him  wrapped  in  a  silent  thought, 

I  ask'd,  if  that  the  Painter  well  had  wrought. 

Who  then  reply'd,  he  'has  in  the  Fable  err'd, 

Cov'ring  Adonis  with  a  monstrous  beard;  150 

Made  Hercules  (who  by  his  club  is  shewn) 

A  gentler  fop  then  any  of  the  Town, 

Whilst  Venus,  from  a  bogg  is  rising  seen. 

And  eyes  a  squint,  are  given  to  beautys  queen 

I  had  no  patience,  longer  to  attend. 

And  know  'tis  want  of  witt,  to  discomend. 

Must  Piso  then  I  be  judg'd  by  such  as  these, 
Piso,  who  from  the  Latin,  Virgil  frees. 
Who  loos'd  the  bands,  which  old  Sylenus  bound. 
And  made  our  Albion  rocks  repeat  the  mistick  sound,  160 
"  Whilst  all  he  sung  was  present  to  our  eyes 
"And  as  he  rais'd  his  verse,  the  Poplars  seem'd  to  rise?" 
Scarce  cou'd  I  in  my  brest  my  thoughts  contain. 
Or  for  this  folly,  hide  my  just  disdain. 
When  see,  she  says,  observe  my  best  of  friends. 
And  through  the  window,  half  her  length  extends 
Exalts  her  voyce,  that  all  the  ring  may  hear; 


44  Thb  P0EM8  OF  Anns 

How  fallsomly  she  oft  repeats  my  dear, 

Letts  fall  some  doobtfall  words,  that  we  may  know 

There  still  a  secret  is,  betwixt  them  two,  170 

And  makes  a  sign,  the  small  white  hand  to  shew. 

When,  Fate  be  prais'd,  the  coachman  slacks  the  reins. 

And  o^re  my  lap,  no  longer  now  she  leans, 

But  how  her  choyce  I  like,  does  soon  enquire? 

Can  I  dislike  I  cry,  what  all  admire. 
Discreet,  and  witty,  civil  and  refin'd, 
Nor,  in  her  person  fairer  then  her  mind, 
Is  yong  Alinda,  if  report  be  just; 
For  half  the  Caracter,  my  eyes  I  trust 
What  chang'd  Almeria,  on  a  suddain  cold,  180 

As  if  I  of  your  freind,  some  tale  had  told? 
No,  she  replyes,  but  when  I  hear  her  praise, 
A  secret  failing  does  my  pitty  raise, 
Damon  she  loves,  and  'tis  my  dayly  care. 
To  keep  the  passion  from  the  publick  ear, 
I  ask,  amaz'd,  if  this  she  has  reveal'd, 
No,  'but  tis  true,  she  crys,  though  much  conceal'd; 
I  have  observ'd  itt  long,  nor  wou'd  betray 
But  to  your  self,  what  now  with  greif  I  say. 
Who  this,  to  none,  but  Confidents  must  break,  190 

Nor  they  to  others,  but  in  whispers,  speak ; 
I  am  her  freind  and  must  consult  her  fame. 
More  was  she  saying,  when  fresh  objects  came. 
Now  what's  that  thing,  she  crys,  Ardelia,  guesse  ? 
A  woman  sure. — 

Ay  and  a  Poetesse, 
They  say  she  writes,  and  'tis  a  comon  jest. 
Then  sure  sh'  has  publiekly  the  skill  professt, 
I  soon  reply,  or  makes  that  gift  her  pride, 
And  all  the  world,  but  scribblers,  does  deride; 
Setts  out  Lampoons,  where  only  spite  is  seen,  200 

Not  fiU'd  with  female  witt,  but  female  spleen. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  45 

Her  florish'd  name,  does  o're  a  song  expose, 

Which  through  all  ranks,  down  to  the  Carman,  goes. 

Or  poetry  is  on  her  Picture  found, 

In  which  she  sits,  with  painted  lawrel  crown'd. 

If  no  such  flyes,  no  vanity  defile 

The  Helyconian  balm,  the  sacred  oyl. 

Why  shou'd  we  from  that  pleasing  art  be  ty'd, 

Or  like  State  Pris'ners,  Pen  and  Ink  deny'd? 

But  see,  the  Sun  his  chariot  home  has  driv'n  210 

From  the  vast  shining  ring  of  spacious  Heav'n, 

Nor  after  him  Celestial  beautys  stay, 

But  crou'd  with  sparkling  wheels  the  milky  way. 

Shall  we  not  then,  the  great  example  take  , 

And  ours  below,  with  equal  speed  forsake? 

When  to  your  favours,  adding  this  one  more, 

You'll  stop,  and  leave  me  thank-full,  att  my  door. 

How!  e're  you've  in  the  Drawing-room  appear'd. 

And  all  the  foUys  there  beheld  and  heard. 

Since  you've  been  absent,  such  intrigues  are  grown;     220 

Such  new  Coquetts  and  Fops  are  to  be  shown. 

Without  their  sight  you  must  not  leave  the  Town. 

Excuse  me,  I  reply,  my  eyes  ne're  feast 

Upon  a  fool,  tho'  ne're  so  nicely  dresst 

Nor  is  itt  musick  to  my  burthen'd  ear 

The  unripe  prating's  of  our  sex  to  hear, 

A  noysy  girl,  who'  has  at  fifteen  talk'd  more 

Then  Grandmother,  or  Mother  here  to  fore, 

In  all  the  cautious,  prudent  years  they  bore. 

Statesmen  there  are,  (she  crys)  whom  I  can  show         230 

That  bear  the  kingdoms  cares,  on  a  bent  brow; 

Who  take  the  weight  of  politicks  by  grains. 

And  to  the  least,  know  what  each  scull  contains. 

Who's  to  be  coach'd,  who  talk'd  to  when  abroad. 

Who  but  the  smile  must  have,  and  who  the  nod; 

And  when  this  is  the  utmost  of  their  skill. 


46  The  Poems  of  Anne 

^Tis  not  mnch  wonder,  if  affairs  go  ilL 
Then  for  the  Church-men  — 

hold  my  lodging^s  here ; 
Nor  can  I  longer  a  re-proof  forbear 
When  sacred  things  nor  Persons  she  wou^d  spare.         240 

We  parted  thus,  the  night  in  peace  I  spent, 
And  the  next  day,  with  haste  and  pleasure  went 
To  the  best  seat  of  fam^d  and  fertile  Kent 
Where  lett  me  live  from  all  detraction  free 
Till  thus  the  World  is  criticis'd  by  mee; 
Till  freind,  and  Foe,  I  treat  with  such  dispite 
May  I  no  scorn,  the  worst  of  ills,  excite. 

FRIENDSHIP  BETWEEN  EPHELIA  AND  ARDELIA 

Eph.     What  Friendship  is,  Abdelia  shew. 

Ard.    'Tis  to  love,  as  I  love  You. 

Eph.     This  Account,  so  short  (tho'  kind) 

Suits  not  my  enquir^g  Mind. 

Therefore  farther  now  repeat ; 

What  is  Friendship  when  compleat? 
Ard.    'Tis  to  share  all  Joy  and  Grief; 
'Tis  to  lend  all  due  Relief 

From  the  Tongue,  the  Heart,  the  Hand; 
^Tis  to  mortgage  House  and  Land; 

For  a  Friend  be  sold  a  Slave; 
'Tis  to  die  upon  a  Grave, 

If  a  Friend  therein  do  lie. 
Eph.     This  indeed,  tho'  carry'd  high, 

This,  tho'  more  than  e'er  was  done 

Underneath  the  rolling  Sun, 

This  has  all  been  said  before. 

Can  Abdelia  say  no  more? 
Ard^     Words  indeed  no  more  can  shew: 

But  His  to  love^  as  I  Jove  you. 


Countess  of  Winghilsea  47 

A  DESCBrPTION  OP  ONE  OP  THE  PIECES  OP  TAPISTRY 
AT  LONQ-LEAT, 

made  after  the  famous  Cartons  of  Baphael;  in  whichy  Elymas 
the  Sorcerer  is  miraculously  struck  blind  by  St.  Paul  before 
Sergius  Pauliis,  the  Proconsul  of  Asia 

Inscribed  to  the  Hon^  Henry  Thynne,  under  the  name  of 
Theanor 

Thus  Tapistry  of  old,  the  Walls  adom'd, 
Ere  noblest  Dames  the  artful  Shuttle  scomM: 
Arachney  then,  with  Pallas  did  contest, 
And  scarce  th'  Immortal  Work  was  judg'd  the  Best 
Nor  valorous  Actions,  then,  in  Books  were  fought; 
But  all  the  Fame,  that  from  the  Field  was  brought, 
Employ'd  the  Loom,  where  the  kind  Consort  wrought: 
Whilst  sharing  in  the  Toil,  she  shar'd  the  Fame, 
And  with  the  Heroes  mixt  her  interwoven  Name. 
No  longer.  Females  to  such  Praise  aspire,  10 

And  seldom  now  We  rightly  do  admire. 
So  much.  All  Arts  are  by  the  Men  engrossed. 
And  Our  few  Talents  unimprov'd  or  cross'd; 
Even  I,  who  on  this  Subject  wou'd  compose. 
Which  the  fam'd  Urbin  for  his  Pencil  chose, 
(And  here,  in  tinctur'd  Wool  we  now  behold 
Correctly  foUow'd  in  each  Shade,  and  Fold) 
Should  prudently  from  the  Attempt  withdraw, 
But  Inclination  proves  the  stronger  Law: 
And  tho'  the  Censures  of  the  World  pursue  20 

These  hardy  Flights,  whilst  his  Designs  I  view; 
My  burden'd  Thoughts,  which  labour  for  a  Vent, 
Urge  me  t^explain  in  Verse,  what  by  each  Face  is  meant. 

Of  Sebgius  first,  upon  his  lofty  Seat, 
With  due  Regard  our  Observations  treat ; 
Who,  whilst  he  thence  on  Elymas  looks  down. 


48  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Contracts  his  pensive  Brow  into  a  Frown, 
With  Looks  inquisitive  he  seeks  the  Cause 
Why  Nature  acts  not  still  by  Natures  Laws. 
'Twas  but  a  Moment,  since  the  Sorcerer^a  Sight  80 

Receiv'd  the  Day,  and  blazed  infernal  Light: 
Untouch'd,  the  Optiques  in  a  Moment  fail'd, 
Their  fierce  Illumination  quench'd,  or  veil'd; 
Throughout  th'  Extention  of  his  ample  Sway, 
No  Fact,  like  this,  the  Roman  cou'd  survey, 
Who,  with  spread  Hands,  invites  Mankind  to  gaze, 
And  sympathize  in  the  profound  Amaze. 
To  share  his  Wonder  every  one  combines, 
By  diff 'rent  Aspects  shewn,  and  difif 'rent  Signs. 
A  comely  Figure,  near  the  Consul  plac'd,  40 

With  serious  Mildness  and  Instruction  grac'd. 
To  Others  seems  imparting  what  he  saw. 
And  shews  the  Wretch  with  reverential  Awe: 
Whilst  a  more  eager  Person  next  we  find. 
Viewing  the  Wizard  with  a  Sceptick's  Mind; 
Who  his  fixt  Eyes  so  near  him  do's  apply. 
We  think,  enliv'ning  Beams  might  from  them  fly. 
To  re-inkindle,  by  so  just  an  Aim, 
The  radial  Sparks,  but  lately  check'd  and  tame. 
As  Tapers  new  put-out  will  catch  approaching  flame.     50 
But  dire  Surprize  th'  Enquiry  do's  succeed, 
Whilst  full  Conviction  in  his  Face  we  read. 
And  He,  who  question'd,  now  deplores  the  Deed, 

To  sacred  Paul  a  younger  Figure  guides. 

With  seeming  Warmth,  which  still  in  Youth  presides; 

And  pointing  forward,  Elder  Men  directs, 

In  Him,  to  note  the  Cause  of  these  Effects ; 

Upon  whose  Brow  do's  evidently  shine 

Deputed  Pow'r,  t'  inflict  the  Wrath  Divine; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  49 

Whilst  sad  and  solemn,  suited  to  their  Years,  60 

Each  venerable  Countenance  appears. 

Where,  yet  we  see  Astonishment  reveal'd, 

Tho'  by  the  Aged  often  'tis  conceal'd; 

Who  the  Emotions  of  their  Souls  disguize, 

Lest  by  admiring  they  shou'd  seem  less  Wise. 

But  to  thy  Portrait,  Elymas,  we  come 
Whose  Blindness  almost  strikes  the  Poet  dumb; 
And  whilst  She  vainly  to  Describe  thee  seeks, 
The  Pen  but  traces,  where  the  Pencil  speaks. 
Of  Darkness  to  be/ett,  our  Scriptures  write,  70 

Thou  Darkened  seem'st,  as  thou  would' st  feel  the  Light; 
And  with  projected  Limbs,  betray'st  a  Dread, 
Of  unseen  Mischiefs,  levell'd  at  thy  Head. 
Thro'  all  thy  Frame  such  Stupefaction  reigns. 
As  Night  it  self  were  sunk  into  thy  Veins: 
Nor  by  the  Eyes  alone  thy  Loss  we  find. 
Each  Lineament  helps  to  proclaim  thee  Blind. 
An  artful  Dimness  far  diffus'd  we  grant. 
And  failing  seem  all  Parts  through  One  important  Want. 

Oh!  mighty  Raphael,  justly  sure  renown'd!  80 

Since  in  thy  Works  such  Excellence  is  found; 
No  Wonder,  if  with  Nature  Thou'rt  at  strife. 
Who  thus  can  paint  the  Negatives  of  Life  ; 
And  Deprivation  more  expressive  make. 
Than  the  most  perfect  Draughts,  which  Others  take. 
Whilst  to  this  Chiefest  Figure  of  the  Piece, 
All  that  surround  it.  Heigh tnings  do  encrease : 
In  some.  Amazement  by  Extreams  is  shewn. 
Who  viewing  his  clos'd  Lids,  extend  their  Own. 
Nor  can,  by  that,  enough  their  Thoughts  express,  90 

Which  op'ning  Mouths  seem  ready  to  confess. 


50  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Thns  stand  the  Liotobs  gazing  on  a  Deed, 
Which  do's  all  humane  Chastisements  exceed; 
EnfeebPd  seem  their  Instmments  of  smart. 
When  keener  Words  can  swifter  His  impart 

Thon,  Babnabas,  though  Last,  not  least  our  Care, 
Seem'st  equally  employed  in  Praise,  and  Prayer, 
Acknowledging  th'  Omnipotent  Decree, 
Yet  soft  Compassion  in  thy  Pace  we  see: 
Whilst  lifted  Hands  implore  a  kind  Belief,  100 

Tho'  no  Impatience  animates  thy  Grief; 
But  mild  Suspence  and  Charity  benign. 
Do  all  th'  excesses  of  thy  Looks  confine. 

Thus  far,  our  slow  Imagination  goes: 
Wou'd  the  more  skilPd  Theanob  his  disclose; 
Expand  the  Scene,  and  open  to  our  Sight 
What  to  his  nicer  Judgment  gives  Delight; 
Whose  soaring  Mind  do's  to  Perfections  climb, 
Nor  owns  a  Belish,  but  for  Things  sublime: 
Then,  wou'd  the  Piece  fresh  Beauties  still  present,       110 
Nor  Length  of  Time  wou'd  leave  the  Eye  content: 
As  moments,  Hours;  as  Hours  the  Days  wou'd  seem. 
Observing  here,  taught  to  observe  by  Him. 

GLASS 

O  Man!  what  Inspiration  was  thy  Guide, 

Who  taught  thee  Light  and  Air  thus  to  divide; 

To  let  in  all  the  useful  Beams  of  Day, 

Yet  force,  as  subtil  Winds,  without  thy  Shash  to  stay; 

T'extract  from  Embers  by  a  strange  Device, 

Then  polish  fair  these  Flakes  of  solid  Ice ; 

Which,  silver'd  o'er,  redouble  all  in  place. 

And  give  thee  back  thy  well  or  ill-complexion'd  Face. 


Countess  of  Winghilsea  61 

To  Vessels  blown  exceed  the  gloomy  Bowl, 
Which  did  the  Wine's  full  excellence  contronl, 
These  shew  the  Body,  whilst  you  taste  the  SouL 
Its  colour  sparkles  Motion,  lets  thee  see, 
Tho'  yet  th'  Excess  the  Preacher  warns  to  flee. 
Lest  Men  at  length  as  clearly  soy  through  Thee. 

THE  BIBD  AND  THE  ABBAS 

By  neer  resemblance  see  that  Bird  betray'd 

Who  takes  the  well  wrought  Arras  for  a  shade 

There  hopes  to  pearch  and  with  a  chearfull  Tune 

O're-passe  the  scortchings  of  the  sultry  Noon. 

But  soon  repulsed  by  the  obdurate  scean 

How  swift  she  turns  but  turns  alas  in  vain 

That  piece  a  Grove,  this  shews  an  ambient  sky 

Where  immitated  Fowl  their  pinnions  ply 

Seeming  to  mount  in  flight  and  aiming  still  more  high. 

All  she  outstrip's  and  with  a  moments  pride 

Their  understation  silent  does  deride 

Till  the  dash'd  Cealing  strikes  her  to  the  ground 

No  intercepting  shrub  to  break  the  fall  is  found 

Recovering  breath  the  window  next  she  gaines 

Nor  fears  a  stop  from  the  transparent  Panes. 


But  we  degresse  and  leaue  th'  imprisoned  wretch 
Now  sinking  low  now  on  a  loftyer  stretch 
Fluttering  in  endlesse  cercles  of  dismay 
Till  some  kind  hand  directs  the  certain  way 
Which  through  the  casement  an  escape  affoards 
And  leads  to  ample  space  the  only  Heav'n  of  Birda 


52  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 


TO  THE  HONORABLE  THE  LADY  WOBSLEY  AT  LONO- 

LEATE 

Who  had  most  obligingly  desired  my  corresponding  with  her  by 

Letters 

If  from  some  lonely  and  obscure  recesse 

The  shunned  retreat  of  solitary  peace 

Lost  to  the  World  and  like  Ardelias  seat 

Pitt  only  for  the  Wretch  opress'd  by  Fate 

A  melancholly  snmmons  had  been  sent 

To  deal  in  Woe  and  mingle  discontent 

By  sympathising  Lines  t^attempt  relief 

And  load  each  Poste  with  sad  exchange  of  grief 

No  wonder  had  that  comon  Act  expressed 

For  still  Distresse  wooM  Herd  with  the  distreesM       10 

And  to  onr  Cares  itt  seems  a  short  allay 

To  fold  them  close  and  from  our  selves  convey. 

But  that  Utresia  seeks  to  correspond 
With  such  a  dull  and  disproportion'd  hand 
Empty  Replies  endeavours  to  obtain 
From  secrett  Cells  and  from  a  clouded  Brain 
Is  something  so  unusual  (thO  so  kind) 
That  scarse  th'  exalted  motions  of  her  mind 
Or  charms  in  Hers  beyond  each  other  Tongue 
(Had  we  not  heard  Him  speak  from  whom  she  sprung)    20 
Cou'd  more  amaze  us  then  this  friendly  part 
That  she  whom  all  aspire  but  to  divert 
Makes  itt  of  All  her  choice  to  sooth  a  sinking  heart. 
Utresia  in  her  fresh  and  smiling  bloom 
With  Joys  incompass'd  and  new  Joys  to  come 
Who  like  the  Sun  in  her  Meridian  shows 
Surrounded  with  the  Lustre  she  bestows 
Her  self  dispensing  by  her  long'd  for  sight 
To  every  Place  she  visits  full  delight 
For  Beauty  this  Prerogative  maintains  80 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  53 

And  Guer  both  the  Sexes  thus  far  reigns 

To  chear  all  Hearts  and  to  suspend  our  pains 

Who  when  such  Eyes,  so  soft  and  bright  we  view 

Soften  our  Cares  and  grow  enlighten'd  too 

In  sweet  conformity  to  Things  so  fine 

No  motions  feel  but  such  as  in  them  shine. 

Cou'd  but  the  Witt  that  on  her  paper  flows 

Affect  my  Verse  and  tune  itt  to  her  Prose 

Through  every  Line  a  kindly  warmth  inspire 

And  raise  my  Art  equal  to  my  desire  40 

Then  should  my  Hand  snatch  from  the  Muses  store 

Transporting  Figures  n'ere  expos'd  before 

Somthing  to  Please  so  mouing  and  so  new 

As  not  our  Denham  or  our  Cowley  knew. 

Or  shew  (the  harder  labour  to  compleat) 

The  real  splendours  of  our  fam'd  Long-leate 

Which  above  Metaphor  itts  Structure  reares 

ThO  all  Enchantment  to  our  sight  appears 

Magnificently  Great  the  Eye  to  fill 

Minut'ly  finish'd  for  our  nices[t]  skill  50 

Long-leate  that  justly  has  all  Praise  engross'd 

The  Strangers  wonder  and  our  Nations  boast 

Paint  her  Cascades  that  spread  their  sheets  so  wide 

And  emulate  th'  Italian  waters  pride 

Her  Fountains  which  so  high  their  streames  extend 

Th'  amazed  Clouds  now  feel  the  Rains  ascend 

Whilst  Phoebus  as  they  tow'rds  his  Mantion  flow 

Graces  th*  attempt  and  marks  them  with  his  Bow. 

Then  shou'd  my  Pen  (smooth  as  their  Turf)  convey 

Swift  Thought  o're  Terasses  that  lead  the  way  60 

To  flow'ry  Groves  where  ev'ning  Odours  stray 

To  Lab'rinths  into  which,  who  fondly  comes, 

Attracted  still  and  wilder'd  with  Parfumes, 

Till  by  acquaintance  he  their  stations  knows 

Here  twists  a  Woodbine  there  a  Jasmin  grows 


64  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Next  springs  th^  Hesperian  Broom  and  last  th'  Assy- 
rian Rose, 
Shall  endlesse  Rove  nor  tread  the  way  he  went 
No  Thread  to  guide  his  steps,  no  Clue  but  ravish'd  soent 
But  Oh!  Alas!  cou'd  we  this  Prospect  give 
And  make  itt  in  true  lights  and  shaddows  live  70 

Ther's  yett  a  Task  att  which  'twere  vain  to  Strive 
His  Genius  who  th'  original  improved 
To  this  degree  that  has  our  wonder  mov'd 
Too  great  appears  and  awes  the  trembling  hand 
Which  can  no  Colours  for  that  Draught  comand 
No  syllables  the  most  sublimely  wrought 
Can  reach  the  loftier  Immage  of  his  thought 
Whose  Judgment  plac'd  in  a  superior  hight 
All  things  surveys  with  comprehensive  sight 
Then  pittying  us  below  stoops  to  inform  us  right       80 
In  Words  which  such  convincing  Reasons  bear 
We  silent  wish  that  they  engraven  were 
And  grudge  those  Sounds  to  the  dispersing  air. 
Protect  Him  Heaven  and  long  may  He  appear 
The  leading  Star  to  his  great  Offspring  here 
Their  Treasury  of  Council  and  support 
Who  when  att  last  he  shall  attend  your  Court 
To  all  his  future  Race  the  mark  shall  be 
To  stem  the  waves  of  Lifers  tempestuous  Sea 
Who  from  abroad  shall  no  Examples  need  90 

Of  men  Recorded  or  who  then  Exceed 
To  urdge  their  Virtue  and  exalt  their  Fame 
Whilest  their  own  Weymouth  stands  their  noblest  Aime. 
But  we  Presume,  and  ne're  must  hope  to  trace 
His  Worth  profound,  his  Daughters  matchlesse  Grace 
Or  draw  paternall  Witt  deriv'd  into  her  Face 
Though  from  his  Presence  and  her  Charms  did  grow 
The  Joys  Ardelia  att  Long-leat  did  know. 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  65 

So  Paradice  did  wond'rous  Things  disclose 
Yett  surely  not  from  them  itts  Name  arose  100 

Not  from  the  Fraits  in  such  profusion  found 
Or  early  Beauties  of  th'  enammell'd  Ground 
Not  from  the  Trees  in  their  first  leaves  arraid 
Or  Birds  uncurs'd  that  WarbPd  in  their  shade 
Not  from  the  streams  that  in  new  channells  roPd 
O're  radiant  Beds  of  uncorrupting  Gold 
These  might  surprise  but  'twas  th'  accomplished  Pair 
That  gave  the  Title  and  that  made  itt  fair. 
All  lesser  Thoughts  Immagination  Balk 
'Twas  Paradice  in  some  expanded  Walk  110 

To  see  Her  motions,  and  attend  his  Talk 


THE  FOLLOWING  LINES 

occasioned  by  the  Marriage  of  Edward  Herbert  Esquire^  and 
Mrs.  Elizabet  Herbert 

Cupid  one  day  ask^d  his  Mother, 
When  she  meant  that  he  shou'd  Wed? 
You're  too  Young,  my  Boy,  she  said: 
Nor  has  Nature  made  another 
Fit  to  match  with  CupidCs  Bed. 

Cupid  then  her  Sight  directed 

To  a  lately  Wedded  Pair; 
Where  Himself  the  Match  effected; 

They  as  Youthful,  they  as  Fair. 

Having  by  Example  carry'd 

This  first  Point  in  the  Dispute ; 
WoBSELEY  next  he  said^s  not  Marry'd: 

Her's  with  Cupid^s  Charms  may  suit 


56  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  HONOURABLE  MH.  JAMES 

THYNNE, 

Younger  Son  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  Viecount 
Weymouth 

Farewel,  lov'd  Youth !  since  'twas  the  Will  of  Heaven 
So  soon  to  take,  what  had  so  late  been  giv'n; 
And  thus  our  Expectations  to  destroy, 
Baising  a  Grief,  where  we  had  f orm'd  a  Joy ; 
Who  once  believ'd,  it  was  the  Fates  Design 
In  Him  to  double  an  Illustrious  Line, 
And  in  a  second  Channel  spread  that  Race 
Where  ev'ry  Virtue  shines,  with  every  Grace. 
But  we  mistook,  and  'twas  not  here  below 
That  this  engrafted  Scion  was  to  grow ;  10 

The  Seats  above  requir'd  him,  that  each  Sphere 
Might  soon  the  Offspring  of  such  Parents  share. 
Resign  him  then  to  the  supream  Intent, 
You,  who  but  Flesh  to  that  blest  Spirit  lent. 
Again  disrob'd,  let  him  to  Bliss  retire. 
And  only  bear  from  you,  amidst  that  Choir, 
What,  Precept  or  Example  did  inspire, 
A  Title  to  Rewards,  from  that  rich  store 
Of  Pious  Works,  which  you  have  sent  before. 
Then  lay  the  fading  Reliques,  which  remain,  20 

In  the  still  Vault  (excluding  farther  Pain) ; 
Where  Kings  and  Counsellors  their  Progress  close, 
And  his  renowned  Ancestors  repose ; 
Where  Coventby  withdrew  All  but  in  Name, 
Leaving  the  World  his  Benefits  and  Fame ; 
Where  his  Paternal  Predecessor  lies. 
Once  large  of  Thought,  and  rank'd  among  the  Wise ; 
Whose  Genius  in  Long-Leat  we  may  behold 
(A  Pile,  as  noble  as  if  he'd  been  told 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  57 

By  Weymouth,  it  shou'd  be  in  time  possest,  30 

And  strove  to  suit  the  Mansion  to  the  Guest. ) 

Nor  favoured,  nor  disgrac'd,  there  Essex  sleeps, 

Nor  SoMEBSET  his  Master's  Sorrows  weeps, 

Who  to  the  shelter  of  th'  unenvy'd  Grave 

Convey'd  the  Monarch,  whom  he  cou'd  not  save; 

Though,  Roman-hke,  his  own  less-valu'd  Head 

He  proffer'd  in  that  injur'd  Martyr's  stead. 

Nor  let  that  matchless  Female  'scape  my  Pen, 

Who  their  Whole  Duty  taught  to  weaker  Men, 

And  of  each  Sex  the  Two  best  Gifts  enjoy'd  40 

The  Skill  to  write,  the  Modesty  to  hide ; 

Whilst  none  shou'd  that  Performance  disbelieve, 

Who  led  the  Life,  might  the  Directions  give. 

With  such  as  These,  whence  He  deriv'd  his  Blood, 

Great  on  Record,  or  eminently  Good, 

Let  Him  be  laid,  till  Death's  long  Night  shall  cease, 

And  breaking  Glory  interrupt  the  Peace. 

Mean-while,  ye  living  Parents,  ease  your  Grief 

By  Tears,  allow'd  as  Nature's  due  Relief. 

For  when  we  offer  to  the  Pow'rs  above,  50 

Like  You,  the  dearest  Objects  of  our  Love ; 

When,  with  that  patient  Saint  in  Holy  Writ, 

We've  learnt  at  once  to  Grieve,  and  to  Submit ; 

When  contrite  Sighs,  like  hallow'd  Incense,  rise 

Bearing  our  Anguish  to  th'  appeased  Skies ; 

Then  may  those  Show'rs,  which  take  from  Sorrow  birth, 

And  still  are  tending  tow'rd  this  baleful  Earth, 

O'er  all  our  deep  and  parching  Cares  diffuse. 

Like  Eden's  Springs,  or  Hermon's  soft'ning  Dews. 

But  lend  your  Succours,  ye  Almighty  Pow'rs,  60 

For  as  the  Wound,  the  Balsam  too  is  Yours. 

In  vain  are  Numbers,  or  persuasive  Speech, 

What  Poets  write,  or  what  the  Pastors  teach. 


68  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Till  Yon,  who  make,  again  repair  the  Breach. 

For  when  to  Shades  of  Death  onr  Joys  are  fled, 

When  for  a  loss,  like  This,  onr  Tears  are  shed. 

None  can  revive  the  Heart,  bnt  who  can  raise  the  Dead. 

Bnt  yet,  my  Muse,  if  thou  hadst  softer  Verse 

Than  e'er  bewailed  the  melancholy  Herse; 

If  thou  hadst  Pow'r  to  dissipate  the  Gloom  70 

Inherent  to  the  Solitary  Tomb; 

To  rescue  thence  the  Memory  and  Air 

Of  what  we  lately  saw  so  Fresh,  so  Fair; 

Then  should  this  Noble  Youth  thy  Art  engage 

To  shew  the  Beauties  of  his  blooming  Age, 

The  pleasing  Light,  that  from  his  Eyes  was  cast, 

Like  hasty  Beams,  too  Vigorous  to  last; 

Where  the  warm  Soul,  as  on  the  Confines,  lay 

Ready  for  Flight,  and  for  Eternal  Day. 

G-ently  disposed  his  Nature  should  be  shown,  80 

And  all  the  Mother^ s  Sweetness  made  his  Own. 

The  Father*  s  Likeness  was  but  faintly  seen. 

As  ripen'd  Fruits  are  figur'd  by  the  Green. 

Nor  cou'd  we  hope,  had  he  fulfill'd  his  Days, 

He  shou'd  have  reach'd  Weymouth's  unequal'd  Praise. 

Still  One  distinguish'd  Plant  each  Lineage  shews, 

And  all  the  rest  beneath  it's  Stature  grows. 

Of  Tull'ffs  Race  but  He  possess'd  the  Tongue, 

And  none  like  Julius  from  the  Cceaars  sprung. 

Next,  in  his  harmless  Sports  he  shou'd  be  drawn  90 

Urging  his  Courser,  o'er  the  flow'ry  Lawn; 

Sprightly  Himself,  as  the  enliven'd  Game, 

Bold  in  the  Chace,  and  full  of  gen'rous  Flame; 

Yet  in  the  Palace,  Tractable  and  Mild, 

Perfect  in  all  the  Duties  of  a  Child; 

Which  fond  reflection  pleases,  whilst  it  pains, 

Like  penetrating  Notes  of  sad  Harmonious  Strains. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  59 

Selected  Friendships  timely  he  began, 

And  siezed  in  Youth  that  best  Delight  of  Man, 

Leaving  a  growing  Race  to  mourn  his  End,  100 

Their  earliest  and  their  Ages  promis'd  Friend. 

But  far  away  alas!  that  Prospect  moves. 

Lost  in  the  Clouds,  like  distant  Hills  and  Groves, 

Whilst  with  encreasing  Steps  we  all  pursue 

What  Time  alone  can  brii^g  to  nearer  View, 

That  Future  State,  which  Darkness  yet  involves, 

Known  but  by  Death,  which  ev'ry  Doubt  resolves. 


TO  THE  PAINTER  OF  AN  ILL-DRAWN  PICTURE  OF 
CLEONE,  THE  HONORABLE  MRS.  THYNNE 

Sooner  I'd  praise  a  Cloud  which  Light  beguiles. 
Than  thy  rash  hand  which  robs  this  Face  of  Smiles; 
And  does  that  sweet  and  pleasing  Air  controul, 
Which  to  us  paints  the  fair  Cleone's  Soul. 
'Tis  vain  to  boast  of  Rules  or  laboured  Art; 
I  miss  the  Look  that  captivates  my  Heart, 
Attracts  my  Love,  and  tender  Thoughts  inspires; 
Nor  can  my  Breast  be  warm'd  by  common  Fires; 
Nor  can  Abdelia  love  but  where  she  first  admires. 
Like  Jupiter*  8j  thy  Head  was  sure  in  Pain  10 

When  this  Virago  struggl'd  in  thy  Brain; 
And  strange  it  is,  thou  hast  not  made  her  wield 
A  mortal  Dart,  or  penetrating  Shield, 
Giving  that  Hand  of  disproportion'd  size 
The  Pow'r,  of  which  thou  hast  disarmed  her  Eyes: 
As  if,  like  Amazons^  she  must  oppose, 
And  into  Lovers  force  her  vanquished  Foes. 
Bad  to  Theanob  thus  her  Form  been  shown 
To  gain  her  Heart,  he  had  not  lost  his  own; 
Nor,  by  the  gentlest  Bands  of  Human  Life,  20 


60  The  Poems  op  Anne 

At  once  secur'd  the  Mistress  and  the  Wife. 

For  still  Cleonb's  Beauties  are  the  same, 

And  what  first  lighten' d,  still  upholds  his  Flame. 

Fain  his  Compassion  wou'd  thy  Works  approve, 

Were  pitying  thee  consistent  with  his  Love, 

Or  with  the  Taste  which  Italy  has  wrought 

In  his  refin'd  and  daily  heighten'd  Thought, 

Where  Poetry,  or  Painting  find  no  place, 

Unless  perform'd  with  a  superior  Grace. 

Cou'd  but  my  Wish  some  Influence  infuse,  30 

Ne'er  shou'd  the  Pencil,  or  the  Sister-Muse 

Be  try'd  by  those  who  easily  excuse: 

But  strictest  Censors  shou'd  of  either  judge, 

Applaud  the  Artist,  and  despise  the  Drudge. 

Then  never  wou'd  thy  Colours  have  debas'd 

Cleonb's  Features,  and  her  Charms  defac'd: 

Nor  had  my  Pen  (more  subject  to  their  Laws) 

Assay'd  to  vindicate  her  Beauty's  Cause. 

A  rigid  Fear  had  kept  us  both  in  Awe, 

Nor  I  compos'd,  nor  thou  presum'd  to  draw;  40 

But  in  Cleone  viewing  with  Surprize 

That  Excellence,  to  which  we  ne'er  cou'd  rise, 

By  less  attempts  we  safely  might  have  gain'd 

That  humble  Praise  which  neither  has  obtain'd, 

Since  to  thy  Shadowings,  or  my  ruder  Verse, 

It  is  not  giv'n  to  shew,  or  to  rehearse 

What  Nature  in  Cleone's  Face  has  writ, 

A  soft  Endearment,  and  a  chearful  Wit, 

That  all-subduing,  that  enliv'ning  Air 

By  which,  a  sympathizing  Joy  we  share,  50 

For  who  forbears  to  smile,  when  smil'd  on  by  the  Fair? 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  61 

TO  THE  BIGHT  HONOURABLE  THE  COUNTESS  OF 
HARTFORD, 

ivith  her  volume  of  Poems 
Of  sleepless  nights,  and  days  with  cares  o'ercasty 
Accept  the  fruits,  tho'  far  beneath  your  taste ; 
Yet  look  with  favour  on  Ardelia's  muse, 
And  what  your  father  cherish'd,  still  excuse. 
Whenever  style  or  fancy  in  them  shines, 
Conclude  his  praise  gave  spirit  to  those  lines: 
So  deep  his  judgment,  so  acute  his  wit, 
No  critic  liv'd,  but  did  to  him  submit. 
From  his  your  gentle  nature  does  proceed; 
Then  pari;ial  be,  like  him,  while  here  you  read; 
Who  could  forgive  the  errors  of  a  friend. 
But  knew  no  bounds,  when  prompted  to  commend. 

UPON  THE  DEATH  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  TWISDEN 

Cou'd  Rivers  weep  (as  somtimes  Poets  dream) 

Cou'd  neigh'bring  Hills  our  sorrows  know, 

And  thoughtlesse  Flocks,  and  faiding  Flowers, 

Droop  o're  the  pastures,  and  beneath  the  showers, 

To  sympathize  with  Man,  and  answer  to  his  Woe; 

Now,  shou'd  the  Medway's  fruitfuU  stream, 

In  broaken  drops,  disolve  away. 

And  pay  in  tears,  her  Tribute  to  the  sea; 

Now  shou'd  the  Flocks,  forgett  to  thrive. 

Nor  wou'd  th'  ensuing  blasted  Spring  10 

One  purple  Violet  revive, 

One  fragrant  Odour  bring; 

Now,  by  those  Eccho's,  which  retum'd  his  Name 

When  by  the  loud  prevailing  voice 

Calld  to  the  Senate,  by  his  Country's  choice, 

Twisden  amongst  their  Rocks,  and  deep  recesses  came ; 


62  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Now,  shouM  by  them,  th'  unwelcome  news  be  spread, 
O're  all  th^  extended,  moumfull  Land, 
O're  all  the  coasts,  o're  all  the  Kentish  strand, 
That  Twisden  is  no  more,  their  Matchlesse  Patriot's 
dead.  20 

2 

But  oh!  in  vain,  things  void  of  sence,  we  call. 

In  vain,  implore  the  murmuring  sound 

Of  hollow  groans,  from  underneath  the  ground; 

Or  court  the  loud  laments,  of  some  steep  water's  fall; 

On  things  innaninate,  [sic]  wou'd  force. 

Some  share  of  our  divided  greif, 

Whilst  Nature  (unconcem'd  for  our  relief) 

Persues  her  settPd  path,  her  fixt,  and  steaddy  course, 

Leaving  those  ills,  which  Providence  allows 

To  check  our  Pleasures,  and  contract  our  Brows,  80 

Freely  to  act  their  uncontrouled  part. 

Within  the  center  of  the  human  breast; 

There,  every  lighter  folly,  to  molest, 

And  fill  with  anxious  thoughts,  the  sad,  awakened  heart; 

From  whence  alone  proceed  those  gath'ring  clouds 

Which  euery  outward  beauty  shrouds ; 

From  whence  alone,  those  sad  complaints  ascend. 

Which  pittying  Echo's  seem  to  lend; 

And  when  through  weeping  Eyes,  the  world  we  view. 

The  ancient  Flood  we  to  ourselues  renew,  40 

Then  hasty  mine  seizes  all  around; 

All  things  to  desolation  tend. 

All  seems  to  dye,  with  a  departed  Friend, 

The  Earth  unpeopl'd  seems,  and  all  again  is  drown'd, 

3 
Such  were  our  thoughts,  so  with  each  Mind  it  far'd. 
When  first  th'  unhappy  news  we  heard, 
When  told  alas!  that  Twisden  was  expir'd. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  63 

Whom  all  lament,  whom  lining,  all  admirM; 

For  in  his  breast,  were  snch  perfections  sown, 

Snch  numerous  excellencies  plac'd,  50 

That  every  man,  with  different  tallents,  grac'd, 

Found  somthing  that  improvM,  or  answer'd  to  his  own. 

He,  whose  lou'd  Country,  was  his  cheifest  care. 

Might  find  her  very  Archives  there. 

Her  ancient  Stattutes,  in  their  first  dessign. 

Prerogative,  and  Priviledge  to  joyn. 

The  perfect  draught  of  all-preserving  Law, 

(Which,  whilst  unbyast  hands  couM  round  us  draw, 
Bebel,  nor  Tyrant,  cou'd  encroach. 

Not  that  aspire,  nor  this  extend  too  much;  60 

None,  cou'd  beyond  his  happy  Limmit  goe. 
Not  man  depraved,  nor  Demon  from  below 
Cou^d  leap  the  hallowed  bound,  or  passe  the  magick  Line) 
Well  did  we  in  our  far  applauded  Kent, 
Whilst  Pious,  Wise,  Heroick,  and  refin'd. 
Whilst  these  strong  Bayes,  of  our  old  Yertue  shin'd, 
Make  him  our  choice,  the  Whole  to  represent; 
The  worthyest  pattern  of  the  publick  Mind. 
Who,  when  alas!  we  more  Fanatick  grew, 
A  heavyer  Immage  of  our  Country  drew  70 

(Like  to  a  fault,  in  every  altered  part) 
A  rough  ill  wrought  Dessign,  a  work  of  Flemish  Art 

4 
Those,  whom  a  curious  search  had  led 
Where  the  fam'd  Tiber,  from  his  plenteous  bed 
Such  frequent  Treasures  does  unfold. 
As  down  his  Streames  since  Ceesars  days  have  roled 
Tubraid  new  Rome,  with  wonders  of  the  old, 
With  him  their  great  Ideas,  might  renew; 
Enlightened  more,  and  more  amazed 


64  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Then  when  at  first  (with  unexperienced  view)  80 

On  those  stupenduous  Works,  they  (lesse  assisted)  gaz^d 
With  Him,  who  rested  not  alone 
In  Arts,  that  (more  then  did  the  fabPd  fire) 
Give  Painting  breath,  and  do  with  life  inspire 
The  new  created  Bock,  the  Man  of  pollish'd  Stone; 
But  justly  weigh'd  (in  his  capacious  mind) 
Through  ev'ry  Age,  her  past,  and  present  state, 
What  rais'd  those  Arts,  what  made  Rome  once  so  great, 
And  by  what  failing  steps,  now  ruined,  and  declined; 
All  useful  knowledge,  thence  he  brought,  90 

And  Against  their  dull,  mistaken  maxims,  taught 
(Let  the  constrained,  severe  Italian  see) 
A  man  dessign'd  for  Wisdom's  last  degree 
Might  wear  an  open  face,  with  a  behaviour  free. 

5 

The  soften'd  Courtier,  might  in  him  discern 
(What  to  himself,  H'had  cost  much  pains  to  learn, 

And  was  att  last,  but  with  dissembling  worn) 

A  pleasing,  and  a  sweet  Adresse, 

Beyond  what  Affectation,  can  expresse, 

Good  breeding  lesse  acquir'd,  then  with  his  temper  bom. 

So  was  he  vers'd,  in  that  allusive  Art  101 

Which  dying  Israel,  did  the  first  impart, 
(When  he  the  Koyal  Lyon  did  bestow 

On  Him,  from  whom  all  sovereign  Bule  shou'd  flow. 

Rightly  dispos'd  the  Wolf,  and  loosen'd  Hind, 

And  Blazon'd  every  coat,  he  to  each  Tribe  assigned.) 

That  unto  Him,  all  Families  were  known; 

Their  distant  branches,  and  their  wide  extent. 

Their  Ancient  rise,  or  more  renown'd  descent; 

Modestly  Silent,  only  of  his  own,  110 

But  Silence,  cou'd  not  that  Extraction  wrong. 

Which  all  besides  confess'd,  which  Kent  has  bom  so  long. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  65 

6 
With  Him,  we  the  Traditions  loose, 
Of  great,  and  of  Illustrious  Men, 
Which  his  Discourse,  reviv'd  to  us  again. 
(Their  unrecorded  Graces,  did  disclose. 
Their  moving  Gestures,  their  engaging  looks. 
Of  life,  the  ornamental  parts; 
The  powerfull  spells,  that  influence  our  hearts, 
Their  secret  motives,  and  their  apt  replies,  120 

Which  ignorance,  or  brevity  denies 
To  be  at  large  enrowl'd,  or  register'd  in  Books) 
With  Him  they  fell,  though  many  years  before. 
The  World  might  their  departed  breath  deplore, 
'Tis  now,  they  to  Oblivion  are  resigned. 
Or  some  short  page  of  History  confined, 
'Tis  now  they  cease  to  live,  and  now,  they  are  no  more. 
So  nicely  cou'd  he  all  retain. 
Of  such  a  memory  possest, 

So  undisturb'd  might  every  subject  rest,  130 

Or  range  that  ample  store-house  of  the  brain. 
Where  ancient  learning  early  was  convey'd, 
The  solid,  and  the  usefull  ground 
Where  all  the  modem  was  profusely  found, 
Where,  what  our  own,  or  neighb'ring  Witts  cou'd  write. 
What  his  yett  clearer  thoughts,  cou'd  to  themselves 

endite, 
Was  in  such  beauteous  order  laid. 
As  made  the  Symetrie  entire. 
As  did  the  whole,  harmoniously  inspire, 
Whilst  all,  was  in  the  propperest  terms  expresst,  140 

When  to  our  pleas'd  attention  still  made  known. 
In  chosen  words,  that  best  adom'd  his  own. 
Or  in   the  numerous  Tongues,  of  various   Countrys 

dresst 


66  The  Poems  of  Anne 

7 

How,  had  we  su'd  so  great  a  Life  to  save 

From  yet  descending  to  th'  unactive  Grave; 

How,  had  the  loud  united  Prayers 

Of  that  best  Church,  the  object  of  his  cares, 
(The  object  of  his  still  a  waken'd  thought. 

For  which  so  well  he  spoke,  so  well  his  Father  wrote) 

Imploring  at  the  Throne  above  150 

With  unresisted  force,  for  his  continnuance  strove ; 

Had  not  wise  Heaven  (our  clamours  to  prevent) 

So  secretly  the  fatal  message  sent, 
(Bid  the  light  Essense  his  swift  wings  display, 

Nor  his  Commission  to  survey, 
Till  passt  the  bounds  of  all  th'  Angellick  Host, 

Distant  alike,  from  our  benighted  Coast, 

Till  sailed  into  the  midd'st  of  the  Etherial  way) 

Least,  that  if  either  World,  shou'd  know 

What  sadly  was  decreed,  for  ours  below,  160 

(In  favour  of  the  happy er  Skiea) 

Some  pious  heat  might  grow. 

Some  holy  strife  might  rise. 

The  Church  Triumphant,  to  encrease  her  throng. 

Might  urge,  that  he  had  stay'd  too  long. 

Whilst  the  afflicted  Militant,  might  plead 

Of  such  support,  her  more  incessant  need, 

Repeat  her  passt  distresse,  and  doubts  of  future  woe. 

Least  that  Himself,  had  in  a  streight  been  known, 

Strugg'ling  betwixt  our  Interest,  and  his  own,  170 

For  whom  'twas  easily  resolv'd. 

The  better  choice,  to  be  with  haste  disolv'd; 

Yett  Charity  prevailing  in  the  strife. 

For  us,  he  might  have  ask'd  a  longer  Life, 

Rightly  to  act,  in  his  appointed  Place, 
(Of  Freedom  mindfull,  and  that  generous  Race 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  67 

Which  the  (too  pow'full)  Norman  once  withstood, 
Beneath  the  covert  of  a  moving  Wood) 
Unconquer'd  still,  't'have  kept  his  native  Land, 
Helped  to  disperse  her  Cares,  and  make  her  fears  disband. 

8 

Such,  were  His  Actions;  such,  his  jnst  Dessigns;         181 

But  far  too  weak,  are  these  imperfect  Lines, 
(Th'  nnskill'd  attempts  of  an  inferiour  Mnse) 

To  paint  a  Mind,  so  exquisitely  bright; 

To  sett  such  Vertnes,  in  their  noblest  light. 

Or  in  our  anxious  greif ,  pathetick  thoughts  infuse. 
No  lesse  Applause,  no  lesse  exalted  Verse, 

Then  once  adom'd  our  boasted  Sydney's  Hearse, 

Shou'd  to  his  Caracter,  do  equal  right; 

Shou'd  of  this  second  Astrophel,  endite, 
"As  much  the  Poets  Friend,  as  much  the  Worlds  delight" 

ENQUIRY  AFTER  PEACE 
A  Fragment 

Peace  I  where  art  thou  to  be  found? 

Where,  in  all  the  spacious  Round, 

May  thy  Footsteps  be  pursu'd? 

Where  may  thy  calm  Seats  be  view'd? 

On  some  Mountain  dost  thou  lie. 

Serenely  near  the  ambient  Sky, 

Smiling  at  the  Clouds  below. 

Where  rough  Storms  and  Tempests  grow? 

Or,  in  some  retired  Plain, 

Undisturb'd  dost  thou  remain?  10 

Where  no  angry  Whirlwinds  pass. 

Where  no  Floods  oppress  the  Grass. 

High  above,  or  deep  below. 


68  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Fain  I  thy  Retreat  wou'd  know. 

Fain  I  thee  alone  wou^d  find, 

Balm  to  my  o'er-weary'd  Mind. 

Since  what  here  the  World  enjoys, 

Or  our  Passions  most  employs, 

Peace  opposes,  or  destroys. 

Pleasure's  a  tumultuous  thing,  20 

Busy  still,  and  still  on  Wing; 

Flying  swift,  from  place  to  place, 

Darting  from  each  beauteous  Face; 

From  each  strongly  mingled  Bowl 

Through  th'inflam'd  and  restless  SouL 

Sovereign  Pow'r  who  fondly  craves, 

But  himself  to  Pomp  enslaves; 

Stands  the  Envy  of  Mankind, 

Peace,  in  vain,  attempts  to  find. 

Thirst  of  Wealth  no  Quiet  knows,  30 

But  near  the  Death-bed  fiercer  grows; 

Wounding  Men  with  secret  Stings, 

For  Evils  it  on  Others  brings. 

War  who  not  discreetly  shuns, 

Thorough  Life  the  Gauntlet  runs. 

Swords,  and  Pikes,  and  Waves,  and  Flames, 

Each  their  Stroke  against  him  aims. 

Love  (if  such  a  thing  there  be) 

Is  all  Despair,  or  Extasie. 

Poetry's  the  feav'rish  Fit,  40 

Th'  overflowing  of  unbounded  Wit.     &c. 

THE  PETITION  FOB  AN  ABSOLUTE  BETBEAT 

Inscribed  to  the  Right  Hon^^*  Catharine  Countess  of  Thanety 
mentioned  in  the  Poem  under  the  Name  of  Arminda 

Give  me  O  indulgent  Fate! 
Give  me  yet,  before  I  Dye, 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  69 

A  sweet,  but  absolute  Betreat, 
'Mongst  Paths  so  lost,  and  Trees  so  high, 
That  the  World  may  ne'er  invade. 
Through  such  Windings  and  such  Shade, 
My  unshaken  Liberty. 

No  Intruders  thither  come! 
Who  visit,  but  to  be  from  home ; 
None  who  their  vain  Moments  pass,  10 

Only  studious  of  their  Glass, 
News,  that  charm  to  listning  Ears; 
That  false  Alarm  to  Hopes  and  Fears; 
That  common  Theme  for  every  Fop, 
From  the  Statesman  to  the  Shop, 
In  those  Coverts  ne'er  be  spread, 
Of  who's  Deceas'd,  or  who's  to  Wed, 
Be  no  Tidings  thither  brought. 
But  Silent,  as  a  Midnight  Thought, 
Where  the  World  may  ne'er  invade,  20 

Be  those  Windings,  and  that  Shade: 

Courteous  Fate!  afford  me  there 
A  Table  spread  without  my  Care, 
With  what  the  neighb'ring  Fields  impart, 
Whose  Cleanliness  be  all  it's  Art, 
When,  of  old,  the  Calf  was  drest, 
(Tho'  to  make  an  Angel's  Feast) 
In  the  plain,  unstudied  Sauce 
Nor  Treufle^  nor  Morillia  was; 
Nor  cou'd  the  mighty  Patriarch's  Board  80 

One  far-fetch'd  Ortolane  afford. 
Courteous  Fate,  then  give  me  there 
Only  plain,  and  wholesome  Fare. 
Fruits  indeed  (wou'd  Heaven  bestow) 
All,  that  did  in  Eden  grow. 


70  Thk  Poems  op  Avvk 

All,  bat  the  Forbiddem  Tree, 

Won^d  be  coveted  bj  me; 

Orapes,  with  Juice  so  croiided  up, 

Ab  breaking  thro^  the  natire  Cop; 

Figs  (yet  growing)  candyM  o'er,  40 

By  the  Son's  attracting  Pow'r; 

Cherries,  with  the  downy  Peach, 

All  within  my  easie  Beach; 

Whilst  creeping  near  the  homble  Groond, 

Shooed  the  Strawberry  be  foond 

Springing  wheresoever  I  stray'd. 

Thro'  those  Windings  and  that  Shade. 

For  my  OarmerUs;  let  them  be 
What  may  with  the  Time  agree; 
Warm,  when  Phoebtis  does  retire,  50 

And  is  ill-supply'd  by  Fire: 
But  when  he  renews  the  Year, 
And  verdant  all  the  Fields  appear; 
Beauty  every  thing  resumes. 
Birds  have  dropt  their  Winter-Plumes; 
When  the  Lilly  full  display'd, 
Stands  in  purer  White  array'd, 
Than  that  Vest,  which  heretofore 
The  Luxurious  Monarch  wore. 
When  from  Salem^s  Gates  he  drove,  60 

To  the  soft  Retreat  of  Love, 
LehanorCs  all  bumish'd  House, 
And  the  dear  Egyptian  Spouse. 
Cloath  me,  Fate,  tho'  not  so  Gay ; 
Cloath  me  light,  and  fresh  as  May: 
In  the  Fountains  let  me  view 
All  my  Habit  cheap  and  new ; 
Such  as,  when  sweet  Zephyrs  fly. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  71 

With  their  Motions  may  comply ; 
Gently  waving,  to  express  70 

Unaffected  Carelesness: 
No  Perfumes  have  there  a  Part, 
Borrowed  from  the  Chymists  Art; 
But  such  as  rise  from  flow'ry  Beds, 
Or  the  falling  Jasmin  Sheds! 
'Twas  the  Odour  of  the  Field, 
E8au*8  rural  Coat  did  yield. 
That  inspired  his  Father's  Pray'r, 
For  Blessings  of  the  Earth  and  Air: 
Of  Gums,  or  Ponders  had  it  smelt;  80 

The  Supplanter,  then  unfelt, 
Easily  had  been  descry'd. 
For  One  that  did  in  Tents  abide; 
For  some  beauteous  Handmaids  Joy, 
And  his  Mother's  darling  Boy. 
Let  me  then  no  Fragrance  wear. 
But  what  the  Winds  from  Gardens  bear. 
In  such  kind,  surprizing  Gales, 
As  gather'd  from  Fidentia^s  Vales, 
All  the  Flowers  that  in  them  grew;  90 

Which  intermixing,  as  they  flew, 
In  wreathen  Garlands  dropt  agen, 
On  Lucullus,  and  his  Men ; 
Who,  chear'd  by  the  victorious  Sight, 
Trebl'd  Numbers  put  to  Flight 
Let  me,  when  I  must  be  fine, 
in  such  natural  Colours  shine ; 
Wove,  and  painted  by  the  Sun, 
Whose  resplendent  Bays  to  shun. 
When  they  do  too  fiercely  beat,  100 

Let  me  find  some  close  Betreat, 
Where  they  have  no  Passage  made. 
Thro'  those  Windings,  and  that  Shade. 


72  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Give  me  there  (since  Heaven  has  shown 

It  was  not  Good  to  be  alone) 

A  Partner  suited  to  my  Mind, 

Solitary,  pleased  and  kind; 

Who,  partially,  may  something  see 

Preferred  to  all  the  World  in  me; 

Slighting,  by  my  humble  Side,  110 

Fame  and  Splendor,  Wealth  and  Pride. 

When  but  Two  the  Earth  possest, 
'Twas  their  happiest  Days,  and  best; 

They  by  Business,  nor  by  Wars, 

They  by  no  Domestick  Cares, 

Prom  each  other  e'er  were  drawn. 

But  in  some  Grove,  or  flow'ry  Lawn, 

Spent  the  swiftly  flying  Time, 

Spent  their  own,  and  Nature's  Prime, 

In  Love;  that  only  Passion  given  120 

To  perfect  Man,  whilst  Friends  with  Heaven. 

Bage,  and  Jealousie,  and  Hate, 

Transports  of  his  fallen  State, 
(When  by  Satan's  Wiles  betray'd) 

Fly  those  Windings,  and  that  Shade! 

Thus  from  Crouds,  and  Noise  remov'd. 
Let  each  Moment  be  improv'd; 
Every  Object  still  produce. 
Thoughts  of  Pleasure,  and  of  Use: 
When  some  Eiver  slides  away,  130 

To  encrease  the  boundless  Sea; 
Think  we  then,  how  Time  do's  haste. 
To  grow  Eternity  at  last. 
By  the  Willows,  on  the  Banks, 
Gather'd  into  social  Banks, 
Playing  with  the  gentle  Winds, 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  73 

Strait  the  Boughs,  emd  smooth  the  Binds, 
Moist  each  Fibre,  and  each  Top, 
Wearing  a  luxurious  Crop, 
Let  the  time  of  Youth  be  shown,  140 

The  time  alas!  too  soon  outgrown; 
Whilst  a  lonely  stubborn  Oak, 
Which  no  Breezes  can  provoke. 
No  less  Gusts  persuade  to  move. 
Than  those,  which  in  a  Whirlwind  drove, 
Spoil'd  the  old  Fraternal  Feast, 
And  left  alive  but  one  poor  Guest; 
Rivell'd  the  distorted  Trunk, 
Sapless  Limbs  all  bent,  and  shrunk. 
Sadly  does  the  Time  presage,  150 

Of  our  too  near  approaching  Age. 
When  a  helpless  Vine  is  found. 
Unsupported  on  the  Ground, 
Careless  all  the  Branches  spread. 
Subject  to  each  haughty  Tread, 
Bearing  neither  Leaves,  nor  Fruit, 
Living  only  in  the  Boot; 
Back  reflecting  let  me  say. 
So  the  sad  Ardelia  lay; 

Blasted  by  a  Storm  of  Fate,  160 

Felt,  thro'  all  the  British  State; 
Fall'n,  neglected,  lost,  forgot, 
Dark  Oblivion  all  her  Lot; 
Faded  till  Arminda^s  Love, 
(Guided  by  the  Pow'rs  above) 
Warm'd  anew  her  drooping  Heart, 
And  Life  diffused  thro'  every  Part; 
Mixing  Words,  in  wise  Discourse, 
Of  such  Weight  and  wond'rous  Force, 
As  could  all  her  Sorrows  charm,  170 


74  The  Poems  op  Anne 

And  transitory  His  disarm; 
Chearing  the  delightful  Day, 
When  disposed  to  be  more  Gay, 
With  Wit,  from  an  nnmeasured  Store, 
To  Woman  ne'er  allow'd  before. 
What  Nature,  or  refining  Art, 
All  that  Fortune  cou'd  impart, 
Heaven  did  to  Arminda  send; 
Then  gave  her  for  ArdelicCs  Friend: 
To  her  Cares  the  Cordial  drop,  180 

Which  else  had  overflowed  the  Cup. 
So,  when  once  the  Son  of  Jess, 
Every  Anguish  did  oppress. 
Hunted  by  all  kinds  of  Ills, 
Like  a  Partridge  on  the  Hills; 
Trains  were  laid  to  catch  his  Life, 
Baited  with  a  Royal  Wife, 
From  his  House,  and  Country  torn, 
Made  a  Heathen  Prince's  Scorn ; 
Fate,  to  answer  all  these  Harms,  190 

Threw  a  Friend  into  his  Arms. 
Friendship  still  has  been  designed. 
The  Support  of  Human-kind ; 
The  safe  Delight,  the  useful  Bliss, 
The  next  World's  Happiness,  and  this. 
Give  then,  O  indulgent  Fate ! 
Give  a  Friend  in  that  Retreat 
(Tho'  withdrawn  from  all  the  rest) 
Still  a  Clue,  to  reach  my  Breast. 
Let  a  Friend  be  still  convey'd  200 

Thro'  those  Windings,  and  that  Shade! 

Where,  may  I  remain  secure, 
Waste,  in  humble  Joys  and  pure. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  75 

A  Life,  that  can  no  Envy  yield; 

Want  of  Affluence  my  Shield. 

Thus,  had  Crasstis  been  content, 

When  from  Marius  Bage  he  went, 

With  the  Seat  that  Fortune  gave, 

The  commodious  ample  Cave, 

Form'd,  in  a  divided  Bock,  210 

By  some  mighty  Earthquake's  Shock, 

Into  Booms  of  every  Size, 

Fair,  as  Art  cou'd  e'er  devise, 

Leaving,  in  the  marble  Boof, 
('Gainst  all  Storms  and  Tempests  proof) 

Only  Passage  for  the  Light, 

To  refresh  the  chearful  Sight, 

Whilst  Three  Sharers  in  his  Fate, 

On  th'  Escape  with  Joy  dilate, 

Beds  of  Moss  their  Bodies  bore,  220 

Canopy'd  with  Ivy  o'er; 

Bising  Springs,  that  round  them  play'd, 

O'er  the  native  Pavement  stray'd; 

When  the  Hour  arrived  to  Dine, 

Various  Meats,  and  sprightly  Wine, 

On  some  neighboring  ClifiF  they  spy'd; 

Every  Day  a-new  supply'd 

By  a  Friend's  entrusted  Care; 

Had  He  still  continu'd  there. 

Made  that  lonely  wond'rous  Cave  230 

Both  his  Palace,  and  his  Grave ; 

Peace  and  Best  he  might  have  found, 
(Peace  and  Best  are  under  Ground) 

Nor  have  been  in  that  Betreat, 

Fam'd  for  a  Proverbial  Fate; 

In  pursuit  of  Wealth  been  caught. 

And  punish'd  with  a  golden  Draught 


76  The  Poems  op  Ahe 

Xor  had  He.  viao  Ciwik  eodd  bind. 
Wbkpriiig  whli  a  aiovr  Hmd. 
IfMfe  'em  tidiik  that  from  abawie.  240 

(Like  tbcr  greet  Inifnstor  s  Dkive ) 
TTdingB  to  bis  Ens  sbe  brooglit. 
Baks  bj  vfajch  he  maich'd  and  Covg^ 
AfCier  Spain  he  had  o'er-nm, 
Citks  sackU  and  Banks  von. 
Drcnre  Rf/meM  Consuls  from  the  Field, 
Hade  her  darling  Pcmpeg  jiehL 
At  a  fatal,  treacheroos  Feast 
Felt  a  Dagger  in  his  Breast; 
Had  he  his  onoe-pk^ng  Thooght  230 

Of  Solitude  to  Practice  brought; 
Had  no  wild  Ambiticn  swaj'd; 
In  those  Islands  had  he  stayed, 
Jnstlj  caU'd  the  Seats  <rf  Best, 
Trolj  Fortunate,  and  Blest, 
By  the  ancient  Poets  giv'n 
As  their  best  discovered  Hear'n. 
Let  me  then,  indulgent  Fate! 
Let  me  still,  in  my  Betreat, 
From  all  roving  Thoughts  be  freed,  260 

Or  Aims,  that  may  Contention  breed: 
Nor  be  my  Endeavours  led 
By  Goods,  that  perish  with  the  Dead! 
Fitly  might  the  Life  of  Man 
Be  indeed  esteem'd  a  Span, 
If  the  present  Moment  were 
Of  Delight  his  only  Share; 
If  no  other  Joys  he  knew 
Than  what  round  about  him  grew: 
But  as  those,  who  Stars  wou'd  trace  270 

From  a  subterranean  Place, 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  77 

Throngh  some  Engine  lift  their  Eyes 

To  the  ontward,  glorious  Skies; 

So  th'  immortal  Spirit  may, 

When  descended  to  our  Clay, 

From  a  rightly  govem'd  Frame 

View  the  Height,  from  whence  she  came; 

To  her  Paradise  be  caught. 

And  things  unutterable  taught. 

Give  me  then,  in  that  Betreat,  280 

Give  me,  O  indulgent  Fate! 

For  all  Pleasures  left  behind. 

Contemplations  of  the  Mind. 

Let  the  Fair,  the  Gay,  the  Vain 

Courtship  and  Applause  obtain; 

Let  th^  Ambitious  rule  the  Earth; 

Let  the.  giddy  Fool  have  Mirth ; 

Give  the  Epicure  his  Dish, 

Ev'ry  one  their  sev'ral  Wish ; 

Whilst  my  Transports  I  employ  290 

On  that  more  extensive  Joy, 

When  all  Heaven  shall  be  surveyed 

From  those  Windings  and  that  Shade. 

TO  THE  R'  HONB"  THE  LADY  C.  TUPTON 

Upon  Addressing  to  me  the  first  letter  that  ever  she  writt  at  the 

age  of 

To  write  in  Verse  has  been  my  pleasing  choice 
When  great  Arminda's  kindnesse  urg'd  my  voice 
Or  Madam  when  in  softer  Notes  I  sung 
The  sweet  Serena  beautifull  and  yong 
WhiPst  euery  Muse  did  chearfuUy  attend 
And  lent  their  aid  Serena  to  commend 
To  speak  what  in  that  tender  age  became 
Your  blooming  Beauty  then  your  cheif est  Fame. 


78  The  Poems  op  Annb 

Now  to  secure  me  from  your  skillfull  sight 

In  borrow'd  caracters  disguis'd  I  write  10 

Nor  dare  my  hand  or  meaner  stile  expose 

Without  a  Verse,  aw'd  by  your  smoother  Prose. 

But  sheltered  in  an  Art  unleam'd  as  yett 

Take  this  aduantage  of  your  growing  witt, 

To  trust  to  Numbers  e're  you  know  their  faults 

The  strange  delight  of  your  Ardelia's  thoughts. 

When  I  with  sweet  surprise  that  Letter  view'd 

Which  to  myself  such  welcome  favour  shew'd 

Who  yett  cou'd  scarcely  take  itt  for  a  truth 

That  such  perfection  came  from  so  much  youth  20 

And  that  Arminda  should  not  only  give 

Those  Graces  to  her  Bace  which  in  her  line 

But  thus  deriues  her  ornamental  parts 

Whil'st  you  inheritt  her  acquired  Adrts 

And  from  you  Madam  now  we  look  to  see 

Lines  fine  and  finished  to  the  same  degree 

As  those  Her  favour  oft  conferr's  on  mee. 

Yours  too  apply'd  to  me  do  also  seem 

To  spring  from  the  rich  stock  of  her  esteem 

As  if  all  those  her  wisdom  condescends  80 

To  make  her  own  must  be  Serena's  Prienda 

And  by  such  gentle  and  engaging  bands 

Resign  their  hearts  to  your  alluring  handa 

Mine  I  submitt  but  great  and  lonely  Maid! 

Remember  when  that  Tribute  I  haue  paid 

That  not  your  Station  nor  each  ripen'd  Charm 

Th'  admiring  world  which  shall  about  you  swarm, 

The  gifts  of  Fortune  equal  to  your  Birth, 

My  sinking  Spirits  or  your  prosperous  Mirth, 

Nor  the  vast  distance  betwixt  Youth  and  Age,  40 

Must  from  this  happy  kindnesse  disengage. 

So  loues  Arminda  where  she  once  has  lou'd, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  79 

So  your  great  Father  whom  her  charms  had  mou'd 

Has  this  to  all  his  steadfast  virtues  joyn^d 

That  still  that  Loue  adorns  his  constant  mind. 

Your  Friendship  Madam  now  your  Pen  declares 

In  sense  and  caracters  beyond  your  years 

Which  first  dear  pledge  shall  in  my  hand  remain 

A  lasting  Honour  whil'st  I  life  retain 

Whose  utmost  Date  shall  find  you  still  possest  50 

Of  what  those  Lines  haue  grafted  in  my  breast 

WhiPst  none  that  your  Ardelia  cou'd  command 

Ere  fillM  my  paper  or  employed  my  hand 

To  such  advantage  as  these  closing  few 

Owning  what  is  so  rightfully  their  due 

My  self  a  servant  to  the  Tuftons  name 

And  sharer  in  their  Joyes  for  your  encreasing  Fame. 

A  POEM  FOR  THE  BIETH-DAY  OF  THE  RIGHT  HON*" 
THE  LADY  CATHARINE  TUFTON 

Occasioned  by  sight  of  some  Verses  upon  that  Subject  for  the 
preceding  Year,  composed  by  no  Eminent  Hand  , 

'Tis  fit  Serena  shou'd  be  sung. 
High-bom  Serena,  Fair  and  Young, 
Shou'd  be  of  ev'ry  Muse  and  Voice 
The  pleasing,  and  applauded  Choice. 
But  as  the  Meanest  of  the  Show 
Do  First  in  all  Processions  go: 
So,  let  my  Steps  pursue  that  Swain 
The  humblest  of  th'  inspired  Train ; 
Whose  well-meant  Verse  did  just  appear, 
To  lead  on  the  preceding  Year:  10 

So  let  my  Pen,  the  next  in  Fame, 
Now  wait  on  fair  Serena's  Name ; 
The  second  Tribute  gladly  pay, 
And  hail  this  blest  returning  Day. 


80  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

But  let  it  not  attempt  to  raise 

Or  rightly  speak  Serena's  Praise: 

Since  with  more  ease  we  might  declare 

How  Great  her  Predecessors  were; 

How  Great  that  more  distinguishM  Peer, 

To  whom  she  owes  her  Being  here;  20 

In  whom  onr  Britain  lets  ns  see 

What  once  they  were,  and  still  shon'd  be; 

As,  when  the  earliest  Bace  was  drown'd, 

Some  Patterns,  from  amongst  them  found. 

Were  kept  to  shew  succeeding  Times 

Their  Excellence  without  their  Crimes: 

More  easily  we  might  express 

What  Vertues  do  her  Mother  dress ; 

What  does  her  Form  and  Mind  adorn. 

Of  whom  th'  engaging  Nymph  was  bom;  80 

What  Piety,  what  generous  Love, 

Does  the  enlarged  Bosom  move 

Of  Her,  whose  Fav'rite  she  appears, 

Who  more  than  as  a  Niece  endears. 

Such  full  Perfections  obvious  lie, 

And  strike,  at  first,  a  Poet's  Eye. 

Deep  Lines  of  Honour  all  can  hit. 

Or  mark  out  a  superior  Wit ; 

Consummate  Goodness  all  can  show, 

And  where  such  Graces  shine  below:  40 

But  the  more  tender  Strokes  to  trace, 

T'  express  the  Promise  of  a  Face, 

When  but  the  Dawnings  of  the  Mind 

We  from  an  Air  unripen'd  find ; 

Which  alt'ring,  as  new  Moments  rise. 

The  Pen  or  Pencil's  Art  defies; 

When  Flesh  and  Blood  in  Youth  appears, 

Polish'd  like  what  our  Marble  wears ; 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  81 

Fresh  as  that  Shade  of  op'ning  Green, 

Which  first  upon  our  Groves  is  seen ;  50 

Enlivened  by  a  harmless  Fire, 

And  brighten'd  by  each  gay  Desire; 

These  nicer  Touches  wou'd  demand 

A  Cowley* 8  or  a  Waller's  Hand, 

T'explain,  with  undisputed  Art, 

What  'tis  afifects  th'enlighten'd  Heart, 

When  ev'ry  darker  Thought  gives  way, 

Whilst  blooming  Beauty  we  survey ; 

To  shew  how  All,  that's  soft  and  sweet, 

Does  in  the  fair  Serena  meet;  60 

To  tell  us,  with  a  sure  Presage, 

The  Charms  of  her  maturer  Age. 

When  Hothfeild  shall  (as  heretofore 

From  its  far-sought  and  virtuous  Store 

It  Families  of  great  Benown 

Did  with  illustrious  Hymens  crown) 

When  Hothfeild  shall  such  Treasure  know, 

As  fair  Serena  to  bestow: 

Then  shou'd  some  Muse  of  loftier  Wing 

The  Triumphs  of  that  Season  sing;  70 

Describe  the  Pains,  the  Hopes,  the  Fears 

Of  noble  Youths,  th'ambitious  Cares 

Of  Fathers,  the  long-fram'd  Design, 

To  add  such  Splendour  to  their  Line, 

Whilst  all  shall  strive  for  such  a  Bride 

So  Educated,  and  Ally'd. 

ON  THE  LORD  DUNDEE 

It  must  not  be ;  nor  can  the  grave 
Graham,  your  mighty  acts  conceal; 
Oblivion,  never  can  prevail 
Against  the  Loyal,  emd  the  brave. 


82  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Fame,  shall  the  gloomy  Tyrant  disposess, 

And  bear  yon,  on  her  golden  wings, 

You,  that  have  borne  the  cause  of  Bangs 

To  the  most  distant  parts,  of  the  wide  universe. 

All,  the  yong  Grecian  Conqueror  gained. 

All,  that  his  own,  he  eVe  could  rate,  10 

In  spite  of  accedents,  or  fate, 

Already  is  by  you  obtain'd. 

A  treacherous  hand  his  life  unty'd; 

And  meaner  men,  his  world  devide; 

But  Fame,  like  you,  he  grasped,  and  after  life,  retained. 

Already,  in  your  name,  was  shown 

Deeds,  second  only  to  your  own. 

But,  as  if  to  your  race  'twere  due, 

Due,  as  succession  to  our  Kings, 

Still  to  be  made  for  glorious  things,  20 

Montrose's  spirit's  doubl'd  upon  you. 

No  sooner  can  the  Nation  want. 

But  Fate,  does  still  a  Graham  grant ; 

And  storms,  and  tumults  seems  to  raise 

To  build  them  Pyramids  of  praise. 

O  Scotland!  never  more,  be  thou 

A  cold,  unfruitfull  Country  nam'd. 

But,  be  for  heat,  and  product  fam'd; 

Not  such  as  answers  to  the  plow. 

But  such,  as  Heroes  can  produce,  SO 

For  thine,  and  for  thy  Monark's  use. 

To  nobler  ends,  thou  doest  thy  heat  bestow. 

Not  to  make  com,  and  wine,  but  valiant  wariers  grow. 

No  land,  but  did  to  you  impart 
Dundee,  what  excellent  she  held. 
To  fitt  you  for  the  Court,  or  feild. 
France,  lent  you  all  her  gracefuU  arts. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  83 

That  who  e're  saw  you,  wou'd  have  thought 

A  frame  so  fine,  so  nicely  wrought, 

Was  only  made  to  conquer  hearta  40 

Courage,  your  native  country  gave, 

With  such  a  soul,  as  soon  should  take 

The  best  impressions  Art  could  make: 

Whilst  with  her  sister,  England  joyn'd  % 

With  learning  to  enrich  your  mind. 

Italy  made  you  wise,  and  grave. 

For  Strattagem,  and  council  fitt, 

Heighten^  your  conduct,  and  your  witt, 

Inspired  her  soft  poetick  fires. 

And  gave  you  o're  the  muses  land  60 

Such  vast,  such  absolute  command. 

As  suited  your  refinM  desires. 

So  was  you  made  to  be  belov'd, 

So  bom,  so  bred,  and  so  improved. 

That  when  Mars  arm'd  you,  for  wars  fatal  toile, 

Venus,  stood  sadly  by,  and  sweetly  wept  the  while. 

Unequal  numbers,  couM  not  make  you  fear. 
Unequal  numbers,  might  oppresse. 
But  cou^d  not  make  your  courage  lesse. 
Before  your  troops,  thrice  to  your  foes  60 

One  single  life,  you  did  expose; 
Oh!  had  you  been  of  that,  as  sure 
As  Fame,  and  Conquest  to  procure! 
But  greedy  Death,  envious  that  they, 
Alone,  shou'd  share  the  glorious  day, 
Resolv'd,  to  make  his  part  appear 
In  pomp,  and  solemn  trophies  drest. 
Magnificent  above  the  rest. 

And  make  the  mighty  cheif ,  become  his  noble  Prey. 
So  great  Gustavus,  tho'  with  Conquest  crown'd,     70 


84  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Had  Cypresse,  with  his  Lawrells  wound, 
And  slept  like  Graham,  on  the  field  he  wonn, 
When  the  great  businesse  of  the  day,  was  done. 

THE  CHANGE 

Poor  River^  now  thou'rt  almost  dry, 
*  What  Nymph,  or  Swain,  will  near  thee  lie? 

Since  brought,  alas!  to  sad  Decay, 
What  Flocks,  or  Herds,  will  near  thee  stay? 
The  Swans,  that  sought  thee  in  thy  Pride, 
Now  on  new  Streams  forgetful  ride: 
And  Fish,  that  in  thy  Bosom  lay, 
Chuse  in  more  prosp'rous  Floods  to  play. 
All  leave  thee,  now  thy  Ebb  appears. 
To  waste  thy  sad  Remains  in  Tears;  10 

Nor  will  thy  mournful  Murmurs  heed. 
Fly,  wretched  Stream,  with  all  thy  speed, 
Amongst  those  solid  Rocks  thy  Griefs  bestow ; 
For  Friends,  like  those  alas!  thou  ne^er  did^st  know. 

And  thou,  poor  Sun!  that  saf  st  on  high ; 
But  late,  the  Splendour  of  the  Sky ; 
What  Flow'r  tho'  by  thy  Influence  born. 
Now  Clouds  prevail,  will  tow'rds  thee  turn? 
Now  Darkness  sits  upon  thy  Brow, 
What  Persian  Votary  will  bow  ?  20 

What  River  will  her  Smiles  reflect. 
Now  that  no  Beams  thou  can^st  direct? 
By  watry  Vapours  overcast. 
Who  thinks  upon  thy  Glories  past? 
If  present  Light,  nor  Heat  we  get, 
Unheeded  thou  may'st  rise,  and  set. 
Not  all  the  past  can  one  Adorer  keep, 
Fall,  wretched  Sun,  to  the  more  faithful  Deep. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  85 

Nor  do  thou,  lofty  Structure!  boast, 
Since  undermin'd  by  Time  and  Frost:  30 

Since  thou  canst  no  Reception  give, 
In  untrod  Meadows  thou  may'st  live. 
None  from  his  ready  Road  will  turn. 
With  thee  thy  wretched  Change  to  mourn. 
Not  the  soft  Nights,  or  chearful  Days 
Thou  hast  bestow'd,  can  give  thee  Praise. 
No  lusty  Tree  that  near  thee  grows, 
(Tho'  it  beneath  thy  Shelter  rose) 
Will  to  thy  Age  a  Staff  become. 
Fall,  wretched  Building!  to  thy  Tomb.  40 

Thou,  and  thy  painted  Roofs,  in  Ruin  mixt. 
Fall  to  the  Earth,  for  That  alone  is  fixt. 

The  same,  poor  Man^  the  same  must  be 
Thy  Fate,  now  Fortune  frowns  on  thee. 
Her  Favour  ev'ry  one  pursues, 
And  losing  Her,  thou  all  must  lose. 
No  Love,  sown  in  thy  prosperous  Days, 
Can  Fruit  in  this  cold  Season  raise: 
No  Benefit,  by  thee  conferred, 
Can  in  this  time  of  Storms  be  heard.  50 

All  from  thy  troubl'd  Waters  run ; 
Thy  stooping  Fabrick  all  Men  shun. 
All  do  thy  clouded  Looks  decline, 
As  if  thou  ne'er  did'st  on  them  shine. 
O  wretched  Man!  to  other  World's  repair; 
For  Faith  and  Oratitude  are  only  there. 

UPON  THE  DEATH  OF  KING  JAMES  THE  SECOND 

1 

If  the  Possession  of  Imperial  sway 

Thou  hads't  by  Death  unhappy  Prince  resign'd 


86  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

And  to  a  moumf  uU  Bnocessour  made  way 

Whilst  All  was  uncontested,  All  combinM, 

How  had  the  streets,  how  had  the  Palace  rang, 

In  praise  of  thy  acknowledge  Worth ; 

What  had  our  numerous  Writers  then  brought  forth, 

What  melancholly  Dirges  had  they  sung. 

What  weeping  Elegy's  prepar'd. 

If  not  from  loyal  grief,  yett  to  obtain  reward.  10 

Thus  is  that  Gift  (which  Heauen  did  sure  bestow 

To  elevate  the  hearts  of  Men 

And  lead  them  to  those  BlissfuU  seats  agen 

Whence  all  harmonious  Sounds   and  lofty  Numbers 

flow) 
Now,  Mammon,  turn'd  thy  slave  to  dig  thy  Mines  below. 

2 
But  Royal  James  though  none  shall  pay  this  Verse 
Bred  in  a  Land  not  honoured  with  thy  Herse, 
But  Royal  James  who  never  shalt  return 
To  cheer  those  Hearts  which  did  thy  sorrows  mourn. 
Who  never  shalt  the  Woes,  the  Wants,  repair  20 

Which  for  thy  sake  have  been  thy  Followers  share. 
Though  with  thy  latest  Breath  such  Prospects  fled 
And  all  who  saw  thee  Dye  now  wish  themselves  as  dead, 
Yett  shall  a  free  disinterested  Muse 
In  chosen  Lines  perform  that  Task 
Which  does  an  abler  Writer  ask 
But  abler  Writers  will  the  Work  refuse, 
And  where,  alas  'twill  but  the  Feather  cost 
The  noblest  Subjects  for  the  Pen  are  lost. 

3 

Else  how  wou'd  the  Poetick  crew,  30 

Those  publick  Heralds  of  Immortal  Fame 
Unto  the  present  Times  renew 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  87 

All  which  the  Past  did  with  such  wonder  view 
And  down  to  future  Ages  wou'd  Proclaim 
What  future  Ages  scarse  cou'd  take  for  true 
When  they  describ'd  Thee  on  the  Stage  of  War 
Earlier  than  CsBsar  far 

And  made  Thee  ere  thy  tenth  accomplish'd  year 
Undaunted  in  the  Lists  appear 

And  martial   Lightnings  see  and  Martial  Thunders 

hear  40 

Which  CsBsar  never  provM  nor  his  tenth  Legion  knew. 


Next  had  they  shown  Thee  in  the  Galick  Host 

Performing  such  stupenduous  Things 

As  influenced  the  Fates  of  Kings 

Whil'st  the  best  General  which  the  World  cou'd  boast 

Thought  ready  to  resign  his  Breath 

Assured  his  Troops  they  should  not  feel  his  Death 

If  that  Illustrious  York  wou'd  fill  th'  important  Post. 

Thus  wou'd  they  Thy  exalted  valour  raise 

By  Turene  form'd,  and  stamp'd  with  Turene's  praise    50 

O're  Seas  and  Lands  (as  Seas  and  Lands  have  seen 

Thee  greatly  Brave)  that  Fame  had  sounded  been 

Which  to  the  skies  was  borne  in  Opdam's  fiery  blaze. 

High  o're  th'  Invading  Fleet  his  vessel  rose 

By  Thy  prevailing  Batteries  driven 

Which  like  a  streaming  Meteor  dreadfuU  shows 

Now  threat'ning  from  th'  illuminated  Air 

To  all  beneath  itt  Kuine  and  Dispair 

As  Heathen  Witts  had  said  to  haue   inkindl'd  Heaven 

Till  down  at  length  the  Plague  portended  came  60 

And  wrought  such  various  Deaths  that  some  must  want 

a  name. 
Oh  mighty  Prince,  for  here  thy  dark'ned  Lott 


88  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

Must  be  in  this  Reverse  of  Sight  forgott 

All  must  be  Glorious  whilst  thy  Youth  we  trace 

Whilst  shelf  ring  Waves  shall  Brittish  Shores  embrace 

Or  whilst  our  Reccords  shall  haue  place 

Where  thy  Rewards  and  Attributes  are  such 

As  show  noe  Gratitude  was  thought  too  much 

For  keeping  England  then,  superiour  to  the  Dutch. 

WhiPst  These  shall  last  no  Envy  shall  deface  70 

Of  that  Tryumphant  Day  th'  Aduantage  and  the  Grace. 


Yett  even  in  Youth  War  n'er  was  thy  Delight 

Nor  Led  by  Thee  but  in  the  Nations  right 

Which  well  Asserted  and  the  souldier  paid 

The  Honour  rescued  and  the  gainfuU  Trade 

The  solid  Buisnesse  wisely  done 

And  each  who  shar'd  the  Generous  Cause 

Possessed  too  of  the  share  that  He  had  won 

The  warrantable  Spoiles  the  Fauour  and  Applause 

Again  Commissions  ceased  and  Arms  apart  were  laid.  80 

So  good  Dictators  fought  for  ancient  Rome 

And  brought  not  single  Fame,  but  Peace  and  Plenty 

Home 
Nor  bred  new  Strifes  to  keep  that  ample  sway 
But  to  the  Plough  retum'd  cou'd  chearfully  Obey. 
So  had  our  Charles  (whilst  Reigning)  cause  to  own 

(The  Pow'er  recalled  which  his  great  Seal  had  shown) 
The  readyest  subject  stood  the  next  his  Throne. 
Oh  You  who  under  James  in  fight  were  try'd, 
Who  strove  successfuU  by  that  Prince's  side, 
Who've  seen  Him  brave  the  Cannons  angry  breath    90 
For  Brit  tan's  Interest  and  Renown 
As  if  He  had  courted  rather  then  her  Crown 

(Which  was  His  right  of  birth)  to  merit  itt  by  Death 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  89 

Oh  You  who  in  His  frequent  Dangers  stood 

And  sought  to  fence  them  at  th'  expence  of  Blood 

Now  lett  your  Teares  a  heavyer  Tribute  pay, 

Give  the  becoming  Sorrow  way 

Nor  bring  bad  Paralells  upon  the  Times 

By  seeking  through  mistaken  Peares 

To  curb  your  Sighs  or  to  conceal  your  Teares.  100 

Twas  but  in  Nero's  dayes  that  Sighs  and  Teares  were 

crimes. 

6 
♦         ♦♦♦♦«««« 
(As  all  must  do)  at  Death's  cold  feet  the  Crown 
Him  had  you  sure  EnroU'd  and  justly  with  the  Best 
Then  Alfred's  Piety  had  form'd  his  Praise 
His  thoughtfuU  Nights  compar'd  and  His  assiduous 

Dayes. 
Then  had  that  Providential  care 
Which  kept  the  Treasury  full   yett   not   the  subject 

bare 
Unto  our  frugal  Henry's  been  preferr'd 
Applauses  of  that  Temp'rance  had  we  heard 
By  whose  Example  had  excluded  been  110 

What  even  Eliza's  dayes  brought  in 
The  wasting  foul  Excesse  miscall'd  Good-natured  Sin. 


Weep  ye  Attendants  who  composed  his  Traine 
And  no  Observance  spent  in  vain 
Nor  ever  with  uneasy  Feares 

Contracted  needful  Debts  and  doubted  your  Arrears 
All  whom  His  Justice  or  his  Bounty  fed 
Now  gratefuU  weep  and  mix  the  silent  Dew 
(Which  none  will  e're  suspect  untrue) 


90  The  Poems  of  Anne 

With  your  embittered  Draughts  and  since  diminished 
Bread  120 

You  who  subordinate  in  Pnblick  Oares 

For  his  Inspection  modelled  the  Affaires 

Kemember  still  how  easy  Your  Accesse 

No  Pleasures  kept  him  from  your  sight 

No  late  Debauch  no  Bevel  of  the  Night 

No  distant  slothfull  Seat  e're  served  as  a  Recesse. 

Open  to  all  but  when  the  Seaman  came 

Known  by  his  Pace  and  greeted  by  his  Name 

Peculiar  Smiles  and  Praises  did  impart 

To  all  his  Prowesse  and  Desert  130 

All  had  his  willing  Hand,  the  Seaman  had  his  Heart 

He  bom  an  Islander  by  Nature  knew 

Her  wooden  walls  her  strength,  her  Guard  the  Naval 
Crew. 

8 

But  draw  the  Vaile  nor  seek  to  paint  that  Grief 
Which  knows  no  Bounds  nor  meditates  Relief 
Maria  weeps  with  unexhausted  Teares 
No  Look  that  Beauteous  Pace  but  sorrow  wears 
And  in  those  Eyes  where  Majesty  was  seen 
To  warn  Admirers  and  Declare  the  Queen 
Now  only  Reigns  th'  incurable  Distresse  140 

Which  Royal  James  thy  f  aithf  uU  Consort  shows 
Who  by  Her  different  Grief,  does  too  Confesse 
That  now  alas  She  the  Distinction  knows 
'Twixt  Weeping  for  thy  Losse  or  with  Thee  for  thy  Woes 
No  more  the  Diadem  attracts  Her  sight 
Held  but  by  Reflection  Bright 
Thoughts  of  returning  Glory  move  no  more 
Nor  can  She  e're  Receive  what  She  Possess' t  before 
A  Grave  is  All  She  with  Her  James  can  share 
And  were  itt  not  for  What  He  left  Her  Care  150 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  91 

How  soon  wou'd  She  Descend  and  be  His  Consort  There 
Pleas'd  better  in  that  Fourth  and  last  Remove 
Securely  by  thy  unmolested  side 
From  Life  itts  self  an  Exile  to  abide 
Then  in  th'  experienced  former  Three 
Which  yett  she  well  sustained  Accompanied  by  Thee 
Strong  are  the  Bands  of  Death,  but  stronger  those  of 
Love. 

9 

Oh  Brittan  take  this  Wish  before  we  cease 

May  Rightful!  Kings  procure  Thee  lasting  Peace 

And  having  Rul'd  Thee  to  thy  Own  desire  160 

On  thy  Maternal  Bosome  late  Expire 

Clos'd  in  that  Earth,  where  they  had  Reign'd  before 

Till  States  and  Monarchies  shall  be  no  more 

Since  in  the  Day  of  unapealing  Doom 

Or  King  or  Kingdom  must  Declare 

What  the  sad  Chance  or  weighty  Causes  were 

That  forc'd  Them  to  Arise  from  out  a  Forrain  Tomb. 

Oh  Brittan  may  Thy  Days  to  come  be  fair 

And  All  who  shall  intend  thy  Q-ood 

Be  reverendly  Heard  and  rightly  Understood  170 

May  no  Intestine  Broiles  thy  Entrailles  Tare 

No  Fields  in  Thee  be  fought  or  Nam'd  anew  by  Blood 

May  all  who  Shield  Thee  due  Applauses  have 

Whilst  for  my  self  like  solitary  men 

Devoted  only  to  the  Pen 

I  but  a  safe  Retreat  amidst  Thee  Crave 

Below  th'  ambitious  World  and  just  above  my  Grave. 

VERSES 
Written  under  the  King  of  Sweden^a  Picture 

Observe  this  Piece,  which  to  our  Sight  does  bring 
The  fittest  Posture  for  the  Swedish  King; 


92  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

(Encompass'd,  as  we  think,  with  Armies  round, 
The'  not  express'd  within  this  narrow  Bound) 
Who,  whilst  his  warlike  and  extended  Hand 
Directs  the  foremost  Ranks  to  Charge  or  Stand, 
Reverts  his  Face,  lest  That,  so  Fair  and  Young, 
Should  call  in  doubt  the  Orders  of  his  Tongue: 
Whilst  the  excited,  and  emboldened  Rear 
Such  Youth  beholding,  and  such  Features  there. 
Devote  their  plainer  Forms,  and  are  asham'd  to  Fear. 
Thus!  ev'ry  Action,  ev'ry  Grace  of  thine, 
O  latest  Son  of  Fame,  Son  of  Oustavus  Line! 
Affects  thy  Troops,  with  all  that  can  inspire 
A  blooming  Sweetness,  and  a  martial  Fire, 
Fatal  to  none,  but  thy  invading  Foe. 
So  Lightnings,  which  to  all  their  Brightness  shew, 
Strike  but  the  Man  alone,  who  has  provoked  the  Blow. 

THE  CIRCUIT  OF  APPOLLO 

AppoUo  as  lately  a  Circuit  he  made, 

Throo'  the  lands  of  the  Muses  when  Kent  he  survey'd 

And  saw  there  that  Poets  were  not  very  common. 

But  most  that  pretended  to  Verse,  were  the  Women 

Resolv'd  to  encourage,  the  few  that  he  found. 

And  she  that  writt  best,  with  a  wreath  shou'd  be  crown'd. 

A  summons  sent  out,  was  obey'd  but  by  four. 

When  Phebus,  afflicted,  to  meet  with  no  more. 

And  standing,  where  sadly,  he  now  might  descry. 

From  the  banks  of  the  Stoure  the  desolate  Wye,         10 

He  lamented  for  Behn  o're  that  place  of  her  birth. 

And  said  amongst  Femens  was  not  on  the  earth 

Her  superiour  in  fancy,  in  language,  or  witt, 

Yett  own'd  that  a  little  too  loosly  she  writt; 

Since  the  art  of  the  Muse  is  to  stirr  up  soft  thoughts, 

Yett  to  make  all  hearts  beat,  without  blushes,  or  faults, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  93 

But  now  to  proceed,  and  their  merritts  to  know, 

Before  he  on  any,  the  Bay's  wou'd  bestow, 

He  order'd  them  each  in  their  several  way, 

To  show  him  their  papers,  to  sing,  or  to  say,  20 

What  ^ere  they  thought  best,  their  pretention's  might 

prove. 
When  Alinda,  began,  with  a  song  upon  Love. 
So  easy  the  Verse,  yett  compos'd  with  such  art. 
That  not  one  expression  fell  short  of  the  heart; 
Apollo  himself,  did  their  influence  obey. 
He  catch'd  up  his  Lyre,  and  a  part  he  wou'd  play, 
Declaring,  no  harmony  else,  cou'd  be  found, 
Fitt  to  wait  upon  words,  of  so  moving  a  sound. 
The  Wreath,  he  reach'd  out,  to  have  plac'd  on  her  head, 
If  Laura  not  quickly  a  paper  had  read,  30 

Wherin  She  Orinda  has  praised  so  high, 
He  own'd  itt  had  reach'd  him,  while  yett  in  the  sky, 
That  he  thought  with  himself,  when  itt  first  struck  his 

ear. 
Who  e're  cou'd  write  that,  ought  the  Laurel  to  wear. 
Betwixt  them  he  stood,  in  a  musing  suspence, 
Till  Valeria  withdrew  him  a  little  from  thence. 
And  told  him,  as  soon  as  she'd  gott  him  aside, 
Her  works,  by  no  other,  but  him  shou'd  be  try'd; 
Which  so  often  he  read,  and  with  still  new  delight. 
That  Judgment  t'was  thought  wou'd  not  passe  till  twas 

'night;  40 

Yet  at  length,  he  restor'd  them,  but  told  her  withall 
If  she  kept  itt  still  close,  he'd  the  Talent  recall. 
Ardelia,  came  last  as  expecting  least  praise. 
Who  writt  for  her  pleasure  and  not  for  the  Bays, 
But  yett,  as  occasion,  or  fancy  should  sway, 
Wou'd  sometimes  endeavour  to  passe  a  dull  day. 
In  composing  a  song,  or  a  Scene  of  a  Play 


94  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Not  seeking  for  Fame,  which  so  little  does  last, 
That  e^re  we  can  taste  itt,  the  Pleasure  is  Past. 
But  AppoUo  replj^d,  tho^  so  carelesse  she  seemd,        50 
Yett  the  Bays,  if  her  share,  wou^d  be  highly  esteemed. 

And  now,  he  was  going  to  make  an  Oration, 

Had  thrown  by  one  lock,  with  a  delicate  fassion. 

Upon  the  left  foot,  most  genteely  did  stand. 

Had  drawn  back  the  other,  and  way'd  his  white  hand, 

When  calling  to  mind,  how  the  Prize  alltho'  given 

By  Paris,  to  her,  who  was  fairest  in  Heaven, 

Had  pull'd  on  the  rash,  inconsiderate  Boy, 

The  fall  of  his  House,  with  the  mine  of  Troy, 

Since  in  Witt,  or  in  Beauty,,  itt  never  was  heard,        60 

One  female  cou'd  yield  t'  have  another  preferred. 

He  change^  his  dessign,  and  devided  his  praise. 

And  said  that  they  all  had  a  right  to  the  Bay^s, 

And  that  t'were  injustice,  one  brow  to  adorn. 

With  a  wreath,  which  so  fittly  by  each  might  be  worn* 

Then  smiPd  to  himself,  and  applauded  his  art. 

Who  thus  nicely  has  acted  so  suttle  a  part. 

Four  Women  to  wheedle,  but  found  'em  too  many. 

For  who  wou'd  please  all,  can  never  please  any. 

In  vain  then,  he  thought  itt,  there  longer  to  stay,      70 

But  told  them,  he  now  must  go  drive  on  the  day, 

Yett  the  case  to  Parnassus,  shou'd  soon  be  referr'd, 

And  there  in  a  councill  of  Muses,  be  heard. 

Who  of  their  own  sex,  best  the  title  might  try. 

Since  no  man  upon  earth,  nor  Himself  in  the  sky, 

Wou'd  be  so  imprudent,  so  dull,  or  so  blind. 

To  loose  three  parts  in  four  from  amongst  woman  kind. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  95 


AN  EPISTLE 

From  Ardelia  To  Mrs.  Randolph  in  answer  to  her  Poem  upon 

Her  Verses 
Madam, 

till  pow'rfuUy  convinc'd  by  you, 

I  thought  those  Praises  never  were  Their  due. 

Which  I  had  read,  or  heard  bestow'd  by  Men 

On  Women,  that  have  ventured  on  the  Pen. 

But  now  must  yeild  (pursuaded  by  your  stile) 

That  Lesbian  Sapho^s  might  all  hearts  beguile. 

The  vanquish'd  Pindar,  now  I  must  beleive 

Might  from  Corrina's  Muse  new  Laws  receive. 

Since  our  own  Age  is  happily  possest 

Of  such  a  genius,  in  a  Female  Breast,  10 

As  gives  us  Faith  for  all  those  wonders  told, 

Producing  New,  to  justify  the  old. 

Then  we'll  no  more  submitt,  but  (in  your  name) 

To  Poetry  renew  our  Ancient  Claime ; 

Through  itts  retirement,  we'll  your  worth  persue, 

And  lead  itt  into  Public  Rule  and  View; 

As  the  best  Monarks,  which  the  Romans  made 

Were  forc'd  to  Thrones,  from  some  beloved  shada 

Nor,  lett  itt  to  your  Verse,  objected  be. 

That  itt  has  stoop'd  so  low,  to  find  out  me,  20 

Since  a  mean  subject  greater  skill  requires 

Then  one,  which  of  itts  self,  high  thoughts  inspires. 

And  twas  the  Mantuan  Poet's  boasted  praise, 

Virgil's,  who  Kings  and  Heroes  best  cou'd  raise. 

That  if  to  lowly  Plaines,  he  did  repair. 

His  Song,  shou'd  make  'em  worth  a  Consull's  care, 

Thus,  have  you  Madam,  by  your  lines  enhanc'd 

My  humble  worth,  and  so,  my  fame  advanc'd. 

That  where-so-ere  that  Panigerick's  shown. 


96  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

It  stands  inferiour  only  to  your  own;  30 

And  whilst  Orinda^s  part  you  far  transcend, 

I  proudly  bear  that  of  her  glorious  Friend, 

Who  though  not  equaling  her  lofty  Witt, 

Th^  occasion  was,  of  what  so  well  she  writt 

Might  I  the  paralell  yett  more  improve, 

And  gain  as  high  a  Station  in  your  Love, 

Then  should  my  Pen  (directed  by  my  heart) 

Make  gratefull  Nature,  speak  the  words  of  Art, 

Since  Friendship,  like  Devotion  clears  the  mind, 

Where  every  thought,  is  heightened  and  refin'd.      40 

Had  Saul  alone,  upon  Mount  Gilboa  fell, 

David  had  sung,  but  had  not  sung  so  well; 

Described  th'  abandoned  Sheild,  and  broaken  Bow, 

But,  to  the  love  of  Jonathan  we  owe 

The  Love,  which  that  of  Women  did  surpasse. 

Of  that  sweet  Elegy,  the  mournful!  grace; 

The  Brother  Jonathan,  peirc'd  deeper  far 

Then  all  the  Spears  of  that  destructive  war. 

Thus,  may  your  vallu^d  kindnesse,  raise  my  sence, 

Who  can  but  treat  you  att  your  own  expence,         50 

Nor  must,  untill  I  in  that  wish  succeed, 

E're  hope  to  write,  what's  fitt  for  you  to  read. 

Since  upon  you,  itt  does  alone  depend 

To  make  a  Poet,  when  you  make  a  Friend 

Of  Madam  &a 

A  PROLOGUE  TO  DON  CARLOS 

Acted  by  Yong  LadySy  An :  1696 

'Twas  long  debated,  wheither  to  a  Play, 
So  known  as  this,  which  we  present  to-day, 
A  Prologue,  for  the  Audience  shou'd  be  writt, 
To  add  to  all  the  rest,  th'  expence  of  Witt; 
When  in  this  Kingdom,  'tis  so  hard  to  find. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  97 

And  from  such  store  of  Mints,  so  little's  coin'd, 
That  shon'd  the  Muses  senate,  dam  the  old, 
The  new,  no  pleasing  comerce  cou'd  uphold ; 
Which  makes  us  a  supply,  to  treat  you  seek 
From  such  a  Bank,  as  time  nor  chance  can  break ;      10 
And  Otta way's  heroick  thoughts,  rehearse; 
Love  in  his  Lines,  and  dye  in  his  smooth  Verse. 
Not  tire  ye,  with  a  Farce,  on  powder'd  Beauxs, 
Who  like  some  Trees,  thrive  with  redoubPd  blows; 
And  a  new  crop  of  tawdry  foUys  bear, 
After  the  lash,  of  each  satirick  year; 
Whom  Silence  mortif ys  the  surer  way. 
Since  Beaux,  unminded,  only  do  decay. 
Nor  shall  we  greive  Ladys,  with  fading  Graces, 
By  any  Plott,  but  shewing  yonger  faces.  20 

We'll  allso  spare  our  safe  retum'd  comanders, 
And  be  as  mild,  as  their  campagn  in  Flanders. 
Nay,  tho'  we'll  poyson  too,  the  Queen  of  Spain, 
It  sha'nt  be  long,  ere  she  revives  again. 
In  our  design,  no  secret  malice  lyes, 
And  All  may  'scape,  that  can  withstand  our  Eyes. 
But  Gentlemen,  111  tell  ye,  least  ye  say 
Ye  were  surpris'd,  and  vanquish'd  by  foul  play. 
Our  Eyes,  for  conquest,  are  so  well  prepar'd, 
You'd  need  be  wam'd  to  stand  upon  your  guard.         30 
The  Black,  with  unsheath'd  glances,  all  defying. 
The  softer  Grey,  in  dang'rous  Ambush  lying, 
And  on  each  Oheeck,  the  youthfuU  colours  flying, 
Which  we  expect,  shou'd  no  resistance  meet, 
'Till  every  heart,  lyes  beating  at  our  feet. 
Now,  if  you'll  stay,  repent  itt  not  hereafter, 
When  that  subdu'd,  you  find  we  give  no  quarter; 
Nor  think  itt  hard,  we  put  stale  witt  upon  you, 
Who  shew  fresh  Beauty,  and  excuse  your  mony. 


98  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 


A  POEM,  OOCASION'D  BY  THE  SIGHT  OP  THE  4™ 
EPISTLE  LIB.  EPIST:  1.  OP  HORACE 

Immitated  and  Inscribed  to  Richard  Thomhill  Esq.  by  Mr  Bowe^ 
who  had  before  sent  heithevy  another  translation  from  Horace 

Twice  in  our  Solitude  has  now  appear'd 
Such  verse  as  Home  throng'd  with  applauders  heard, 
And  twice,  Her  Horace  been  to  us  reviv'd 
As  praised  and  pollish'd  as  to  them  he  liv^d. 
The  Stu£P  and  Workman's  skill  so  nicely  shown. 
We  think  the  Words  as  well  as  thoughts  his  own 
And  Joy  to  see  that  by  relenting  Fate 
(Which  Speech  confused)  tis  given  thus  to  translate 
Whilst  BabePs  scattered  streames  unite  again 
Beneath  the  conduct  of  th'  industrious  Pen  10 

But  why  should  such  a  Muse  as  can  comend 
And  Paralell  the  Virtues  of  a  Friend 
Describe  from  ancient  Rules  with  modem  Art 
His  Copious  sensce  each  ornamental  part 
Mistake  the  softer  Buisnesse  of  his  heart 
Or  ask  how  he  the  too  swift  Hours  imploys 
Who  late  possessed  of  so  long  courted  Joys 
Flyes  to  some  still  retreate  and  shunn's  the  Citty's 

noise 
As  He  whom  Poets  fein  t'have  rul'd  above 
When  sway'd  himself  by  more  commanding  Love       20 
Left  his  Society  and  Court  of  Gods 
To  stem  the  Hellispont  and  haunt  the  Woods 
Nor  to  Olimpus  but  some  lonely  shade 
With  untrac'd  steps  the  beauteous  Prize  convey'd. 

Nor  be  itt  thought  that  Tragedy  has  place 
Within  the  influence  of  Orania's  face 
Not  he  who  cou'd  so  well  our  souls  comand 
And  toutch  each  string  with  a  prevailing  hand 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  99 

His  Belvedera's  or  Monimia's  Fate 

Cou'd  'ere  haue  Plotted  in  so  blessed  a  State  30 

(Since  His  from  our  own  bosome  cares  that  flow 
The  moving  scenes  we  on  the  World  bestow) 
Yett  had  he  liv'd  Orania  to  have  seen 
His  Caracters  had  sure  more  perfect  been 
Not  such  as  sullied  in  his  Plays  were  shown 
One  by  anothers  guilt  one  by  her  own. 
Tho'  for  Her  Charms  Brothers  might  too  contest 
And  the  best  secret  quitt  the  closest  Breast 
So  bright  her  form  for  whom  such  Numbers  strove 
Till  the  most  worthy  fixt  her  envy'd  Love  40 

Whilst  but  to  him  and  her  own  sex  confin'd 
Are  now  the  soft  indearments  of  her  Mind 
Inspiring  Joy  still  chearfuU  and  att  ease 

(For  they  are  all  ways  pleas'd  who  all  ways  please) 
Even  I  who  to  my  Heart  just  bounds  had  sett 
And  in  my  Friendship  scomM  to  be  coquette 
Or  seem  indulgent  to  each  new  Adresse 
Which  generall  Friends  in  comon  terms  expresse 
Now  (by  so  sweet  a  violence  compell'd) 
The  amplest  room  to  kind  Orania  yield  50 

Then  is  it  strange  the  Touth  a  while  remains 
Contemplating  his  Blisse  on  silent  Plaines 
Lives  to  Himself  and  the  selected  Fair 
Nor  can  enough  of  those  lov'd  moments  spare 

(If  rightly  I  Devine)  a  debt  to  pay 
Of  well  writt  Verse  (tho'  none  more  knows  the  way) 
Nor  hardly  will  afifoard  one  sprightly  Line 
To  crown  the  Health  still  wish'd  him  at  the  Vine 
Where  he  returning  shall  sustain  a  part 
Of  heighten'd  Witt  and  of  the  Critticks  Art  60 

With  Him  whose  Numbers  to  our  shades  extend 
And  Him  that  stooped  our  Numbers  to  comend 


/ 


/ 


The  Poems  of  Anne 


Whose  well  bred  Muse  found  something  to  allow 

And  tho'  they  fail'd  wou'd  to  the  Woman  bow 

Happy  You  three!  happy  the  Bace  of  Men! 

Bom  to  inform  or  to  correct  the  Pen 

To  proffitts  pleasures  freedom  and  command 

Whilst  we  beside  you  but  as  Cyphers  stand 

T'  increase  your  Numbers  and  to  swell  th^  account 

Of  your  delights  which  from  our  charms  amount       70 

And  sadly  are  by  this  distinction  taught 

That  since  the  Pall  (by  our  seducement  wrought) 

Ours  is  the  greater  losse  as  ours  thQ  greater  fault 

AN    EPILOGUE  TO  THE  TRAGEDY  OF    JANE    SHORE 
To  he  spoken  by  Mrs,  Oldfield  the  night  before  the  Foe  fa  Day 

The  audience  seems  tonight  so  very  kind, 

I  fancy  I  may  freely  speak  my  mind, 

And  tell  you,  when  the  author  nam'd  Jane  Shore, 

I  all  her  glorious  history  run  o'er, 

And  thought  he  would  have  shewn  her  on  the  stage, 

In  the  first  triumphs  of  her  blooming  age; 

Edward  in  public  at  her  feet  a  slave. 

The  jealous  Queen  in  private  left  to  rave ; 

Yet  Jane  superior  still  in  all  the  strife, 

For  sure  that  mistress  leads  a  wretched  life,  10 

Who  can't  insult  the  Keeper  and  the  wife. 

This  I  concluded  was  his  right  design, 

To  make  her  lavish,  careless,  gay  and  fine ; 

Not  bring  her  here  to  mortify  and  whine. 

I  hate  such  parts  as  we  have  plaid  today. 

Before  I  promis'd,  had  I  read  the  play, 

I  wou'd  have  staid  at  home,  and  drank  my  Tea. 

Then  why  the  husband  shou'd  at  last  be  brought 

To  hear  her  own  and  aggravate  her  fault. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  101 

Puzzled  as  much  my  discontented  thought.  20 

For  were  I  to  transgress,  for  all  the  Poet, 

I'll  swear  no  friend  of  mine  should  ever  know  it. 

But  you  perhaps  are  pleased  to  see  her  mended, 

And  so  should  I ;  had  all  her  charms  been  ended. 

But  whilst  another  lover  might  be  had, 

The  woman  or  the  Poet  must  be  mad. 

There  is  a  season,  which  too  fast  approaches, 

And  every  listening  beauty  nearly  touches; 

When  handsome  Ladies,  falling  to  decay, 

Pass  thro'  new  epithets  to  smooth  the  way :  80 

From  fair  and  young  transportedly  confessed, 

Dwindle  to  finey  well  fashioned,  and  well  dres8*d. 

Thence  as  their  fortitude's  extremest  proof. 

To  fjoell  as  yet;  from  well  to  well  enough; 

Till  having  on  such  weak  foundation  stood, 

Deplorably  at  last  they  sink  to  good. 

Abandon'd  then,  'tis  time  to  be  retir'd, 

And  seen  no  more,  when  not  alas!  admir'd. 

By  men  indeed  a  better  fate  is  known. 

The  pretty  fellow,  that  has  youth  outgrown,  40 

Who  nothing  knew,  but  how  his  cloaths  did  sit, 

Transforms  to  a  Free-thinker  and  a  Wit; 

At  Operas  becomes  a  skill'd  Musician ; 

Ends  in  a  partyman  and  politician ; 

Maintains  some  figure,  while  he  keeps  his  breath. 

And  is  a  fop  of  consequence  till  death. 

And  so  would  I  have  had  our  mistress  Shore 

To  make  a  figure,  till  she  pleas'd  no  more. 

But  if  you  better  like  her  present  sorrow, 

Pray  let  me  see  you  here  again  to-morrow,  50 

And  should  the  house  be  throng'd  the  Poets'  day, 

Whate'er  he  makes  us  women  do  or  say, 

You'll  not  believe,  that  he'll  go  fast  and  pray. 


102  The  Poems  op  Anne 


TO  MR.  PRIOR  FROM  A  LADY  UNKNOWN 

The  Nymph  whose  Virgin-heart  thy  charms  have  taught 

To  cherish  Love,  with  secret  wishes  fraught, 

Reserv'd  at  first,  endeavours  to  conceal 

What  She  had  rather  die  than  not  reveal, 

No  fears  the  Love-sick  Maid  can  long  restrain. 

None  read  Thy  verse,  or  hear  Thee  speak  in  vain. 

Thy  melting  Numbers,  and  polite  Address, 

In  ev'ry  Pair  raise  passion  to  excess. 

In  either  sex  You  never  fail,  we  find. 

To  cultivate  the  heart,  or  charm  the  mind, 

Li  raptures  lost.     I  fear  not  your  disdain. 

But  own  I  languish  to  possess  your  vein. 

As  a  fond  bird,  pleas'd  with  the  teacher's  note, 

Expends  his  life  to  raise  his  mimic  throat. 

His  little  art,  exerting  all  he  can, 

Charm'd  with  the  tune,  to  imitate  the  man: 

Rudely  he  chants,  yet  labours  not  in  vain. 

By  wild  essays  just  so  much  song  to  gain. 

As  tempts  his  master  to  renew  the  strain. 

Such  is  my  verse,  with  equal  zeal  I  bum. 

Too  happy,  shou'd  I  meet  the  same  return. 

THE  ANSWER 
[To  Pope's  Impromptu] 

Disarmed  with  so  genteel  an  air, 

The  contest  I  give  o'er ; 
Yet,  Alexander,  have  a  care. 

And  shock  the  sex  no  more. 
We  rule  the  world  our  life's  whole  race. 

Men  but  assume  that  right; 
First  slaves  to  ev'ry  tempting  face, 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  108 

Then  martyrs  to  our  spite. 
You  of  one  Orpheus  sure  have  read, 

Who  would  like  you  have  writ  10 

Had  he  in  London  town  been  bred, 

And  polish'd  to[o]  his  wit; 
But  he  poor  soul  thought  all  was  well, 

And  great  should  be  his  fame. 
When  he  had  left  his  wife  in  hell, 

And  birds  and  beasts  could  tame. 
Yet  venturing  then  with  scofSng  rhimes 

The  women  to  incense, 
Eesenting  Heroines  of  those  times 

Soon  punished  his  offence.  20 

And  as  the  Hebrus  rolPd  his  scull. 

And  harp  besmear'd  with  blood. 
They  clashing  as  the  waves  grew  full, 

Still  harmonized  the  flood. 
But  you  our  follies  gently  treat. 

And  spin  so  fine  the  thread. 
You  need  not  fear  his  aukward  fate. 

The  lock  wo'n't  cost  the  head. 
Our  admiration  you  command 

For  all  that's  gone  before ;  80 

What  next  we  look  for  at  your  hand 

Can  only  raise  it  more. 
Yet  sooth  the  Ladies  I  advise 

(As  me  too  pride  has  wrought,) 
We're  bom  to  wit,  but  to  be  wise 

By  admonitions  taught. 

TO  MK.  POPE 

The  muse,  of  ev'ry  heav'nly  gift  allowed 
To  be  the  chief,  is  public,  though  not  proud. 
Widely  extensive  is  the  poet's  aim, 


104  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  in  each  verse  he  draws  a  bill  on  fame. 

For  none  have  writ  (whatever  they  pretend) 

Singly  to  raise  a  patron,  or  a  friend; 

But  whatsoe'er  the  theme  or  object  be, 

Some  commendations  to  themselves  foresee. 

Then  let  us  find  in  your  foregoing  page, 

The  celebrating  poems  of  the  age ;  10 

Nor  by  injurious  scruples  think  it  fit 

To  hide  their  judgments  who  applaud  your  wit 

But  let  their  pens  to  yours  the  heralds  prove, 

Who  strive  for  you  as  Greece  for  Homer  strove ; 

Whilst  he  who  best  your  poetry  asserts. 

Asserts  his  own,  by  sympathy  of  parts. 

Me  panegyric  verse  does  not  inspire. 

Who  never  well  can  praise  what  I  admire; 

Nor  in  those  lofty  trials  dare  appear. 

But  gently  drop  this  counsel  in  your  ear.  20 

Go  on,  to  gain  applauses  by  desert, 

Inform  the  head,  whilst  you  dissolve  the  heart ; 

Inflame  the  soldier  with  harmonious  rage, 

Elate  the  young,  and  gravely  warn  the  sage ; 

Allure  with  tender  verse  the  female  race. 

And  give  their  darling  passion  courtly  grace ; 

Describe  the  Forest  still  in  rural  strains. 

With  vernal  sweets  fresh  breathing  from  the  plains. 

Your  tales  be  easy,  natural,  and  gay. 

Nor  all  the  poet  in  that  part  display ;  30 

Nor  let  the  critic  there  his  skill  unfold. 

For  Boccace  thus,  and  Chaucer  tales  have  told. 

Soothe,  as  you  only  can,  each  diff'ring  taste, 

And  for  the  future  charm  as  in  the  past. 

Then  should  the  verse  of  ev'ry  artful  hand 

Before  your  numbers  eminently  stand; 

In  you  no  vanity  could  thence  be  shown, 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  105 

Unless,  since  short  in  beauty  of  your  own, 
Some  envious  scribbler  might  in  spite  declare, 
That  for  comparison  you  placed  them  there.  40 

But  envy  could  not  against  you  succeed, 
'Tis  not  from  friends  that  write,  or  foes  that  read ; 
Censure  or  praise  must  from  ourselves  proceed. 

TO  A  FELLOW  SCRIBBLER 

Prithee,  friend,  that  hedge  behold: 

When  all  we  rhiming  fools  grow  old, 

That  hedge  our  state  will  represent, 

Who  in  vain  flourish  life  have  spent; 

Amidst  it  stands  a  rivalPd  tree 

Now  representing  sixty  three. 

And  like  it  you  and  I  shall  be. 

The  bare  vine  round  about  it  clings 

With  mischievous,  intangling  strings, 

The  night  shade,  with  a  dismal  flow'r,  10 

Curl's  o'er  it,  like  a  Lady's  tower; 

Or  honesty  with  feathered  down. 

Like  grizled  hair  deforms  its  crown; 

Luxuriant  plants  that  o'er  it  spread. 

Not  med'cinal  for  heart  or  head, 

Which  serve  but  to  amuse  the  sight. 

Are  like  the  nothings  that  we  write; 

Yet  still  'tis  thought,  that  tree's  well  plac'd. 

With  beauteous  Eglantine  imbrac'd ; 

But  see  how  false  appearance  proves,  20 

If  he  that  honey-suckle  loves ; 

His  love  the  honey -suckle  scorns, 

Which  climbs  by  him  to  reach  the  thorns; 

The  rival  thorn  his  age  derides. 

And  gnaws  like  jealousy  his  sides. 

Then  let  us  cease,  my  friend,  to  sing 


106  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

When  ever  youth  is  on  the  wing, 

Unless  we  solidly  indite, 

Some  good  infusing  while  we  write. 

Lest  with  our  follies  hung  around,  SO 

We  like  that  tree  and  hedge  be  found, 

Grotesque  and  trivial,  shun'd  by  all. 

And  soon  forgotten  when  we  falL 

TO  DB-  WALDRON 

A  Fellow  of  All  Soula  Colledge  in  Oxford,  TF%o  in  a  Letter 
acknowledg'd  hie  mistake  in  having  lefte  that  Society  dt  the 
Muses  to  follow  the  Practise  of  Phisck 

'Tis  true  Mirtillo  'twas  a  fault 
T  have  been  by  glittering  profit  wrought 
To  quit  that  seat  of  thoughts  refined 
That  Eden  to  the  fruitfuU  mind 
Where  thy  well  nurs'd  and  thriving  Muse 
Such  sweets  and  plenty  did  diffuse 
Buisnesse  to  court  thy  freedoms  fane 
Of  Life  the  well  nam'd  Hurricane 
To  leave  th'  embraces  of  a  Friend 
Which  there  kind  Fate  did  often  send  10 

A  Miser's  guilty  hand  to  hold 
And  feel  his  Pulse,  to  feel  his  Gold 
Who  startles  att  the  name  of  thee 
And  in  suspence  'twixt  Life  and  Fee 
How  to  determine  seems  so  loth 
Till  by  delay,  he  parts  with  both, 
Whom  hadd'st  thou  rais'd  from  fainting  sweats 
Supporting  Him  had  propp'd  new  cheats 
By  wealth  too  fatally  betray'd 

'Twas  ill  resolv'd  to  quitt  some  Maid  20 

Whose  blooming  youth  and  chearfuU  face 
Expell'd  contagion  from  each  Place 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  107 

A  Grand-Sires  latest  plaints  to  hear 
Sick  only  of  his  nintieth  year 
To  combat  with  each  foul  disease 
That  can  nnwholsome  Nature  seize 
The  brisker  aid  of  sprightly  wine 
For  Sal-volatile  resign 
With  Druggs  and  their  mistaken  force. 
'Twas  ill  to  clogg  that  gay  discourse  30 

Which  here-to-fore  when  unconfin'd 
Bemoy'd  all  sicknesse  from  the  Mind 
Whilst  Table-books  were  richly  fraught 
With  Witt  which  cost  thee  scarce  a  thought 
So  swift  itt  from  occasions  rose 
Extempor6  in  Verse  or  Prose 
Why  should  that  Herb  which  cur'd  our  spleen 
When  from  thy  Pen  so  fresh  so  green 
So  soft  so  fragrant  and  so  yong 
It  in  th'  inliven'd  Fancy  sprung  40 

Grow  useless  by  o're  labour'd  skill 
And  draining  through  a  winding  still 
Why  shou'd  thy  time  and  sence  be  lost 
In  saving  those  not  worth  the  cost 
Believe  me  too  His  all  in  vain 
Believe  one  of  the  Biming  Traine 
'Tis  vain  to  strive  in  Pate's  dispite 
Numbers  with  mony  to  unite 
That  sordid  Plant  we  ne're  cou'd  raise 
Within  the  odour  of  the  Bays  50 

Forsake  then  thy  ill  chosen  toile 
Betum  to  that  abandon^  soyle 
Betum  Mirtillo  to  Apollo's  Bules 
Betum  to  ease  and  to  the  Muses  scools 
Live  there  a  Wit  leave  druggery  to  fools 


108  The  Poems  of  Anne 

TO  EDWARD  JENKINSON,  ESQ. 
a  very  young  Oentleman^  who  writ  a  Poem  on  PEACE 

Fair  Youth!  who  wish  the  Wars  may  cease, 

We  own  you  better  form'd  for  Peace. 

Nor  Pallas  you,  nor  Mars  shou'd  follow; 

Your  Gods  are  Cupid  and  Apollo; 

Who  give  sweet  Looks,  and  early  Bhimes, 

Bespeaking  Joys,  and  Halcyon  Times. 

Your  Face,  which  We^  as  yet,  may  praise, 

Calls  for  the  Myrtle,  and  the  Bays. 

The  Martial  Crowns  Fatigues  demand, 

And  laurell'd  Heroes  must  be  tann'd;  10 

A  Fate,  we  never  can  allow 

Shou'd  reach  your  pleasing,  polish'd  Brow. 

But  granting  what  so  young  you've  writ. 

From  Nature  flow'd,  as  well  as  Wit; 

And  that  indeed  you  Pea^ce  pursue. 

We  must  begin  to  Treat  with  you. 

We  Females^  Sir,  it  is  I  mean: 

Whilst  I,  like  Bristol  for  the  Queen, 

For  all  the  Ladies  of  your  Age 

As  Plenipo'  betimes  engage;  20 

ALud  as  first  Article  declare, 

You  shall  be  Faithful  as  you're  Fair: 

No  Sighs,  when  you  shall  know  their  Use, 

Shall  be  discharg'd  in  Love's  Abuse ; 

Nor  kindling  Words  shall  undermine, 

Till  you  in  equal  Passion  join. 

Nor  Money  be  alone  your  Aim, 

Tho'  you  an  Over-weight  may  claim, 

And  fairly  build  on  your  Desert, 

If  with  your  Person  goes  your  Heart.  30 

But  when  this  Barrier  I  have  gain'd, 


Countess  op  Winghilsea  109 

And  trust  it  will  be  well  maintained ; 
Who  knows,  but  some  imprudent  She 
Betraying  what's  secur'd  by  me, 
Shall  yield  thro'  Verse,  or  stronger  Charms, 
To  Treat  anew  on  easier  Terms? 

And  I  be  negligently  told 

You  was  too  Young,  and  I  too  Old, 
To  have  our  distant  Maxims  hold. 

TO  MB.  JERVAS 
Occasioned  by  the  Sight  of  Mrs.  Chettvind's  Picture 

This  matchless  Picture,  Jervas,  hide. 

Or  let  it  stand  alone; 
When  one  does  over  all  preside. 

The  rest  are  vainly  shown. 

The  meanest  Figures  of  the  Sky, 
(Though  drawn  with  handsome  Faces,) 

Are,  when  their  Goddesses  are  by, 
Th'  attending  Nymphs  and  Gracea 

For  sure,  (as  Caesar  chose  Renown) 

'Tis  better  to  be  reckon'd. 
The  Dulcinea  of  some  Town, 

Than  in  a  Court,  the  Second. 

Then,  let  this  new  Campaspe  go, 

Or,  if  thou'lt  not  resign. 
As  thou  Apelles'  Skill  doest  know. 

So,  may  his  Heart  be  thine. 

To  praise  more  equal  leave  our  Choice, 

When  we  thy  Works  survey. 
Nor  let  each  sighing  Breast  and  Voice, 

But  one  Applause  betray. 


110  The  Poems  op  Anne 

TO  A  FRIEND 
In  Praise  of  the  Invention  of  Writing  Letters 

BleBt  be  the  Man!  his  Memory  at  least, 

Who  found  the  Art,  thus  to  unfold  his  Breast, 

And  taught  succeeding  Times  an  easy  way 

Their  secret  Thoughts  by  Letters  to  convey; 

To  baffle  Absence,  and  secure  Delight, 

Which,  till  that  Time,  was  limited  to  Sight. 

The  parting  Parewel  spoke,  the  last  Adieu, 

The  less'ning  Distance  past,  then  loss  of  View, 

The  Friend  was  gone,  which  some  kind  Moments  gave. 

And  Absence  separated,  like  the  Grave.  10 

The  Wings  of  Love  were  tender  too,  till  then 

No  Quill,  thence  pulPd,  was  shap'd  into  a  Pen, 

To  send  in  Paper-sheets,  from  Town  to  Town, 

Words  smooth  as  they,  and  softer  than  his  Down. 

O'er  such  he  reign'd,  whom  Neighbourhood  had  join'd. 

And  hopt,  from  Bough  to  Bough,  supported  by  the  Wind. 

When  for  a  Wife  the  youthful  Patriarch  sent, 

The  Camels,  Jewels,  and  the  Steward  went, 

A  wealthy  Equipage,  tho'  grave  and  slow; 

But  not  a  Line,  that  might  the  Lover  shew.  20 

The  Rings  and  Bracelets  woo'd  her  Hands  and  Arms; 

But  had  she  known  of  melting  Words,  the  Charms 

That  under  secret  Seals  in  Ambush  lie. 

To  catch  the  Soul,  when  drawn  into  the  Eye, 

The  Fair  Assyrian  had  not  took  this  Guide, 

Nor  her  soft  Heart  in  Chains  of  Pearl  been  ty'd. 

Had  these  Conveyances  been  then  in  Date, 
Joseph  had  known  his  wretched  Father's  State, 
Before  a  Famine,  which  his  Life  pursues, 
Had  sent  his  other  Sons,  to  tell  the  News.  30 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  111 

Oh!  might  I  live  to  see  an  Art  arise, 
As  this  to  Thoughts,  indulgent  to  the  Eyes ; 
That  the  dark  Powers  of  distance  cou'd  subdue, 
And  make  me  See^  as  well  as  Talk  to  You; 
That  tedious  Miles,  nor  Tracts  of  Air  might  prove 
Bars  to  my  Sight,  and  shadows  to  my  Love! 
Tet  were  it  granted,  such  unbounded  Things 
Are  wand'ring  Wishes,  bom  on  Phancy's  Wings, 
They'd  stretch  themselves  beyond  this  happy  Case, 
And  ask  an  Art,  to  help  us  to  Embrace.  40 

CLABINDA'S  INDIFFERENCE  AT  PARTING  WITH  HER 

BEAUTY 

Now,  age  came  on,  and  all  the  dismal  traine 
That  fright  the  vitious,  and  afflicte  the  vaine. 
Departing  beauty,  now  Clarinda  spies 
Pale  in  her  cheeks,  and  dying  in  her  eyes; 
That  youthfull  air,  that  wanders  ore  the  face. 
That  undescrib'd,  that  unresisted  grace. 
Those  morning  beams,  that  strongly  warm,  and  shine, 
Which  men  that  feel  and  see,  can  ne're  define, 
Now,  on  the  wings  of  restlesse  time,  were  fled. 
And  ev'ning  shades,  began  to  rise,  and  spread,  10 

When  thus  resolv'd,  and  ready  soon  to  part, 
Slighting  the  short  repreives  of  proflPer'd  art 
She  spake  — 

And  what,  vain  beauty,  didst  thou  'ere  atcheive. 
When  at  thy  height,  that  I  thy  fall  shou'd  greive, 
When,  did'st  thou  e're  succesfuUy  persue? 
When,  did'st  thou  e're  th'  appointed  foe  subdue? 
'Tis  vain  of  numbers,  or  of  strength  to  boast. 
In  an  undisciplin'd,  unguided  Host, 
And  love,  that  did  thy  mighty  hopes  deride,  20 

Wou'd  pay  no  sacrafice,  but  to  thy  pride. 


112  The  Poems  of  Ankb 

When,  did^Bt  thou  e're  a  pleasing  rale  obtain, 
A  glorions  Empire's  bnt  a  glorious  pain, 
Thon,  art  indeed,  bnt  vanity's  cheife  sonrse, 
Bnt  foyle  to  witt,  to  want  of  witt  a  curse. 
For  often,  by  thy  gaudy  sign's  descry'd 
A  fool,  which  unobserv'd,  had  been  untry'd. 
And  when  thou  doest  such  empty  things  adorn, 
'Tis  but  to  make  them  more  the  publick  scorn. 
I  know  thee  well,  but  weak  thy  reign  wou'd  be  30 

Did  n'one  adore,  or  prize  thee  more  then  me. 
I  see  indeed,  thy  certain  mine  neer. 
But  can't  affoard  one  parting  sigh,  or  tear. 
Nor  rail  at  Time,  nor  quarrell  with  my  glasse. 
But  unconcern'd,  can  lett  thy  glories  passe. 

SOME  PIECES  OUT  OF  THE  FIRST  ACT  OF  THE  AMINTA 

OF  TASSO 

DAPHNE'S  Answer  to  SYLVIA,  declaring  she  should  esteem  all 
as  Enemies,  who  should  talk  to  her  of  Love 

Then,  to  the  snowy  Ewe,  in  thy  esteem. 

The  Father  of  the  Flock  a  Foe  must  seem , 

The  faithful  Turtles  to  their  yielding  Mates. 

The  chearf  ul  Spring,  which  Love  and  Joy  creates. 

That  reconciles  the  World  by  soft  Desires, 

And  tender  Thoughts  in  ev'ry  Breast  inspires, 

To  you  a  hateful  Season  must  appear, 

Whilst  Love  prevails,  and  all  are  Lovers  here. 

Observe  the  gentle  Murmurs  of  that  Dove, 

And  see,  how  billing  she  confirms  her  Love! 

For  this,  the  Nightingale  displays  her  Throat,        10 

And  Love,  Love,  Love,  is  all  her  Ev'ning  Note. 

The  very  Tygers  have  their  tender  Hours, 

And  prouder  Lyons  bow  beneath  Lovers  Pow'ra 

Thou,  prouder  yet  than  that  imperious  Beast, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  113 

Alone  deny'st  him  Shelter  in  thy  Breast. 
But  why  should  I  the  Creatures  only  name 
That  Sense  partake,  as  Owners  of  this  Flame  ? 
Love  farther  goes,  nor  stops  his  Course  at  these: 
The  Plants  he  moves,  and  gently  bends  the  Trees. 
See  how  those  Willows  mix  their  am'rous  Boughs ;  20 
And,  how  that  Vine  clasps  her  supporting  Spouse ! 
The  silver  Firr  dotes  on  the  stately  Pine; 
By  Love  those  Elms,  by  Love  those  Beeches  join. 
But  view  that  Oak;  behold  his  rugged  Side: 
Yet  that  rough  Bark  the  melting  Flame  do's  hide. 
All,  by  their  trembling  Leaves,  in  Sighs  declare 
And  tell  their  Passions  to  the  gath'ring  Air. 
Which,  had  but  Love  o'er  Thee  the  least  Command, 
Thou,  by  their  Motions,  too  might' st  understand. 

Amintob  being  ask'd  by  TmBSis  who  is  the  object  of  his  Lovef 
speaks  as  follows 

Amint    THIRSIS!   to  Thee    I   mean   that   Name  to 

show, 
Which,  only  yet  our  Groves,  and  Fountains  know: 
That,  when   my  Death  shall  through  the   Plains   be 

told. 
Thou  with  the  wretched  Cause  may'st  that  unfold 
To  every -one,  who  shall  my  Story  find 
Carv'd  by  thy  Hand,  in  some  fair  Beeches  rind; 
Beneath  whose  Shade  the  bleeding  Body  lay: 
That,  when  by  chance  she  shall  be  led  that  way. 
O'er  my  sad  Grave  the  haughty  Nymph  may  go. 
And  the  proud  Triumph  of  her  Beauty  shew  10 

To  all  the  Swains,  to  Strangers  as  they  pass ; 
And  yet  at  length  she  may  (but  Oh!  alas! 
I  fear,  too  high  my  flatt'ring  Hopes  do  soar) 
Yet  she  at  length  may  my  sad  Fate  deplore ; 


114  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

May  weep  me  Dead,  may  o'er  my  Tomb  recline. 
And  fighing,  wish  were  he  alive  and  Mine  I 
But  mark  me  to  the  End — 

Thir.  Go  on;  for  well  I  do  thy  Speech  attend, 
Perhaps  to  better  Ends,  than  yet  thon  know'st 

Amint  Being  now  a  Child,  or  bnt  a  Yonth  at  most,  20 
When  scarce  to  reach  the  blushing  Fruit  I  knew. 
Which  on  the  lowest  bending  Branches  grew; 
Still  with  the  dearest,  sweetest,  kindest  Maid 
Young  as  myself,  at  childish  Sports  I  play'd. 
The  Fairest,  sure,  of  all  that  Lovely  Kind, 
Who  spread  their  golden  Tresses  to  the  Wind; 
Cydipp^s  Daughter,  and  Montano^s  Heir, 
Whose  Flocks  and  Herds  so  numerous  do  appear; 
The  beauteous  Sylvia;  She,  'tis  She  I  love. 
Warmth  of  all  Hearts,  and  Pride  of  ev'ry  Grova  30 

With  Her  I  liv'd,  no  Turtles  e'er  so  fond. 
Our  Houses  met,  but  more  our  Souls  were  join'd. 
Together  Nets  for  Fish,  and  Fowl  we  laid; 
Together  through  the  spacious  Forest  stray'd; 
Pursu'd  with  equal  Speed  the  flying  Deer, 
And  of  the  Spoils  there  no  Divisions  were. 
But  whilst  I  from  the  Beasts  their  Freedom  won, 
Alas!  I  know  not  how,  my  Own  was  gone. 
By  unperceiv'd  Degrees  the  Fire  encreas'd. 
Which  fiU'd,  at  last,  each  comer  of  my  Breast;  40 

As  from  a  Root,  tho'  scarce  discern'd  so  small, 
A  Plant  may  rise,  that  grows  amazing  talL 
From  Sylvid'a  Presence  now  I  could  not  move. 
And  from  her  Eyes  took  in  full  Draughts  of  Love, 
Which  sweetly  thro'  my  ravish'd  Mind  distill'd; 
Yet  in  the  end  such  Bitterness  wou'd  yield. 
That  oft  I  sigh'd,  ere  yet  I  knew  the  cause. 
And  was  a  Lover,  ere  I  dream'd  I  was. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  115 

But  Oh!  at  last,  too  well  my  State  I  knew; 

And  now,  will  shew  thee  how  this  Passion  grew.  50 

Then  listen,  while  the  pleasing  Tale  I  telL 

THIBSIS  persuades  AMINTOR  not  to  despair  upon  the  Pre- 
dictions of  MOPSUS  discovering  him  to  be  an  Impostor 

Thirsts.  Why  dost  thou  still  give  way  to  such  Despair! 

Amintor.  Too  just,  alas!  the  weighty  Causes  are. 
Mopsusy  wise  Mopsus,  who  in  Art  excels, 
And  of  all  Plants  the  secret  Vertue  tells. 
Knows,  with  what  healing  Gifts  our  Springs  abound. 
And  of  each  Bird  explains  the  mystick  Sound ; 
'Twas  He,  ev'n  He!  my  wretched  Fate  foretold. 

Thir,  Dost  thou  this  Speech  then  of  that  Mopstts  hold, 
Who,  whilst  his  Smiles  attract  the  easy  View, 
Drops  flatt'ring  Words,  soft  as  the  falling  Dew;  10 

Whose  outward  Form  all  friendly  still  appears, 
Tho^  Fraud  and  Daggers  in  his  Thoughts  he  wears. 
And  the  unwary  Labours  to  surprize 
With  Looks  aflfected,  and  with  riddling  Lyes. 
If  He  it  is,  that  bids  thy  Love  despair, 
I  hope  the  happier  End  of  all  thy  Care. 
So  far  from  Truth  his  vain  Predictions  falL 

Amint.   If  ought  thou  know^st,  that  may  my  Hopes 
recall. 
Conceal  it  not;  for  great  I've  heard  his  Fame, 
And  fear'd  his  Words — 

Thir.  — When  hither  first  I  came,  20 

And  in  these  Shades  the  false  Impostor  met. 
Like  Thee  I  prized,  and  thought  his  Judgment  great ; 
On  all  his  study'd  Speeches  still  rely'd. 
Nor  fear'd  to  err,  whilst  led  by  such  a  Guide: 
When  on  a  Day,  that  Bus'ness  and  Delight 
My  Steps  did  to  the  Neighb'ring  Town  invite. 


116  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Which  stands  upon  that  rising  Mountain's  side. 

And  from  our  Plains  this  Biver  do's  divide, 

He  check'd  me  thus — Be  wam'd  in  time,  My  Son, 

And  that  new  World  of  painted  Mischiefs  shun,  80 

Whose  gay  Inhabitants  thou  shalt  behold 

Plum'd  like  our  Birds,  and  sparkling  all  in  Gold; 

Courtiers,  that  will  thy  rustick  Garb  despise, 

And  mock  thy  Plainness  with  disdainful  Eyes. 

But  above  all,  that  Structure  see  thou  fly. 

Where  hoarded  Vanities  and  Witchcrafts  lie; 

To  shun  that  Path  be  thy  peculiar  Care. 

I  ask,  what  of  that  Place  the  Dangers  are: 

To  which  he  soon  replies,  there  shalt  thou  meet 

Of  soft  Enchantresses  th'  Enchantments  sweet,  40 

Who  subt'ly  will  thy  solid  Sense  bereave, 

And  a  false  Gloss  to  ev'ry  Object  give. 

Brass  to  thy  Sight  as  polish'd  Gold  shall  seem, 

And  Glass  thou  as  the  Diamond  shalt  esteem. 

Huge  Heaps  of  Silver  to  thee  shall  appear. 

Which  if  approach'd,  will  prove  but  shining  Air. 

The  very  Walls  by  Magick  Art  are  wrought. 

And  Bepetition  to  all  Speakers  taught: 

Not  such,  as  from  our  Ecchoes  we  obtain. 

Which  only  our  last  Words  return  again;  50 

But  Speech  for  Speech  entirely  there  they  give, 

And  often  add,  beyond  what  they  receive. 

There  downy  Couches  to  false  Best  invite. 

The  Lawn  is  charmed,  that  faintly  bars  the  Light 

No  gilded  Seat,  no  iv'ry  Board  is  there. 

But  what  thou  may'st  for  some  Delusion  fear: 

Whilst,  farther  to  abuse  thy  wond'ring  Eyes, 

Strange  antick  Shapes  before  them  shall  arise; 

Fantastick  Fiends,  that  will  about  thee  flock. 

And  all  they  see,  with  Imitation  mock.  60 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  117 

Nor  are  these  Ills  the  worst.     Thyself  may'st  be 
Transform'd  into  a  Flame,  a  Stream,  a  Tree; 
A  Tear,  congeaPd  by  Art,  thou  may'st  remain, 
'Till  by  a  burning  Sigh  dissolv'd  again. 
Thus  spake  the  Wretch;  but  cou'd  not  shake  my  Mind. 
My  way  I  take,  and  soon  the  City  find. 
Where  above  all  that  lofty  Pabrick  stands, 
Which,  with  one  View,  the  Town  and  Plains  commands. 
Here  was  I  stopt,  for  who  cou'd  quit  the  Ground, 
That  heard  such  Musick  from  those  Boofs  resound!    70 
Musick!  beyond  th'  enticing  Serene's  Note ; 
Musick!  beyond  the  Swan's  expiring  Throat; 
Beyond  the  softest  Voice,  that  charms  the  Grove, 
And  equal'd  only  by  the  Spheres  above. 
My  Ear  I  thought  too  narrow  for  the  Art, 
Nor  fast  enough  convey'd  it  to  my  Heart: 
When  in  the  Entrance  of  the  Gate  I  saw 
A  Man  Majestick,  and  commanding  Awe ; 
Yet  temper'd  with  a  Carriage,  so  refin'd 
That  undetermin'd  was  my  doubtful  Mind,  80 

Whether  for  Love,  or  War,  that  Form  was  most  design'd. 
With  such  a  Brow,  as  did  at  once  declare 
A  gentle  Nature,  and  a  Wit  severe ; 
To  view  that  Palace  me  he  ask'd  to  go, 
Tho'  Boyal  He,  and  I  Obscure  and  Low. 
But  the  Delights  my  Senses  there  did  meet, 
No  rural  Tongue,  no  Swain  can  e'er  repeat. 
Celestial  Goddesses,  or  Nymphs  as  Fair, 
In  unveil'd  Beauties,  to  all  Eyes  appear 
Sprinkl'd  with  Gold,  as  glorious  to  the  View,  90 

As  young  Aurora,  decked  with  pearly  Dew; 
Bright  Rays  dispensing,  as  along  they  pass'd. 
And  with  new  Light  the  shining  Palace  grac'd. 
Phoeibus  was  there  by  all  the  Muses  met, 


118  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

And  at  his  Feet  was  our  Elpino  set. 

Ev'n  humble  Me  their  Harmony  inspir'd, 

My  Breast  expanded,  and  my  Spirits  fir^d. 

Bude  Past'ral  now,  no  longer  I  rehearse, 

But  Heroes  crown  with  my  exalted  Verse. 

Of  Arms  I  sung,  of  bold  advent' rous  Wars;  100 

And  tho'  brought  back  by  my  too  envious  Stars, 

Yet  kept  my  Voice  and  Reed  those  lofty  Strains, 

And  sent  loud  Musick  through  the  wond'ring  Plains: 

Which  Mopsus  hearing,  secretly  malign'd. 

And  now  to  ruin  Both  at  once  designed. 

Which  by  his  Sorceries  he  soon  brought  to  pass; 

And  suddenly  so  clogg'd,  and  hoarse  I  was. 

That  all  our  Shepherds,  at  the  Change  amaz'd, 

Believ'd,  I  on  some  Evening-Wolf  had  gaz'd: 

When  He  it  was,  my  luckless  Path  had  crost,  110 

By  whose  dire  Look,  my  Skill  awhile  was  lost 

This  have  I  told,  to  raise  thy  Hopes  again, 

And  render,  by  distrust,  his  Malice  vain. 

FROM  THE  AMINTA  OF  TASSO 

Tho'  we,  of  small  Proportion  see 
And  slight  the  armed  Golden  Bee; 
Yet  if  her  Sting  behind  she  leaves, 
No  Ease  th'  envenom'd  Flesh  receives. 
Lovey  less  to  Sight  than  is  this  Fly, 
In  a  soft  Curl  concealed  can  lie ; 
Under  an  Eyelid^ s  lovely  Shade, 
Can  form  a  dreadful  Ambuscade; 
Can  the  most  subtil  Sight  beguile 
Hid  in  the  Dimples  of  a  Smile. 
But  if  from  thence  a  Dart  he  throw, 
How  sure,  how  mortal  is  the  Blow! 
How  helpless  all  the  Pow'r  of  Art 
To  bind,  or  to  restore  the  Heart  I 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  119 

FROM  THE  AMINTA  OF  TASSO 

Part  of  the  Description  of  the  Oolden  Age 

Then,  by  some  Fountains  flow'ry  side 
The  Loves  unarmed,  did  still  abide. 
Then,  the  loos'd  Quiver  careless  hung, 
The  Torch  extinct,  the  Bow  unstrung. 
Then,  by  the  Nymphs  no  Charms  were  worn. 
But  such  as  with  the  Nymphs  were  born. 
The  Shepherd  cou'd  not,  then,  complain, 
Nor  told  his  am'rous  Tale  in  vain. 
No  Veil  the  Beauteous  Face  did  hide. 
Nor  harmless  Freedom  was  deny'd. 
Then,  Innocence  and  Virtue  reign'd 
Pure,  unaffected,  unconstrained. 
Love  was  their  Pleasure,  and  their  Praise, 
The  soft  Employment  of  their  Days. 

FROM  THE  FRENCH,  OF  THE  188"  SONNET  OF 
PETRARC 

When  Phoebus,  at  declining  of  the  day 

His  golden  Chariot  plunges  in  the  Sea, 

Leaning  my  Soul,  and  this  forsaken  air 

With  darknesse  cover'd,  and  with  black  dispair, 

I  by  the  rising  streaks  of  Cynthia's  light. 

My  greifs  bewail,  and  dread  th'  approaching  night. 

I  to  the  Heav'ns,  and  to  the  Stars  relate. 

That  hear  me  not,  the  Stories  of  my  fate. 

What  wonder,  if  by  them  unheard  I  be, 

Since  all  things,  are  insencible  to  me  ? 

Fortune  to  me,  alas!  is  doubly  blind. 

My  Mistresse  cruel,  and  the  world  unkind ; 

With  these,  with  love,  and  with  my  self  I  chide. 


120  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Nor  will  one  pleasing  thought,  with  me  abide ; 
Sleep,  from  my  weary,  restlesse  temples  flyes, 
And  falling  tears,  prevent  my  closing  eyes. 
My  soul,  till  morning,  thus  her  anguish-  shews, 
When  soft  Aurora  cheerfuU  light  renews. 
But  still,  behind  the  Cloud,  my  Sun  remains, 
Tis  she  must  give  me  light,  and  ease  my  pains. 


A  SONG  OF  THE  CANIBALS 
out  of  Mountain's  Essays;  done  into  English  verse, paraphrased 

The  French 

Coleuvre,  arest  toy;  arest  toy,  Coleuvre;  afin  que  ma 
seur  tire  sur  le  patron  de  ta  peinture,  le  fa^on,  &  I'ouvrage 
d'  un  rich  cordon,  que  je  puisse  donner  a  ma  Mie.  ainsi,  soit 
en  tout  temps,  ta  beauts,  &  ta  disposition,  preferez  a  touts 
les  autres  Serpents. 

The  English 

Lovely  viper,  haste  not  on. 

Nor  curl,  in  various  folds  along, 

Till  from  that  figur'd  coat  of  thine. 

Which  ev'ry  motion,  makes  more  fine. 

I  take,  as  neer  as  art  can  doe, 

A  draught,  of  what  I  wond'ring  view ; 

Which,  in  a  bracelett,  for  my  Love 

Shall  be  with  carefuU  mixtures  wove. 

So,  may'st  thou  find  thy  beautys  last. 

As  thou  doest  now,  retarde  thy  haste. 

So,  may'st  thou,  above  all  the  snakes. 

That  harbour,  in  the  neigh'bring  brakes. 

Be  honour'd;  and  where  thou  does  [sic]  passe 

The  shades  be  close,  and  fresh  the  grasse. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  121 

A  MAXIM 

F(jT  the  Ladya,  translated  from  Mon*^  du  Busay 

Prom  the  best  witt  of  France,  receive 
A  maxim,  he  to  Ladys  gave. 
If  once  with  cruel  love  opresst 
Lett  secrecy  concern  you  most, 
In  mistery,  lett  itt  still  be  dresst, 
'Tis  not  by  Love,  that  you  are  lost. 
But  by  the  way,  that  'tis  expresst. 

ON  ABSENCE 

From  the  mxxoeims  of  Bussy  Rdbuttn 

Absence  on  Love  effects  the  same 
As  winds  oppos'd  to  fire 
Extinguishes  a  feeble  Flame 
And  blows  a  great  one  higher. 

WRITTEN  BEFORE  A  FRENCH  BOOK 

EntitVd  lea  moyena  de  ae  guerir  de  VAnumr 

In  love,  who  to  a  cure  aspires, 
Never  felt  but  weak  desires, 
Suddain  starts,  of  fancy'd  passion. 
Such,  as  move  the  Gallick  nation ; 
Gainst  which,  receipts,  they  here  compose, 
Of  so  much  Verse,  to  so  much  prose ; 
Whilst  within  our  British  Islands 
From  Pendennis,  to  the  Highlands, 
Only  faces,  wher'in  Nature 
Has  not  plac'd  one  tempting  feature. 
Or  wrincles,  that  defye  Pomatum 
For  love,  are  remedies  probatum. 


122  The  Poems  of  Anne 

THE  EQUIPAGE 
Written  Originally  in  French  by  VAbh6  Reigner 

Since  the  Bead  of  Life's  so  ill ; 
I,  to  pass  it,  use  this  Skill, 
My  frail  Carriage  driving  home 
To  its  latest  Stage,  the  Tomb. 
Justice  first,  in  Harness  strong, 
Marches  stedfastly  along: 
Charity,  to  smooth  the  Pace, 
Pills  the  next  adjoining  Trace: 
Independance  leads  the  Way, 
Whom  no  heavy  Curb  do's  sway ; 
Truth  an  equal  Part  sustains, 
All  indulg'd  the  loosen'd  Reins: 
In  the  Box  fits  vig'rous-HeaZ/A, 
Shunning  miry  Paths  of  Wealth: 
Oaiety  with  easy  Smiles, 
Ev'ry  harsher  Step  beguiles; 
Whilst  of  Nature,  or  of  Pate 
Only  This  I  wou'd  intreat: 
The  Equipage  might  not  decay. 
Till  the  worn  Carriage  drops  away. 

MELINDA  ON  AN  INSIPPID  BEAUTY 
In  imitatton  of  a  fragment  of  Sapho's 
You,  when  your  body,  life  shall  leave 
Must  drop  entire,  into  the  grave ; 
Unheeded,  unregarded  lye, 
And  all  of  you  together  dye; 
Must  hide  that  fleeting  charm,  that  face  in  dust, 
Or  to  some  painted  cloath,  the  slighted  Immage  trust. 
Whilst  my  fam'd  works,  shall  throo'  all  times  surprise 
My  polish'd  thoughts,  my  bright  Ideas  rise, 
And  to  new  men  be  known,  still  talking  to  their  eyes. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  123 

PABT  OF  THE  FIFTH  SCENE  IN  THE  SECOND  ACT  OF 
ATHALIA,  A  TRAGEDY  WRITTEN  IN  FRENCH  BY 
MONSIEUR  RACINE 

Enter,  as  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem 
ATHALIA,  MATHAN,  ABNER. 

Mathan, 
Why,  to  our  Wonder,  in  this  Place  is  seen. 
Thus  discompos'd,  and  alter' d.  Judo's  Queen? 
May  we  demand,  what  Terrors  seize  your  Breast, 
Or,  why  your  Steps  are  to  this  House  addrest. 
Where  your  unguarded  Person  stands  expos'd 
To  secret  Foes,  within  its  Walls  inclos'd  ? 
Can  it  be  thought  that  you  remit  that  Hate? 

Athalia. 
No  more!  but  Both  observe  what  I  relate: 
Not,  that  I  mean  (recalling  Times  of  Blood) 
To  make  you  Judges  of  the  Paths  I  trod,  10 

When  to  the  empty'd  Throne  I  boldly  rose, 
Treating  all  Intercepters  as  my  Foes. 
'Twas  Heav'ns  Decree,  that  I  should  thus  succeed, 
Whose  following  Favour  justifies  the  Deed, 
Extending  my  unlimited  Command 
From  Sea  to  Sea  o'er  the  obedient  Land: 
Whilst  your  Jerusalem  all  Peace  enjoys, 
Nor  now  the'  encroaching  Philistine  destroys. 
Nor  wandring  Arab  his  Pavilion  spreads. 
Near  JordarCs  Banks,  nor  wastes  his  flow'ry  Meads.      20 
The  great  Assyrian^  Terror  of  your  Kings, 
Who  bought  his  Friendship  with  their  holiest  Things, 
Yields  that  a  Sister,  of  his  pow'rful  Race, 
Shoidd  sway  these  Realms,  and  dignify  the  Place. 
Nor  need  we  add  the  late  instdting  Foe, 


124  The  Pobms  of  Anns 

The  furious  Jehu  does  this  Sceptre  know, 
And  sinks  beneath  the  load  of  conscious  Fears, 
When  in  Samaria  he  my  Actions  heara 
Distrest  by  Foes,  which  I've  against  him  raised, 
He  sees  me  unmolested,  fix'd,  and  pleased;  80 

At  least,  till  now  thus  glorious  was  my  State ; 
But  something's  threatned  from  relaxing  Fate, 
And  the  last  Night,  which  should  have  brought  me  Best, 
Has  all  these  great  Ideas  dispossest. 
A  Dream,  a  Vision,  an  apparent  View 
Of  what,  methinks,  does  still  my  Steps  pursue. 
Hangs  on  my  pensive  Heart,  and  bears  it  down 
More  than  the  weight  of  an  objected  Grown, 
My  Mother  (be  the  Name  with  Reverence  spoke!) 
Ere  chearful  Day  thro'  horrid  Shades  had  broke,       40 
Approach'd  my  Bed,  magnificent  her  Dress, 
Her  Shape,  her  Air  did  Jesabel  confess: 
Nor  seem'd  her  Face  to  have  refus'd  that  Art, 
Which,  in  despite  of  Age,  does  Youth  impeirt. 
And  which  she  practis'd,  scorning  to  decay. 
Or  to  be  vanquish'd  ev'n  in  Nature^ s  way. 
Thus  all  array'd,  in  such  defying  Pride 
As  when  th'  injurious  Oonqu'ror  she  descry' d. 
And  did  in  height  of  Pow'r  for  ill-got  Pow'r  deride. 
To  me  she  spake,  these  Accents  to  me  came:  50 

"Thou  worthy  Daughter  of  my  soaring  Fame, 
"Tho'  with  a  more  transcendent  Spirit  fiU'd, 
"  Tho'  struggling  Pow'rs  attempt  thy  Life  to  shield, 
"The  Hebrew* s  God  (Oh,  tremble  at  the  sound!) 
"Shall  Thee  and  Them,  and  all  their  Rights  confound. 
A  pitying  Groan  concludes,  no  Word  of  Aid. 
My  Arms  I  thought  to  throw  about  the  Shade 
Of  that  lov'd  Parent,  but  my  troubled  Sight 
No  more  directed  them  to  aim  aright. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  125 

Nor  ought  presented,  but  a  heap  of  Bones,  60 

For  which  fierce  Dogs  contended  on  the  Stones, 
With  Flakes  of  mangled  Flesh,  that  qniv'ring  still 
Proclaim'd  the  Freshness  of  the  snffer'd  111; 
Distained  with  Blood  the  Pavement,  and  the  Wall, 
Appear'd  as  in  that  memorable  Fall 

Ahner, 
Oh!  just  avenging  Heaven! \^aside. 

Mathan, 
Sure,  Dreams  like  these  are  for  Prevention  given. 

LA  PASSION  VAINCUE 
Done  into  English  with  Liberty 

On  the  Banks  of  the  Severn  a  desperate  Maid 
(Whom  some  Shepherd,  neglecting  his  Vows,  had  betray'd,) 
Stood  resolving  to  banish  all  Sense  of  the  Pain, 
And  pursue,  thro'  her  Death,  a  Revenge  on  the  Swain. 
Since  the  Gods,  and  my  Passion,  at  once  he  defies; 
Since  his  Vanity  lives,  whilst  my  Character  dies; 
No  more  (did  she  say)  will  I  trifle  with  Fate, 
But  commit  to  the  Waves  both  my  Love  and  my  Hate. 
And  now  to  comply  with  that  furious  Desire, 
Just  ready  to  plunge,  and  alone  to  expire, 
Some  Reflection  on  Death,  and  its  Terrors  untry'd, 
Some  Scorn  for  the  Shepherd,  some  Flashings  of  Pride 
At  length  puU'd  her  back,  and  she  cry'd,  Why  this  Strife, 
Since  the  Swains  are  so  Many,  and  I've  but  One  Life? 


126  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

AN  EPISTLE  FBOM  A  GENTLEMAN  TO  MADAM 

DESHOULIERS  * 

Returning  money  she  had  lent  him  at  Basaette^  upon  the  first 
day  of  their  acquaintance 

Translated  vnOi  Liberty  from  the  French 

URANIA,  whom  the  Town  admires, 

Whose  Wit  and  Beauty  share  our  Praise; 
This  fair  URANIA  who  inspires 

A  thousand  Joys  a  thousand  ways, 
She,  who  cou'd  with  a  Glance  convey 

Favours,  that  had  my  Hopes  outdone, 
Has  lent  me  Money  on  that  Day, 

Which  our  Acquaintaiice  first  begun. 
Nor  with  the  Happiness  I  taste. 

Let  any  jealous  Doubts  contend:  10 

Her  Friendship  is  secure  to  last. 

Beginning  where  all  others  end. 

And  thou,  known  Cheat!  upheld  by  Law, 

Thou  Disappointer  of  the  craving  Mind, 
Bassette,  who  thy  Original  dost  draw 

From  Venice  (by  uncertain  Seas  confinM) ; 
Author  of  Murmurs,  and  of  Care, 

Of  pleasing  Hopes,  concluding  in  Despair: 
To  thee  my  strange  Felicity  I  owe. 

From  thy  Oppression  did  this  Succour  flow.    20 
Less  had  I  gained,  had'st  thou  propitious  been, 

Who  better  by  my  Loss  hast  taught  me  how  to 
Win. 
Yet  tell  me,  my  transported  Brain! 

(whose  Pride  this  Benefit  awakes) 
Know'st  thou,  what  on  this  Chance  depends? 

And  are  we  not  exalted  thus  in  vain. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  127 

Whilst  we  observe  the  Money  which  she  lends, 

Bat  not,  alas!  the  Heart  she  takes, 
The  fond  Engagements,  and  the  Ties 

Her  fatal  Bounty  does  impose,  30 

Who  makes  Reprisals,  with  her  Eyes, 

For  what  her  gen'rous  Hand  bestows? 

And  tho'  I  quickly  can  retnm 

Those  useful  Pieces,  which  she  gave; 

Can  I  again,  or  wou'd  I  have 

That  which  her  Charms  have  from  me  borne  ? 

Yet  let  us  quit  th'  obliging  Score; 

And  whilst  we  borrow'd  Gold  restore. 

Whilst  readily  we  own  the  Debt, 

And  Gratitude  before  her  set  40 

In  its  approved  and  fairest  Light; 
Let  her  effectually  be  taught 

By  that  instructive,  harmless  Slight, 
That  also  in  her  turn  she  ought 

(Repaying  ev'ry  tender  Thought) 
Kindness  with  Kindness  to  requite. 

A  SONG  FOR  A  PLAY 
Alcander  to  Melinda 

More  then  a  Sea  of  tears,  can  show, 

Or  thousand  sighs  can  prove. 
Then  fault'ring  speech,  can  lett  you  know, 

I  fair  Melinda  love. 

You  then,  must  to  your  self  expresse 

The  strength  of  my  desire. 
Who  brings  the  fewel,  best  may  guesse, 

H<5w  great  must  be  the  fire. 


128  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Think  on  the  pow'r,  that  arms  your  eyes, 
The  charms  that  in  them  shine, 

Think  on  their  aptnesse  to  surprise. 
And  of  the  love  in  mine. 

Then  to  my  wishing  looks  afoard 
The  heart  for  which  they  sue, 

And  take  a  longing  lovers  word, 
That  some  men  can  be  true. 

A  SONG 
Melinda  to  Alcander 

Witt,  as  free,  and  unconfin'd 

As  the  universal  air, 
Was  not  alotted  to  mankind. 

Leaving  us,  without  our  share ; 
No,  we  posesse  alike  that  fire. 
And  all  you  boast  of,  we  inspire. 

Fancy,  does  from  beauty  rise. 
Beauty,  teatches  you  to  write, 

Your  flames  are  borrow'd  from  our  Eyes, 
You  but  speak,  what  they  endite. 

Then  cease  to  boast  alone,  that  Fame. 

Witt,  and  love,  we  give  and  claime. 

A  SONG 

By  Love  persu'd.  In  vain  I  fly 

To  shades,  as  lost  and  wild  as  I ; 

Cold  earth  my  hopes,  sharp  thorns  my  cares. 

Here  lively  paint,  and  urge  my  tears;  # 

Fancy,  makes  all  things  bear  a  part, 

And  shews  a  Rock,  for  Sylvia's  heart. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  129 

In  vain,  I  from  the  object  goe, 

Since  my  own  thoughts,  can  wound  me  soe ; 

m  back  again,  and  ruinM  be 

By  hate,  by  scorn,  or  Jealousie. 

Such  real  ills  attend  us  all. 

Lovers,  by  fancy  need  not  f alL 

A  SONG 

Miranda,  hides  her  from  the  Sun, 

Beneath  those  shady  beaches  nigh. 
Whilst  I,  by  her  bright  rayes  undone, 

Can  no  where  for  refreshment  fly. 

In  that  fair  grove,  att  height  of  noone, 

His  fiercest  glorys,  she  defies; 
I  have  alas!  such  shelter,  none. 

No  safe  umbrella,  'gainst  her  eyes. 

Thus,  does  th'  unequal  hand  of  fate 

Refuse  itts'  favours  to  devide. 
Giving  to  her,  a  safe  retreat. 

And  all  ofensive  arms  beside, 

A  SONG 

Whilst  Thirsis,  in  his  pride  of  youth 

To  me  alone,  professt 
DessembPd  passion,  dressH  like  truth, 

He  tryumph'd  in  my  breast. 

I  lodg'd  him  neer  my  yeilding  heart, 

Deny'd  him  but  my  arms, 
Deluded  with  his  pleasing  art, 

Transported  with  his  charms. 


130  The  Poems  op  Anne 

The  wand'rer,  now  I  loose,  or  share, 

With  ev'ry  lovly  maid, 
Who  make  the  hearts  of  men  their  care, 

Shall  have  their  own,  betray'd. 

Our  charms  on  them  we  vainly  prove. 
And  boast  we  Conquests  gain, 

Where  one,  a  victime  falls  to  love, 
A  Thousand  Tyrants  reign. 

A  SONG 

Persuade  me  not,  there  is  a  Grace 
Proceeds  from  Silma's  Voice  or  Lute, 

Against  Miranda's  charming  Face 
To  make  her  hold  the  least  Dispute. 

Musick,  which  tunes  the  Soul  for  Love, 
And  stirs  up  all  our  soft  Desires, 

Do's  but  the  glowing  Flame  improve. 
Which  pow'rful  Beauty  first  inspires. 

Thus,  whilst  with  Art  she  plays,  and  sings 

I  to  Miranda^  standing  by. 
Impute  the  Music  of  the  Strings, 

And  all  the  melting  Words  apply 

JEALOUSY 
A  Song 

Vain  Love,  why  do'st  thou  boast  of  Wings, 
That  cannot  help  thee  to  retire! 

When  such  quick  Flames  Suspicion  brings. 
As  do  the  Heart  about  tnee  fire. 

Still  Swift  to  come,  but  when  to  go 
Thou  shou'd'st  be  more — Alas!  how  Slow. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  131 

Lord  of  the  World  must  surely  be 

But  thy  bare  Title  at  the  most; 
Since  Jealousy  is  Lord  of  Thee, 

And  makes  such  Havock  on  thy  Coast, 

As  do's  thy  pleasant  Land  deface, 
Yet  binds  thee  faster  to  the  Place. 


A  SONG 

Love,  thou  art  best  of  Human  Joys, 

Our  chief  est  Happiness  below; 
All  other  Pleasures  are  but  Toys, 
Musick  without  Thee  is  but  Noise, 

And  Beauty  but  an  empty  Show. 

Heav'n,  who  knew  best  what  Man  wouM  move. 
And  raise  his  Thoughts  above  the  Brute; 

Said,  Let  him  Be,  and  let  him  Love; 

That  must  alone  his  Soul  improve, 
Howe'er  Philosophers  dispute. 


A  SONG 

Quickly,  Delia,  Learn  my  Passion, 
Lose  not  Pleasure,  to  be  Proud; 

Courtship  draws  on  Observation, 
And  the  Whispers  of  the  Croud. 

Soon  or  late  you'll  hear  a  Lover, 
Nor  by  Time  his  Truth  can  prove; 

Ages  won't  a  Heart  discover, 
Trust,  and  so  secure  my  Love. 


132  The  Poems  of  Anns 


A  SONG 

^Tis  strange,  this  Heart  within  my  breast, 
Reason  opposing,  and  her  Pow'rs, 

Cannot  one  gentle  Moment  rest, 

Unless  it  knows  what^s  done  in  Yours. 

In  vain  I  ask  it  of  your  Eyes, 

Which  subt'ly  would  my  Fears  controul; 
For  Art  has  taught  them  to  disguise, 

Which  Nature  made  t'  explain  the  Soul. 

In  vain  that  Sound,  your  Voice  afiPords, 
Flatters  sometimes  my  easy  Mind ; 

But  of  too  vast  Extent  are  Words 
In  them  the  Jewel  Truth  to  find. 

Then  let  my  fond  Enquiries  cease, 
And  so  let  all  my  Troubles  end: 

For,  sure,  that  Heart  shall  ne'er  know  Peace, 
Which  on  Anothers  do's  depend. 


A  SONG 

The  Nymph,  in  vain,  bestows  her  pains. 
That  seeks  to  thrive,  where  Bacchus  reigns; 
In  vain,  are  charms,  or  smiles,  or  frowns. 
All  Immages  his  torrent  drowns. 

Flames  to  the  head  he  may  impart. 
But  makes  an  Island,  of  the  heart ; 
So  inaccessible,  and  cold, 
That  to  be  his,  is  to  be  old. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  133 

A  SONG 

If  for  a  Woman  I  wou'd  dye, 

It  shou'd  for  Gloriana  be, 
But  lovers,  you  that  talk  so  high, 
Inform,  whilst  in  the  Grave  I  lye 

What  reward  can  reach  to  me? 

If,  I  my  freedom  wou'd  resign. 

That  freedom,  she  alone  shou'd  have, 

But  tell  me,  you  that  can  define. 

If  I,  by  Marriage,  make  her  mine, 

Which  may  be  call'd  the  greater  slave? 

Then  Gloriana,  since  'tis  plain 

Love,  with  these  two,  can  n*er  agree 

Since  death  and  Manage,  are  his  bane, 

Those  melancholy  thoughts  we'll  flee, 
And  chearfuU  Lovers,  allways  bee. 

A  SONG 

Lett  the  fool  still  be  true, 
And  one  object  persue, 
And  for  ever  be  jealous,  or  dying, 
Whilst  he  that  better  knows, 
Will  in  Love,  no  time  loose. 
For  that  God  still,  that  God  still,  that  God  still  is 
flying. 

Lett  the  heart  that  wants  heat. 

But  with  one  motion,  beat, 

Least  that  flame  shou'd  decay,  which  they  sever, . 

But  we,  that  boast  of  more. 

Can  each  Beauty  adore, 

And  love  all,  and  love  all,  and  love  all,  and  for  ever. 


l^  The  Pocxs  of  Astsk 


MORAL  Si3XG 

Wcfvld  1P&  atttm  the  bappiest 

That  is  dfflgn'd  us  here; 
So  Jot  a  Baptnre  imet  crestev 

No  Grkrf  beget  Despair. 
So  Injury  fierce  Anger  r&ise^ 

Xo  HoDfonr  tempt  to  Pride; 
Xo  Tain  Desires  of  emptr  Praise 

Must  in  the  Sool  abide. 
Xo  Charms  of  Yoath,  or  Beantj  more 

The  constant,  settl'd  Brpast: 
Who  leaTes  a  Passage  free  to  Lore. 

ShaU  let  in,  all  the  rest 
In  soeh  a  Heart  soft  Peace  will  liTe, 

Where  none  of  these  aboond ; 
The  greatest  Blessing,  Heaven  do*s  giTe^ 

Or  can  on  Earth  be  found. 

HONOUR 
A  Song 

How  dear  is  Repotation  bought ! 

When  we  the  purchace  pay 
We  sett  the  sweets  of  Life  at  nought 

And  make  our  Joys  away. 

One  most  belou'd  we  often  loose 

To  jmcify  the  crou'd 
And  even  Complisance  refuse 

Not  to  l^  Chast  but  proud. 

Though  Honour  which  the  World  does  awe 

And  makes  our  Sex  so  nice 
Its  self  no  Pedigree  can  draw 

But  what's  deriv'd  from  Vice. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  135 

Thus  Tyrants  who  Usurping  rise 

To  fix  them  in  that  wrong 
Do  sharpest  punishment  Deuise 

For  Crimes  from  whence  they  sprang. 


TIMELY  ADVICE  TO  DORINDA 

Dorinda  since  you  must  decay 

Your  lover  now  resign 
As  Charles  that  Empire  gave  away 

He  saw  wouM  soon  decline 

Tis  better  in  the  height  of  Power 

Thus  with  your  Sway  to  part 
Then  stay  till  that  more  fatal  hour 

Of  his  revolted  heart. 

For  Witt  but  faintly  will  inspire 

Unless  with  Beauty  joyn'd 
And  when  our  Eyes  have  lost  their  fire 

Tis  uselesse  in  the  Mind. 

Be  then  advis'd  and  now  remove 

All  farther  thoughts  about  itt. 
Sinch  [sic]  youth  we  find's  too  short  for  Love 

Though  Life's  too  long  without  iti 


THE  PHCENIX 
A  Song 

A  Female  Friend  advis'd  a  Swain 
(Whose  Heart  she  wish'd  at  ease) 

Make  Love  thy  Pleasure,  not  thy  Pain, 
Nor  let  it  deeply  seize. 


136  Thb  Poems  op  Anne 

Beauty,  where  Vanities  abound, 

No  serious  Passion  claims ; 
Then,  'till  a  Phoenix  can  be  found. 

Do  not  admit  the  Flames. 

But  griev'd  She  finds,  that  his  Replies 
(Since  prepossessed  when  Young) 

Take  all  their  Hints  from  Silvid'&  Eyes, 
None  from  ARDELIA's  Tongue. 

Thus,  Cupidj  of  our  Aim  we  miss. 

Who  wou'd  unbend  thy  Bow; 
And  each  slight  Nymph  a  Phoenix  is, 

When  Love  will  have  it  so. 

HOPE 

The  Tree  of  Knowledge  we  in  Eden  prov'd; 
The  Tree  of  Life  was  thence  to  Heav'n  removM: 
Hope  is  the  growth  of  Earth,  the  only  Plant, 
Which  either  Heav'n,  or  Paradice  cou'd  want 

Hell  knows  it  not,  to  Us  alone  confin'd. 
And  Cordial  onlv  to  the  Human  Mind. 
Receive  it  then,  t'expel  these  mortal  Cares, 
Nor  wave  a  Med'cine,  which  thy  God  prepares. 

LIFE'S  PROGRESS 

How  gayly  is  at  first  begun 

Our  i(/fe's  uncertain  Race! 
Whilst  yet  that  sprightly  Morning  Sun, 
With  which  we  just  set  out  to  run 

Enlightens  all  the  Place. 

How  smiling  the  World's  Prospect  lies 
How  tempting  to  go  through ! 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  137 

Not  Canaan  to  the  Prophet's  Eyes, 
From  Pisgah  with  a  sweet  Surprize, 
Did  more  inviting  shew. 

How  promising's  the  Book  of  Fate, 

Till  thoroughly  understood! 
Whilst  partial  Hopes  such  Lots  create, 
As  may  the  youthful  Fancy  treat 

With  all  that's  Great  and  Good. 

How  soft  the  first  Ideas  prove, 

Which  wander  through  our  Minds! 
How  full  the  Joys,  how  free  the  Love, 
Which  do's  that  early  Season  move; 

As  Flow'rs  the  Western  Winds! 

Our  Sighs  are  then  but  Vernal  Air; 

But  ApriUdro^  our  Tears, 
Which  swiftly  passing,  all  grows  Fair, 
Whilst  Beauty  compensates  our  Care, 

And  Youth  each  Vapour  clears. 

But  oh!  too  soon,  alas,  we  climb; 

Scarce  feeling  we  ascend 
The  gently  rising  Hill  of  Time, 
From  whence  with  Grief  we  see  that  Prime, 

And  all  its  Sweetness  end. 

The  Die  now  cast,  our  Station  known. 

Fond  Expectation  past; 
The  Thorns,  which  former  Days  had  sown. 
To  Crops  of  late  Repentance  grown. 

Thro'  which  we  toil  at  last. 

Whilst  ev'ry  Care's  a  driving  Harm, 
That  helps  to  bear  us  down ; 


138  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Which  faded  Smiles  no  more  can  charm, 
But  ev'ry  Tear's  a  Winter-Storm, 
And  ev'ry  Look's  a  Frown. 

Till  with  succeeding  Ills  opprest, 

For  Joys  we  hop'd  to  find; 
By  Age  too,  rumpl'd  and  undrest, 
We  gladly  sinking  down  to  rest. 

Leave  following  Crouds  behind. 

A  SIGH 

Gentlest  Air  thou  breath  of  Lovers 

Vapour  from  a  secret  fire 
Which  by  thee  itts  self  discovers 

E're  yett  daring  to  aspire. 

Softest  Noat  of  whisper'd  anguish 

Harmony's  refindest  part 
Striking  whilst  thou  seem'st  to  languish 

Full  upon  the  list'ners  heart. 

Safest  Messenger  of  Passion 

Stealing  through  a  crou'd  of  spys 

Which  constrain  the  outward  fassion 
Close  the  Lips  and  guard  the  Eyes. 

Shapelesse  Sigh  we  ne're  can  show  thee 
Form'd  but  to  assault  the  Ear 

Yett  e're  to  their  cost  they  know  thee 
Ev'ry  Nymph  may  read  thee  here. 

C^SAR  AND  BRUTUS 

Though  Caesar  falling,  shew'd  no  sign  of  fear, 
Yett  Brutus,  when  thou  did'st  appear, 
When  thy  false  hand,  against  him  came, 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  139 

He  vaird  his  face,  to  hide  that  shame 
Which  did  on  the  mistake  attend, 
Of  having  own'd  thee,  for  his  freind. 

AN  EPISTLE 
From  Alexander  to  Hephjbstion  in  His  Sickness 
With  such  a  Pulse,  with  such  disorder'd  Veins, 
Such  laboring  Breath,  as  thy  Disease  constrains ; 
With  failing  Eyes,  that  scarce  the  Light  endure, 
(So  long  unclos'd,  they've  watch'd  thy  doubtful  Cure) 
To  his  Hephcestion  Alexander  writes. 
To  soothe  thy  Days,  and  wing  thy  sleepless  Nights, 
I  send  thee  Love:  Oh!  that  I  could  impart. 
As  well  my  vital  Spirits  to  thy  Heart! 
That,  when  the  fierce  Distemper  thine  wou'd  quell, 
They  might  renew  the  Fight,  and  the  cold  Foe  repel.  10 

As  on  Arbela^B  Plains  we  turn'd  the  Day, 
WhenPersians  through  our  Troops  had  mow'd  their  way. 
When  the  rough  Scythians  on  the  Plunder  run. 
And  barb'rous  Shouts  proclaimed  the  Conquest  won, 

'Till  o'er  my  Head  (to  stop  the  swift  Despair) 
The  Bird  of  Jove  fans  the  supporting  Air, 
Above  my  Plume  does  his  broad  Wings  display. 
And  follows  wheresoe'er  I  force  my  way : 
Whilst  Aristander^  in  his  Robe  of  White, 
Shews  to  the  wav'ring  Host  th'  auspicious  Sight;       20 
New  Courage  it  inspires  in  ev'ry  Breast, 
And  wins  at  once  the  Empire  of  the  East. 
Cou'd  He,  but  now,  some  kind  Presage  aflFord, 
That  Health  might  be  again  to  Thee  restor'd; 
Thou  to  my  Wishes,  to  my  fond  Embrace ; 
Thy  Looks  the  same,  the  same  Majestick  Grace, 
That  round  thee  shone,  when  we  together  went 
To  chear  the  Royal  Captives  in  their  Tent, 


140  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Where  Sysigambis,  prostrate  on  the  Floor, 

Did  Alexander  in  thy  Form  adore ;  30 

Above  great  ^sculapius  shouM  he  stand. 

Or  made  immortal  by  Apellea  Hand. 

But  no  reviving  Hope  his  Art  allows, 

And  such  cold  Damps  invade  my  anxious  Brows, 

As,  when  in  Cydnus  plung'd,  I  dar'd  the  Flood 

T'  o'er-match  the  Boilings  of  my  youthful  Blood. 

But  Philip  to  my  Aid  repair'd  in  haste ; 

And  whilst  the  profiPer'd  Draught  I  boldly  taste. 

As  boldly  He  the  dangerous  Paper  views. 

Which  of  hid  Treasons  does  his  Fame  accuse.  40 

More  thy  Physician^s  Life  on  Thine  depends. 

And  what  he  gives,  his  Own  preserves,  or  ends. 

If  thou  expir^st  beneath  his  fruitless  Care, 

To  Rfuzdamanthus  shall  the  Wretch  repair. 

And  give  strict  Answer  for  his  Errors  there.   . 

Near  thy  Pavilion  listening  Princes  wait, 
Seeking  from  thine  to  learn  their  Monarches  State. 
Submitting  Kings,  that  post  from  Day  to  Day, 
To  keep  those  Crowns,  which  at  my  Feet  they  lay, 
Forget  th'  ambitious  Subject  of  their  Speed,  50 

And  here  arriv'd,  only  Thy  Dangers  heed. 
The  Beauties  of  the  Clime,  now  Thou'rt  away, 
Droop,  and  retire,  as  if  their  God  of  Day 
No  more  upon  their  early  Pray'rs  would  shine. 
Or  take  their  Incense,  at  his  late  Decline. 
Thy  Parisatis  whom  I  fear  to  name, 
Lest  to  thy  Heat  it  add  redoubl'd  Flame ; 
Thy  lovely  Wife,  thy  Parisatis  weeps, 
And  in  her  Grief  a  solemn  Silence  keeps. 
Stretch'd  in  her  Tent,  upon  the  Floor  she  lies,  60 

So  pale  her  Looks,  so  motionless  her  Eyes, 


Countess  dp  Winchilsea  141 

As  when  they  gave  thee  leave  at  first  to  gaze 
Upon  the  Charms  of  her  unguarded  Face ; 
When  the  two  beauteous  Sisters  lowly  knelt, 
And  su'd  to  those,  who  more  than  Pity  felt. 
To  chear  her  now  Statira  vainly  proves. 
And  at  thy  Name  alone  she  sighs,  and  moves. 

But  why  these  single  Griefs  shou'd  I  expose? 
The  Worid  no  Mirth,  no  War,  no  Business  knows. 
But,  hush'd  with  Sorrow  stands,  to  favour  thy  Repose.  70 
Ev'n  I  my  boasted  Title  now  resign. 
Not  AmmorC^  Son,  nor  bom  of  Race  Divine, 
But  Mortal  all,  oppressed  with  restless  Fears, 
Wild  with  my  Cares,  and  Womanish  in  Tears. 
Tho'  Tears,  before,  I  for  lost  Clytus  shed. 
And  wept  more  Drops,  than  the  old  Hero  bled; 
Ev'n  now,  methinks,  I  see  him  on  the  Ground, 
Now  my  dire  Arms  the  wretched  Corpse  surround, 
Now  the  fled  Soul  I  wooe,  now  rave  upon  the  Wound. 
Yet  He,  for  whom  this  mighty  Grief  did  spring,         80 
Not  Alexander  valu'd,  but  the  King. 
Then  think,  how  much  that  Passion  must  transcend. 
Which  not  a  Subject  raises  but  a  Friend: 
An  equal  Partner  in  the  vanquished  Earth, 
A  Brother,  not  impos'd  upon  my  Birth, 
Too  weak  a  Tye  unequal  Thoughts  to  bind. 
But  by  the  gen'rous  Motions  of  the  Mind. 
My  Love  to  thee  for  Empire  was  the  Test, 
Since  him,  who  from  Mankind  cou'd  chuse  the  best, 
The  Gods  thought  only  fit  for  Monarch  o'er  the  rest  90 
Live  then,  my  Friend;  but  if  that  must  not  be, 
Nor  Fate  will  with  my  boundless  Mind  agree, 
Affording,  at  one  time,  the  World  and  Thee ; 
To  the  most  Worthy  I'll  that  Sway  resign, 
And  in  Elysium  keep  Hyphcestion  mine. 


142  The  Poems  of  Anne 


FRAGMENT  AT  TUNBRIDGE- WELLS 

For  He,  that  made,  must  new  create  us, 

Ere  Senecaj  or  Epictetus^ 

With  all  their  serious  Admonitions, 

Can,  for  the  Spleen^  prove  good  Physiciana 

The  Heart's  unruly  Palpitation 

Will  not  be  laid  by  a  Quotation; 

Nor  will  the  Spirits  move  the  lighter 

For  the  most  celebrated  Writer. 

Sweats,  Swoonings,  and  convulsive  Jtfotions 

Will  not  be  cur'd  by  Words,  and  Notions. 

Then  live,  old  Brown!  with  thy  Chalybeats, 

Which  keep  us  from  becoming  Idiots. 

At  Tunbridge  let  us  still  be  Drinking, 

Though  'tis  ill* Antipodes  to  Thinking: 

Such  Hurry,  whilst  the  Spirit's  flying. 

Such  Stupefaction,  when  'tis  dying: 

Yet  these,  and  not  sententious  Papers, 

Must  brighten  Life,  and  cure  the  Vapours,  dkc. 

THE  PRODIGY 

A  poem  written  at  Tunbridge  wells  Anno  1706,  on  the  admira- 
lion  that  many  expressed  at  a  Gentleman's  being  in  love, 
and  their  endeavours  to  dissuade  him  from  it,  with  some 
advice  to  the  young  Ladies,  how  to  main[tain]  their  natural 
prerogative 

Protect  the  State,  and  let  Old  England  thrive. 
Keep  all  crown'd  heads  this  wondrous  year  alive  ; 
Preserve  our  palaces  from  wind  and  flame. 
Safe  be  our  fleets,  and  be  the  Scotchmen  tame ; 
Avert,  kind  fate,  whatever  th'  event  might  prove, 
For  here's  a  prodigy,  a  man  in  love  ! 
Wasted  and  pale,  he  languishes  in  sight, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  143 

And  spends  in  am'rous  verse  the  sleepless  night ; 
While  happier  youths,  with  colder  spirits  bom, 
View  the  distress  with  pity  or  with  scorn,  10 

And  maids  so  long  unused  to  be  adored 
Think  it  portends  the  pestilence  or  sword. 

How  chang'd  is  Britain  to  the  blooming  fair. 
Whom  now  the  men  no  longer  make  their  care ; 
But  of  indifference  arrogantly  boast. 
And  scarce  the  wine  gets  down  some  famous  toast ! 
Not  so  (as  still  declare  their  works)  it  prov'd 
When  Spencer,  Sydney,  and  when  Waller  lov'd, 
Who  with  soft  numbers  wing'd  successful  darts, 
Nor  thought  the  passion  lessning  to  their  parts  ;     20 
Then  let  such  patterns  countenance  his  fire, 
Whom  love  and  verse  do  now  afresh  inspire, 
'Gainst  all  who  blame  or  at  the  fate  admire  ; 
And  learn  the  nymphs,  how  to  regain  their  sway. 
And  make  this  stubborn  sex  once  more  obey  ; 
Call  back  the  fugitives  by  modest  pride, 
And  let  them  fear  sometimes  to  be  deny'd  ; 
Stay  'till  their  courtship  may  deserve  that  name, 
And  take  not  ev'ry  look  for  love  and  flame  ; 
To  mercenary  ends  no  charms  imploy,  30 

Nor  stake  their  smiles  against  some  rafled  toy  : 
For  every  fop  lay  not  th'  insnaring  train, 
Nor  lose  the  worthy  to  allure  the  vain. 
Keep  at  due  distance  all  attempts  of  bliss. 
Nor  let  too  near  a  whisper  seem  a  kiss. 
Be  not  the  constant  partner  of  a  swain. 
Except  his  long  address  that  favor  gain  ; 
Nor  be  transported  when  some  trifle's  view. 
Directs  his  giddy  choice  to  fix  on  you. 
Amend  whatever  may  your  charms  disgrace,  40 

And  trust  not  wholly  to  a  conquering  face, 


144  The  Poems  of  Akxe 

Nor  be  your  motions  mde,  coquet  or  wild^ 

Shuffling  or  lame,  as  if  in  nursing  spoiFd  : 

Slight  not  th^  advantage  of  a  graceful  mein, 

Tho^  Paris  gave  the  prize  to  beauty's  Queen« 

When  Juno  mov'd,  Venus  could  scarce  be  seen : 

And  if  to  fashions  past  you  canU  submit. 

Pretend  at  least  to  some  degree  of  wit ; 

The  men  who  fear  now  with  it  to  accost 

Still  love  the  name,  tho'  youVe  the  habit  lost         50 

Assert  your  pow'r  in  early  days  begun. 

Bom  to  undo,  be  not  yourselves  undone. 

Contemned,  and  cheap,  as  easy  to  be  won. 

If  thus,  like  Sovereigns  you  maintain  your  ground. 

The  rebells  at  your  feet  will  soon  be  found ; 

And  when  with  wise  authority  you  move, 

No  new  surprise,  no  prodigy  will  prove, 

To  see  one  man,  or  the  whole  race  in  love. 

A  PASTORAL  DIALOGUE 

Between  Two  Shepherdesses 
Silvia 
Pretty  Nymph!  within  this  shade, 
Whilst  the  Flocks  to  rest  are  laid, 
Whilst  the  World  dissolves  in  Heat, 
Take  this  cool,  and  flow'ry  Seat : 
And  with  pleasing  Talk  awhile 
Let  us  two  the  Time  beguile; 
Tho'  thou  here  no  Shepherd  see, 
To  encline  his  humble  Knee, 
Or  with  melancholy  Lays 
Sing  thy  dangerous  Beauty's  Praise.  10 

Dorinda 
Nymph !  with  thee  I  here  wou'd  stay. 
But  have  heard,  that  on  this  Day, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  145 

Near  those  Beeches,  scarce  in  view, 
All  the  Swains  some  Mirth  pursue: 
To  whose  meeting  now  I  haste. 
Solitude  do's  Life  but  waste. 

Silvia 
Prithee,  but  a  Moment  stay. 

DoHnda 
No!  my  Chaplet  wou'd  decay; 
Ev'ry  drooping  Flow'r  wou'd  mourn, 
And  wrong  the  Face,  they  shou'd  adorn.  20 

Silvia 
I  can  tell  thee,  tho'  so  Fair, 
And  dress'd  with  all  that  rural  Care, 
Most  of  the  admiring  Swains 
Will  be  absent  from  the  Plains. 
Gay  Sylvander  in  the  Dance 
Meeting  with  a  shrew'd  Mischance, 
To  his  Cabin's  now  confin'd 
By  Mopsus,  who  the  Strain  did  bind: 
Damon  through  the  Woods  do's  stray. 
Where  his  Kids  have  lost  their  way :  30 

Young  Narcissus  iv'ry  Brow 
Rac'd  by  a  malicious  Bough, 
Keeps  the  girlish  Boy  from  sight, 
Till  Time  shall  do  his  Beauty  right. 

Dorinda 
Where's  Alexis? 

Silvia 

He,  alas! 
Lies  extended  on  the  Grass; 
Tears  his  Garland,  raves,  despairs, 
Mirth  and  Harmony  forswears; 


146  Thb  Poems  op  Annb 

Since  he  was  this  Morning  shown, 

That  Delia  must  not  be  his  Own.  40 

Dorinda 
Foolish  Swain!  such  Love  to  place. 

Silvia 
On  any  but  DorindcCs  Face. 

Dorinda 
Hasty  Nymph !  I  said  not  so. 

Silvia 

No but  I  thy  Meaning  know. 

EvVy  Shepherd  thou  wou'd'st  have 

Not  thy  Lover,  but  thy  Slave; 

To  encrease  thy  captive  Train, 

Never  to  be  lov'd  again. 

But,  since  all  are  now  away,  50 

Prithee,  but  a  Moment  stay. 

Dorinda 

No;  the  Strangers,  from  the  Vale, 
Sure  will  not  this  Meeting  fail; 
Graceful  one,  the  other  Fair. 
He  too,  with  the  pensive  Air, 
Told  me,  ere  he  came  this  way 
He  was  wont  to  look  more  Gay. 

Silvia 

See!  how  Pride  thy  Heart  inclines 

To  think,  for  Thee  that  Shepherd  pines; 

When  those  Words,  that  reach'd  thy  Ear, 

Chloe  was  designed  to  hear;  60 

Chloc,  who  did  near  thee  stand. 

And  his  more  speaking  Looks  command. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  147 

Dorinda 
Now  thy  Envy  makes  me  smile. 
That  indeed  were  worth  his  while: 
Chloe  next  thyself  decay'd, 
And  no  more  a  courted  Maid. 

Silvia 
Next  myself!  Young  Nymph,  forbear. 
Still  the  Swains  allow  me  Fair, 
Tho'  not  what  I  was  that  Day, 
When  Colon  bore  the  Prize  away;  70 

When 

Dorinda 
Oh,  hold!  that  Tale  will  last, 


Till  all  the  Evening  Sports  are  past; 

Till  no  Streak  of  Light  is  seen, 

Nor  Footstep  prints  the  flow'ry  Green. 

What  thou  wert,  I  need  not  know. 

What  I  am,  must  haste  to  show. 

Only  this  I  now  discern 

From  the  things,  thou'd'st  have  me  learn. 

That  Woman-kind^ 8  peculiar  Joys 

From  pasty  or  present  Beauties  rise.  80 

THE  CAUTIOUS  LOVEES 

Silvia,  let's  from  the  Croud  retire; 

For,  What  to  you  and  me 
(Who  but  each  other  do  desire) 
Is  all  that  here  we  see  ? 

Apart  we'll  live,  tho'  not  alone ; 

For,  who  alone  can  call 
Those,  who  in  Desarts  live  with  One, 

If  in  that  One  they've  All? 


148  The  Poems  op  Anne 

The  World  a  vast  Meander  is, 

Where  Hearts  confus'dly  stray ;  10 

Where  Few  do  hit,  whilst  Thousands  miss 

The  happy  mutual  Way: 

Where  Hands  are  by  stem  Parents  ty'd, 

Who  oft,  in  CupicTs  Scorn, 
Do  for  the  widow'd  State  provide. 

Before  that  Love  is  bom: 

Where  some  too  soon  themselves  misplace; 

Then  in  Another  find 
The  only  Temper,  Wit,  or  Pace, 

That  cou'd  aflfect  their  Mind.  20 

Others  (but  oh!  avert  that  Fate!  ) 

A  well-chose  Object  change: 
Fly,  SilviOy  fly,  ere  'tis  too  late; 
•  Fall'n  Nature's  prone  to  range. 

And,  tho'  in  heat  of  Love  we  swear 

More  than  perform  we  can ; 
No  Goddess,  You,  but  Woman  are. 

And  I  no  more  than  Man. 

Th'  impatient  Silvia  heard  thus  long; 

Then  with  a  Smile  reply'd:  30 

Those  Bands  cou'd  ne'er  be  very  strong, 

Which  Accidents  divide. 

Who  e'er  was  mov'd  yet  to  go  down. 

By  such  o'er-cautious  Fear; 
Or  for  one  Lover  left  the  Town, 

Who  might  have  Numbers  here  ? 

Your  Heart,  'tis  true,  is  worth  them  all. 

And  still  preferr'd  the  first; 
But  since  confessed  so  apt  to  fall, 

'Tis  good  to  fear  the  worst.  40 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  119 

In  ancient  History  we  meet 

A  flying  Nymph  betray'd; 
Who,  had  she  kept  in  fruitful  Crete^ 

New  Conquest  might  have  made. 

And  sure,  as  on  the  Beach  she  stood, 

To  view  the  parting  Sails; 
She  curs'd  her  self,  more  than  the  Flood, 

Or  the  conspiring  Gales. 

False  TheseuSy  since  thy  Vows  are  broke, 

May  following  Nymphs  beware:  50 

Methinks  I  hear  how  thus  she  spoke, 
And  will  not  trust  too  far. 

In  LovBy  in  Play,  in  Trade,  in  War 

They  best  themselves  a^uit, 
Who,  tho*  their  Inf  rests  shipwreckt  are, 

Keep  unreprov^d  their  Wit. 


ADAM  POS'D 

Cou'd  our  First  Father,  at  his  toilsome  Plough, 
Thorns  in  his  Path,  and  Labour  on  his  Brow, 
Cloath'd  only  in  a  rude,  unpolish'd  Skin, 
Cou'd  he  a  vain  Fantastick  Nymph  have  seen, 
In  all  her  Airs,  in  all  her  antick  Graces, 
Her  various  Fashions,  and  more  various  Faces ; 
How  had  it  pos'd  that  Skill,  which  late  assigned 
Just  Appellations  to  Each  several  Kind! 
A  right  Idea  of  the  Sight  to  frame ; 
T'have  guest  from  what  New  Element   she  came ; 
T'have  hit  the  wav'ring  Form,  or  giv'n  this  Thing  a 
Name. 


150  The  Poems  of  Anne 

RALPH'S  REFLECTIONS 
Upon  the  Anniversary  of  his  Wedding 

This  day,  sais  Ralpho,  I  was  free, 

'Till  one  unlucky  hour 
And  some  few  muttered  words  by  me, 

Put  freedom  past  my  pow'r. 

Th'  expressions  I  remember  well. 

For  better  or  for  worse. 
Till  death  us  part,  I  take  thee  Nell, 
(That  is  I  take  a  Purse.) 

'Tis  Gold,  must  make  that  Pill  go  down, 
The  Priest  without  his  Fee, 

Nor  simple  Clerk,  but  for  half-crown 
Would  Execution  see. 

Rubands,  and  Gloves,  the  standers  by 
To  patience  must  encline, 

Besides  the  hopes  of  a  supply 
Of  Bisquits,  and  of  Wine. 

The  Friends  that  wait  us  to  our  Beds, 

(Who  could  no  longer  cross  itt) 
But  throw  our  stockins  at  our  heads. 
Or  drown  us  with  a  Posset. 

Oh!  happy  state  of  human  life, 

If  Mariage  be  thy  best! 
Poor  Ralpho  cry'd,  yet  kiss't  his  Wife, 

And  no  remorse  confess' t. 

THE  UNEQUAL  FETTERS 

Cou'd  we  stop  the  time  that's  flying 
Or  recall  itt  when  'tis  past 


COUNTBSS  OP  WiNOHILSEA  151 

Put  far  oflf  the  day  of  Dying 

Or  make  Youth  for  ever  last 
To  Love  wou'd  then  be  worth  our  cost. 

But  since  we  must  loose  those  Graces 
Which  at  first  your  hearts  have  wonne 

And  you  seek  for  in  new  Faces 
When  our  Spring  of  Life  is  done 

It  wou'd  but  urdge  our  ruine  on 

Free  as  Nature's  first  intention 

Was  to  make  us,  I'll  be  found 
Nor  by  subtle  Man's  invention 

Yeild  to  be  in  Fetters  bound 
By  one  that  walks  a  freer  round. 

Mariage  does  but  slightly  tye  Men 

Whil'st  close  Prisoners  we  remain 
They  the  larger  Slaves  of  Hymen 

Still  are  begging  Love  again 
At  the  full  length  of  all  their  chain. 


ALCIDOE 

While  Monarchs  in  stern  Battle  strove 

For  proud  Imperial  Sway ; 
Abandon^  to  his  milder  Love, 
Within  a  silent  peaceful  Grove, 

Alcidor  careless  lay. 

Some  term'd  it  cold,  unmanly  Fear; 

Some,  Nicety  of  Sense, 
That  Drums  and  Trumpets  cou'd  not  hear, 
The  sullying  Blasts  of  Powder  bear. 

Or  with  foul  Camps  dispense.  10 


152  The  Poems  op  Anne 

A  patient  Martyr  to  their  Scorn, 

And  each  ill-fashioned  Jest; 
The  Youth,  who  but  for  Love  was  bom, 
Remained,  and  thought  it  vast  Return, 

To  reign  in  Cloria^s  Breast. 

But  oh !  a  ruffling  Soldier  came 

In  all  the  Pomp  of  War  : 
The  Oazettes  long  had  spoke  his  Fame; 
Now  Hautboys  his  Approach  proclaim. 

And  draw  in  Crouds  from  far.  20 

Gloria  unhappily  wou'd  gaze; 

And  as  he  nearer  drew, 
The  Man  of  Feather  and  of  Lace 
Stopped  short,  and  with  profound  Amaze 

Took  all  her  Charms  to  view. 

A  Bow,  which  from  Campaigns  he  brought. 

And  to  his  Holsters  low. 
Herself,  and  the  Spectators  taught. 
That  Her  the  fairest  Nymph  he  thought. 

Of  all  that  form'd  the  Row.  30 

Next  day,  ere  Phoebus  cou'd  be  seen, 

Or  any  Gate  unbarr'd ; 
At  hers,  upon  th'  adjoining  Green, 
From  Ranks,  with  waving  Flags  between, 

Were  soften' d  Trumpets  heard. 

The  Noon  do's  following  Treats  provide. 

In  the  Pavilion's  Shade; 
The  Neighbourhood,  and  all  beside, 
That  will  attend  the  amorous  Pride, 

Are  welcomed  with  the  Maid.  40 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  153 

Poor  Alcidorl  thy  hopes  are  cross'd, 

Go  perish  on  the  Ground; 
Thy  Sighs  by  stronger  Notes  are  toss'd, 
Drove  back,  or  in  the  Passage  lost ; 

Rich  Wines  thy  Tears  have  drown' d. 

In  WomerCs  Hearts,  the  softest  Things 

Which  Nature  cou'd  devise, 
Are  yet  some  harsh,  and  jarring  Strings, 
That,  when  loud  Fame,  or  Profit  rings, 

Will  answer  to  the  Noise.  50 

Poor  Alcidorl  go  Fight  or  Dye; 
Let  thy  fond  Notions  cease : 
Man  was  not  made  in  Shades  to  lie, 
Or  his  full  Bliss,  at  ease,  enjoy, 
To  Live,  or  Love  in  peace. 

THE  CRITICK  AND  THE  WRITER  OF  FABLES 

Weary,  at  last,  of  the  Pindarick  way, 

Thro'  which  advent'rously  the  Muse  wou'd  stray ; 

To  Fable  I  descend  with  soft  Delight, 

Pleas'd  to  Translate,  or  easily  Endite: 

Whilst  aery  Fictions  hastily  repair 

To  fill  my  Page,  and  rid  my  Thoughts  of  Care, 

As  they  to  Birds  and  Beasts  new  Gifts  impart, 

And  Teach,  as  Poets  shou'd,  whilst  they  Divert. 

But  here,  the  Critick  bids  me  check  this  Vein. 
Fable,  he  crys,  tho'  grown  th'  affected  Strain,         10 
But  dies,  as  it  was  bom,  without  Regard  or  Pain. 
Whilst  of  his  Aim  the  lazy  Trifler  fails, 
Who  seeks  to  purchase  Fame  by  childish  Tales. 


164  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Then,  let  my  Verse,  once  more  attempt  the  Skies, 

The  easily  persuaded  Poet  cries. 

Since  meaner  Works  you  Men  of  Taste  despise. 

The  Walls  of  Troy  shall  be  our  loftier  Stage, 

Our  mighty  Theme  the  fierce  Achilles  Rage. 

The  Strength  of  Hector^  and  Ulysses  Arts 

Shall  boast  such  Language,  to  adorn  their  Parts,    20 

As  neither  HohheSy  nor  Chapman  cou'd  bestow. 

Or  did  from  Congreve^  or  from  Dryden  flow. 

Amidst  her  Towers,  the  dedicated  Horse 

Shall  be  receiv'd,  big  with  destructive  Force; 

Till  Men  shall  say,  when  Flames  have  brought  her 

down. 
"  Troy  is  no  morCj  and  Ilium  was  a  Town. 

Is  this  the  way  to  please  the  Men  of  Taste, 

The  Interrupter  cries,  this  old  Bombast? 

I'm  sick  of  Troy^  and  in  as  great  a  Fright, 

When  some  dull  Pedant  wou'd  her  Wars  recite,      30 

As  was  soft  Paris,  when  compell'd  to  Fight. 

To  Shades  and  Springs  shall  we  awhile  repair. 
The  Muse  demands,  and  in  that  milder  Air 
Describe  some  gentle  Swain's  unhappy  Smart 
Whose  folded  Arms  still  press  upon  his  Heart, 
And  deeper  drive  the  two  far  enter'd  Dart? 
Whilst  Phillis  with  a  careless  pleasure  reigns 
The  Joy,  the  Grief,  the  Envy  of  the  Plains; 
Heightens  the  Beauty  of  the  verdant  Woods, 
And  softens  all  the  Murmurs  of  the  Floods.  40 

Oh!  stun  me  not  with  these  insipid  Dreams, 
Th'  Eternal  Hush,  the  Lullaby  of  Streams. 
Which  still,  he  cries,  their  even  Measures  keep, 
Till  both  the  Writers,  and  the  Readers  sleep. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  155 

But  ui-ge  thy  Pen,  if  thou  wouldst  move  our  Thoughts, 
To  shew  us  private,  or  the  publick  Faults. 
Display  the  Times,  High-Church  or  Low  provoke; 
We'll  praise  the  Weapon,  as  we  like  the  Stroke, 
And  warmly  sympathizing  with  the  Spite 
Apply  to  Thousands,  what  of  One  you  write.  50 

Then,  must  that  single  Stream  the  Town  supply. 
The  harmless  Fable-wviier  do's  reply. 
And  all  the  Rest  of  Helicon  be  dry? 
And  when  so  many  choice  Productions  swarm. 
Must  only  Satire  keep  your  Fancies  warm? 
Whilst  even  there,  you  praise  with  such  Reserve, 
As  if  you'd  in  the  midst  of  Plenty  starve, 
Tho'  ne'er  so  liberally  we  Authors  carve. 

Happy  the  Men,  whom  we  divert  with  Ease, 

Whom  Opera's  and  Panegyricks  please.  60 

A  MILLER,  HIS  SON,  AND  THEIR  ASS 
A  Fable  Translated  from  Monsieur  de  la  Fontaine 

Tho'  to  Antiquity  the  Praise  we  yield 

Of  pleasing  Arts ;  and  Fable's  earli'st  Field 

Own  to  be  fruitful  Greece;  yet  not  so  clean 

Those  Ears  were  reap'd,  but  still  there's  some  to  glean; 

And  from  the  Lands  of  vast  Invention  come 

Daily  new  Authors,  with  Discov'ries  home. 

This  curious  Piece,  which  I  shall  now  impart. 
Fell  from  Malherbe,  a  Master  in  his  Art, 
To  Racan,  fiU'd  with  like  poetick  Fire, 
Both  tuneful  Servants  of  Apollo's  Choir,  10 

Rivals  and  Heirs  to  the  Horatian  Lyre: 
Who  meeting  him,  one  Day,  free  and  alone, 
(For  still  their  Thoughts  were  to  each  other  known) 


156  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Thus  askM  his  Aid — Some  nsefnl  Counsel  Give, 

Thou  who,  by  living  long,  hast  learnt  to  live; 

Whose  Observation  nothing  can  escape; 

Tell  me,  how  I  my  course  of  Life  shall  shape: 

To  something  I  wou'd  fix  ere't  be  too  late. 

You  know  my  Birth,  my  Talents,  my  Estate; 

Shall  I  with  these  content,  all  Search  resign,  20 

And  to  the  Country  my  Desires  confine? 

Or  in  the  Court,  or  Camp,  advancement  gain? 

The  World^s  a  mixture  of  Delight  and  Pain: 

Tho*  rough  it  seems,  there^s  Pleasure  in  the  Wars, 

And  HymevCs  Joys  are  not  without  their  Cares. 

I  need  not  ask,  to  what  my  Genius  tends. 

But  wou'd  content  the  World,  the  Court,  n^y  Friends. 

Please  all  the  World  (in  haste)  Malherhe  replies? 
How  vain  th'  Attempt  will  prove  in  him,  that  tries, 
Learn  from  a  FablCy  I  have  somewhere  found,  30 
Before  I  answer  all  that  you  propound. 

A  Miller  and  his  Son  (the  Father  old, 
The  Boy  about  some  fifteen  Years  had  told) 
Designed  their  Ass  to  sell,  and  for  the  Fair, 
Some  distance  off,  accordingly  prepare. 
But  lest  she  in  the  walk  should  lose  her  Flesh, 
And  not  appear,  for  Sale,  so  full  and  fresh. 
Her  Feet  together  ty'd;  between  them  two 
They  heav'd  her  up;  and  on  the  Rusticks  go: 
Till  those,  who  met  them  bearing  thus  the  Ass,      40 
Cry'd,  Are  these  Fools  about  to  act  a  Farce  ? 
Surely  the  Beast  (howe'er  it  seem  to  be) 
Is  not  the  greatest  Ass  of  all  the  Three. 
The  Miller  in  their  Mirth  his  Folly  finds, 
And  down  he  sets  her,  and  again  unbinds; 
And  tho'  her  grumbling  shew'd,  she  lik'd  much  more 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  157 

The  lazy  way,  she  travell'd  in  before, 
He  minds  her  not;  but  up  the  Boy  he  sets 
Upon  her  Back,  and  on  the  Crupper  gets. 
Thus  on  they  jog,  when  of  Three  Men  that  pass'd,  50 
The  eldest  thinking  Age  to  be  disgraced, 
Caird  to  the  Youth,  ho!  you,  young  Man  for  shame! 
Come  down,  lest  Passengers  your  Manners  blame, 
And  say,  it  ill  becomes  your  tender  Years 
To  ride  before  a  Grandsire  with  grey  Hairs. 
Truly,  the  Gentlemen  are  in  the  right. 
The  Miller  cries,  and  makes  the  Boy  alight; 
Then  forward  slides  himself  into  his  place, 
And  with  a  Mind  content,  renews  his  pace: 
But  much  he  had  not  gained  upon  his  way,  60 

Before  a  Troop  of  Damsels,  neat  and  gay, 
(Partial  to  Youth)  to  one  another  cry'd. 
See,  how  with  walking  by  that  Dotard's  side, 
The  Boy  is  tir'd;  whilst  with  a  Prelate's  state 
He  rides  alone,  and  dangling  in  the  Seat, 
Hangs  like  a  Calf  thrown  up,  across  the  Beast. 
The  Miller^  thinking  to  have  spoiled  that  Jest, 
Reply'd,  he  was  too  Old  for  Veal  to  pass. 
But  after  more  on  him,  and  on  his  Ass, 
He  stands  convinc'd,  and  takes  his  Son  again         70 
To  ride  at  ease  himself,  still  next  the  Mane. 
Yet  ere  he'd  thirty  Paces  borne  the  Lad, 
The  next  they  met,  cry'd — Are  these  Fellows  mad! 
Have  they  no  Pity  thus  t'o'erload  the  Jade ! 
Sure,  at  the  Fair,  they  for  her  Skin  may  trade. 
See,  how's  she  spent,  and  sinks  beneath  their  strokes! 
The  Miller^  whom  this  most  of  all  provokes. 
Swears  by  his  Cap,  he  shews  his  want  of  Brains, 
Who  thus  to  please  the  World,  bestows  his  Pains. 
Howe'er  we'll  try,  if  this  way't  may  be  done;         80 


158  Thb  Poems  op  Anne 

And  oflf  he  comes,  and  fetches  down  his  Spn. 
Behind  they  walk,  and  now  the  Creature  drive, 
But  con'd  no  better  in  their  Purpose  thrive ; 
Nor  scape  a  Fellow's  Censure,  whom  they  meet. 
That  cries,  to  spare  the  Ass  they  break  their  Feet; 
And  whilst  unladen  at  her  ease  she  goes. 
Trudge  in  the  Dirt,  and  batter  out  their  Shooes; 
As  if  to  burthen  her  they  were  afraid. 
And  Men  for  Beasts,  not  Beasts  for  Men  were  made. 
The  Proverb  right.  The  Cart  before  the  Horse.       90 
The  Miller  J  finding  things  grow  worse  and  worse, 
Cries  out,  I  am  an  Ass,  it  is  agreed, 
And  so  are  all,  who  wou'd  in  this  succeed. 
Hereafter,  tho'  Reproof  or  Praise  I  find, 
I'll  neither  heed,  but  follow  my  own  Mind, 
Take  my  own  Counsel,  how  my  Beast  to  selL 
This  he  resolv'd,  and  did  it,  and  did  well. 

For  you,  Sir,  Follow  Love,  the  Court,  the  War; 
Obtain  the  Crosier,  or  the  Citjfs  Furr; 
Live  single  all  your  days,  or  take  a  Wife;  100 

Trv^t  me,  a  Censure  waits  each  state  of  Life. 

THE  WIT  AND  THE  BEAU 

Strephon,  whose  Person  ev'ry  Grace 

Was  careful  to  adorn ; 
Thought,  by  the  Beauties  of  his  Face, 
In  Silvia'^s  Love  to  find  a  place, 

And  wonder'd  at  her  Scorn. 

With  Bows,  and  Smiles  he  did  his  Part; 

But  Oh!  'twas  all  in  vain: 
A  Youth  less  Fine,  a  Youth  of  Art 
Had  talk'd  himself  into  her  Heart, 

And  wou'd  not  out  again. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  159 

Strephon  with  change  of  Habits  press' d, 

And  urg'd  her  to  admire; 
His  Love  alone  the  Other  dress'd, 
As  Verse,  or  Prose  became  it  best, 

And  mov'd  her  soft  Desire. 

This  found,  his  courtship  Strephon  ends, 

Or  makes  it  to  his  Glass; 
There,  in  himself  now  seeks  amends, 
Convinc'd,  that  where  a  Wit  pretends, 

A  Beau  is  but  an  Ass. 

CUPID  AND  FOLLY 
Imitated  from  the  French 

Cupid,  ere  depriv'd  of  Sight, 
Young  and  apt  for  all  Delight, 
Met  with  Folly  on  the  way. 
As  Idle  and  as  fond  of  Play. 
In  gay  Sports  the  time  they  pass ; 
Now  run,  now  wrestle  on  the  Grass; 
Their  painted  Wings  then  nimbly  ply, 
And  ev'ry  way  for  Mast'ry  try: 
'Till  a  Contest  do's  arise, 

Who  has  won  th'  appointed  Prize.  10 

Gentle  Love  refers  the  Case 
To  the  next,  that  comes  in  Place; 
Trusting  to  his  flatt'ring  Wiles, 
And  softens  the  Dispute  with  Smiles. 
But  Folly,  who  no  Temper  knows. 
Words  pursues  with  hotter  Blows: 
'Till  the  eyes  of  Love  were  lost, 
Which  has  such  Pain  to  Mortals  cost. 
Venus  hears  his  mournful  Crys, 
And  repeats  'em,  in  the  Skys,  20 


160  The  Poems  op  Anne 

To  Jupiter  in  Council  set, 

With  Peers  for  the  Occasion  met; 

In  her  Arms  the  Boy  she  bears, 

Bathing  him  in  falling  Tears ; 

And  whilst  his  want  of  eyes  is  shown. 

Secures  the  Judges  by  her  Own. 

Folly  to  the  Board  must  come, 

And  hear  the  Tryal  and  the  Doom ; 

Which  Cytherea  loudly  prays 

May  be  as  heavy  as  the  Case:  30 

Which,  when  All  was  justly  weigh'd, 

CupicTs  Wings  now  useless  made, 

That  a  staflF,  his  Feet  must  guide, 

Which  wou'd  still  be  apt  to  slide; 

This  Decree  at  last  was  read, 

That  Love  by  Folly  shou'd  be  lead. 


LOVE,  DEATH,  AND  REPUTATION 

Reputation^  Love,  and  Death, 
(The  Last  all  Bones,  the  First  all  Breath, 
The  Midd'st  composed  of  Restless  Fire) 
From  each  other  wou'd  Retire; 
Thro'  the  World  resolv'd  to  stray. 
Every  One  a  several  Way ; 
Exercising,  as  they  went. 
Each  such  Power,  as  Fate  had  lent ; 
Which,  if  it  united  were, 

Wretched  Mortals  cou'd  not  bear:  10 

But  as  parting  Friends  do  show, 
To  what  Place  they  mean  to  go, 
Correspondence  to  engage, 
Nominate  their  utmost  Stage; 
Death  declar'd  he  wou'd  be  found 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  161 

Near  the  fatal  Trumpet's  sound; 

Or  where  Pestilences  reign, 

And  Quacks  the  greater  Plagues  maintain; 

Shaking  still  his  sandy  Glass, 

And  mowing  Human  Flesh,  like  Grass.  20 

Love,  as  next  his  Leave  he  took, 

Cast  on  both  so  sweet  a  Look, 

As  their  Tempers  near  disarm'd, 

One  relax'd,  and  t'other  warm'd; 

Shades  for  his  Betreat  he  chose, 

Bural  Plains,  and  soft  Bepose ; 

Where  no  Dowry  e'er  was  paid. 

Where  no  Jointure  e'er  was  made; 

No  111  Tongue  the  Nymph  perplex'd. 

Where  no  Forms  the  Shepherd  vex'd;  30 

Where  Himself  shou'd  be  the  Care, 

Of  the  Fond  and  of  the  Fair: 

Where  that  was,  they  soon  should  know, 

Au  Revoir!  then  tum'd  to  Go. 

Reputation  made  a  Pause, 

Suiting  her  severer  Laws; 

Second  Thoughts,  and  Third  she  us'd, 

Weighing  Consequences  mus'd; 

When,  at  length  to  both  she  cry'd: 

You  Two  safely  may  Divide,  40 

To  th'  Antipodes  may  fall. 

And  re-ascend  th'  encompast  Ball; 

Certain  still  to  meet  agen 

In  the  Breasts  of  tortur'd  Men; 

Who  by  One  (too  far)  betray'd. 

Call  in  t'other  to  their  Aid: 

Whilst  I  Tender,  Coy,  and  Nice, 

Bais'd  and  ruin'd  in  a  Trice, 

Either  fix  with  those  I  grace, 


162  The  Poems  op  Anns 

Or  abandoning  the  Place,  50 

No  Return  my  Nature  bears, 
From  green  Youth,  or  hoary  Hairs; 
If  thro'  Quilt,  or  Chance,  I  sever, 
I  once  Parting,  Part  for  ever. 

THE  KING  AND  THE  SHEPHERD 
Imitated  from  the  French 

Through  ev'ry  Age  some  Tyrant  Passion  reigns: 

Now  Love  prevails,  and  now  Ambition  gains 

Reason^s  lost  Throne,  and  sovereign  Rule  maintains. 

Tho'  beyond  Love's,  Ambition's  Empire  goes; 

For  who  feels  Love,  Ambition  also  knows. 

And  proudly  still  aspires  to  be  possest 

Of  Her,  he  thinks  superior  to  the  rest. 

As  cou'd  be  prov'd,  but  that  our  plainer  Task 

Do's  no  such  Toil,  or  Definitions  ask; 

But  to  be  so  rehears'd,  as  first  'twas  told,  10 

When  such  old  Stories  pleas'd  in  Days  of  old. 

A  King  J  observing  how  a  Shepherd*^  Skill 
Lnprov'd  his  Flocks,  and  did  the  Pastures  fill, 
That  equal  Care  th'  assaulted  did  defend, 
And  the  secur'd  and  grazing  Part  attend. 
Approves  the  Conduct,  and  from  Sheep  and  Curs 
Transfer^  the  Sway,  and  changed  his  Wool  to  Furrs. 

Lord-Keeper  now,  as  rightly  he  divides 

His  just  Decrees,  and  speedily  decides; 

When  his  sole  Neighbour,  whilst  he  watch'd  the  Fold, 

A  Hermit  poor,  in  Contemplation  old,  21 

Hastes  to  his  Ear,  with  safe,  but  lost  Advice, 

Tells  him  such  Heights  are  levell'd  in  a  trice. 

Preferments  treach'rous,  and  her  Paths  of  Ice: 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  163 

And  that  already  sure  H  had  turned  his  Brain, 

Who  thought  a  Prince's  Favour  to  retain. 

Nor  seem'd  unlike,  in  this  mistaken  Rank, 

The  sightless  Wretch  who  froze  upon  a  Bank 

A  Serpent  found,  which  for  a  Staff  he  took. 

And  us'd  as  such  (  his  own  but  lately  broke)  30 

Thanking  the  Fates,  who  thus  his  Loss  supply'd. 

Nor  marking  one,  that  with  amazement  cry'd. 

Throw  quickly  from  thy  Hand  that  sleeping  111; 

A  Serpent  'tis,  that  when  awak'd  will  kill. 

A  Serpent  this!  th'  uncautioned  Fool  replies: 

A  Staff  it  feels,  nor  shall  my  want  of  eyes 

Make  me  believe,  I  have  no  Senses  left, 

And  thro'  thy  Malice  be  of  this  bereft ; 

Which  Fortune  to  my  Hand  has  kindly  sent 

To  guide  my  Steps,  and  stumbling  to  prevent         40 

No  Staff,  the  Man  proceeds;  but  to  thy  harm 

A  Snake  'twill  prove:  The  Viper,  now  grown  warm. 

Confirmed  it  soon,  and  fastened  on  his  Arm. 

Thus  wilt  thou  find,  Shepherd  believe  it  true, 
Some  111,  that  shall  this  seeming  Good  ensue; 
Thousand  Distastes,  t'  allay  thy  envy'd  Gains, 
Unthought  of,  on  the  parcimonious  Plains. 
So  prov'd  the  Event,  and  Whisp'rers  now  defame 
The  candid  Judge,  and  his  Proceedings  blame. 
By  Wrongs,  they  say,  a  Palace  he  erects,  50 

The  Good  oppresses,  and  the  Bad  protects. 
To  view  this  Seat  the  King  himself  prepares. 
Where  no  Magnificence  or  Pomp  appears. 
But  Moderation,  free  from  each  Extream, 
Whilst  Moderation  is  the  Builder's  Theme. 
Asham'd  yet  still  the  Sycophants  persist, 
That  Wealth  he  had  conceal'd  within  a  Chest, 


164  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Which  but  attended  some  convenient  Day/ 

To  face  the  Sun,  and  brighter  Beams  display. 

The  Chest  mibarr'd,  no  radiant  Gems  they  find,      60 

No  secret  Sums  to  foreign  Banks  designed, 

But  humble  Marks  of  an  obscure  Recess, 

Emblems  of  Care,  and  Instruments  of  Peace; 

The  Hook,  the  Scrip,  and  for  unblam'd  Delight 

The  merry  Bagpipe,  which,  ere  fall  of  Night, 

Cou'd  sympathizing  Birds  to  tuneful  Notes  invite. 

Welcome  ye  Monuments  of  former  Joys! 

Welcome!  to  bless  again  your  Master's  Eyes, 

And  draw  from  Courts,  th'  instructed  Shepherd  cries. 

No  more  dear  Belicksl  we  no  more  will  part,  70 

You  shall  my  Hands  employ,  who  now  revive  my  Heart. 

No  Emulations,  or  corrupted  Times 

Shall  f  alsly  blacken,  or  seduce  to  Crimes 

Him,  whom  your  honest  Industry  can  please. 

Who  on  the  barren  Down  can  sing  from  inward  Ease. 

How's  this!  the  Monarch  something  mov'd  rejoins. 
With  such  low  Thoughts,  and  Freedom  from  Designs, 
What  made  thee  leave  a  Life  so  fondly  priz'd. 
To  be  in  Crouds,  or  envy'd,  or  despis'd  ? 

Forgive  me,  Sir,  and  Humane  Frailty  see,  80 

The  Swain  replies,  in  my  past  State  and  Me ; 
All  peaceful  that,  to  which  I  vow  return. 
But  who  alas!  (tho'  mine  at  length  I  mourn) 
Was  e'er  without  the  Curse  of  some  Ambition  bom. 

THERE'S  NO  TO-MORROW 
A  Fable  imitated  from  Sir  Roger  V Estrange 

Two  long  had  Lov'd,  and  now  the  Nymph  desir'd. 
The  Cloak  of  Wedlock,  as  the  Case  requir'd ; 
Urg'd  that,  the  Day  he  wrought  her  to  this  Sorrow, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  165 

He  Vow'd,  that  he  wou'd  marry  her  To-Morrow. 
Agen  he  Swears,  to  shun  the  present  Storm, 
That  he,  To-Morrow^  will  that  Vow  perform. 
The  Morrows  in  their  due  Successions  came; 
Impatient  still  on  Each,  the  pregnant  Dame 
Urg'd  him  to  keep  his  Word,  and  still  he  swore  the  same. 
When  tir'd  at  length,  and  meaning  no  Bedress,  10 

But  yet  the  Lye  not  caring  to  confess, 
He  for  his  Oath  this  Salvo  chose  to  borrow. 
That  he  was  Free,  since  there  was  no  To-Morrow; 
For  when  it  comes  in  Place  to  be  employed, 
'Tis  then  To-Day;  To-Morrovo's  ne'er  enjoy'd. 
The  Tale* 8  a  Jest^  the  Moral  is  a  Truth; 
To-Morrow  and  To-Morrow,  cheat  our  Youth: 
In  riper  Age^  To-Morrow  still  we  cry, 
Not  thinking,  that  the  present  Day  we  Dye; 
Unpractis'*d  all  the  Oood  toe  had  Designed;  20 

There^s  No  To-Morrow  to  a  Willing  Mind 

JUPITEE  AND  THE  FAEMEB 

When  Poets  gave  their  God  in  Crete  a  Birth, 
Then  Jupiter  held  Traffick  with  the  Earth, 
And  had  a  Farm  to  Lett:  the  Fine  was  high. 
For  much  the  Treasury  wanted  a  Supply, 
By  Dana&^s  wealthy  Show'r  exhausted  quite,  and  dry. 
But  MercWy,  who  as  Steward  kept  the  Court, 
So  racked  the  Rent,  that  all  who  made  Besort 
Unsatisfy'd  returned,  nor  could  agree 
To  use  the  Lands,  or  pay  his  secret  Fee ; 
'Till  one  poor  Clown  (thought  subt'ler  than  the  rest,       10 
Thro'  various  Projects  rolling  in  his  Breast) 
Consents  to  take  it,  if  at  his  Desire 
All  Weathers  tow'rds  his  Harvest  may  conspire ; 
The  Frost  to  kill  the  Worm,  the  brooding  Snow, 


166  The  Poems  of  Anne 

The  filling  Rains  may  come,  and  Phoebus  glow. 

The  Terms  accepted,  sign'd  and  seal'd  the  Lease, 

His  Neighbours  Grounds  afford  their  due  Encrease 

The  Care  of  Heav'n;  the  Owner's  Cares  may  cease. 

Whilst  the  new  Tenant,  anxious  in  his  Mind, 

Now  asks  a  Show'r,  now  craves  a  rustling  Wind  20 

To  raise  what  That  had  lodged,  that  he  the  Sheaves  may 

bind. 
The  Sun,  th'o'er-shadowing  Clouds,  the  moistning  Dews 
He  with  such  Contrariety  does  chuse ; 
So  often  and  so  oddly  shifts  the  Scene, 
Whilst  others  Load,  he  scarce  has  what  to  Glean. 

O  Jupiter!  with  Famine  pinch'd  he  cries. 
No  more  will  I  direct  th'  unerring  Skies; 
No  more  my  Substance  on  a  Project  lay. 
No  more  a  sullen  Doubt  I  will  betray, 
Let  me  but  live  to  Reap,  do  Thou  appoint  the  way.        30 

FOR  THE  BETTER 
Imitated  from  Sir  Roger  V Estrange 

A  Quack,  to  no  true  Skill  in  Physick  bred, 
With  frequent  visits  cursed  his  Patient's  Bed; 
Enquiring,  how  he  did  his  Broths  digest, 
How  chim'd  his  Pulse,  and  how  he  took  his  Rest: 
If  shudd'ring  Cold  by  Burnings  was  pursu'd. 
And  at  what  time  the  Aguish  Fit  renew'd. 
The  waining  Wretch,  each  day  become  more  faint, 
In  like  proportion  doubles  his  Complaint; 
Now  swooning  Sweats  he  begs  him  to  allay. 
Now  give  his  Lungs  more  liberty  to  play,  10 

And  take  from  empty' d  Veins  these  scorching  Heats 
away: 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  167 

Or  if  he  saw  the  Danger  did  increase, 

To  warn  him  fair,  and  let  him  part  in  Peace. 

My  Life  for  yours,  no  Hazard  in  your  Case 

The   Quack   replies;    your    Voice,   your    Pulse,   your 

Face, 
Good  Signs  afford,  and  what  you  seem  to  feel 
Proceeds  from  Vapours,  which  we'll  help  with  Steel. 
With  kindled  Rage,  more  than  Distemper,  bums 
The  suff'ring  Man,  who  thus  in  haste  returns: 
No  more  of  Vapours,  your  belov'd  Disease,  20 

Your  Ignorance's  Skreen,  your  What-you-please^ 
With  which  you  cheat  poor  Females  of  their  Lives, 
Whilst  Men  dispute  not,  so  it  rid  their  Wives. 
For  me,  I'll  speak  free  as  I've  paid  my  Fees; 
My  Flesh  consumes,  I  perish  by  degrees: 
And  as  thro'  weary  Nights  I  count  my  Pains, 
No  Rest  is  left  me,  and  no  Strength  remains. 
All  for  the  Better,  Sir,  the  Quack  rejoins: 
Exceeding  promising  are  all  these  Signs. 
Falling-away,  your  Nurses  can  confirm,  30 

Was  ne'er  in  Sickness  thought  a  Mark  of  Harm. 
The  want  of  Strength  is  for  the  Better  still; 
Since  Men  of  Vigour  Fevers  soonest  kill. 
Ev'n  with  this  Gust  of  Passion  I  am  pleas'd; 
For  they're  most  Patient  who  the  most  are  seiz'd. 
But  let  me  see!  here's  that  which  all  repels: 
Then  shakes,  as  he  some  formal  Story  tells. 
The  Treacle-water y  mixt  with  powder'd  Shells, 
My  Stomach's  gone  (what  d'you  infer  from  thence?) 
Nor  will  with  the  least  Sustenance  dispense.  40 

The  Better;  for,  where  appetite  endures. 
Meats  intermingle,  and  no  Med'cine  cures. 

The  Stomach,  you  must  know,  Sir,  is  a  Part 

But,  sure,  I  feel  Death's  Pangs  about  my  Heart. 


168  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Nay  then  Farewell  I     I  need  no  more  attend 
The  Quack  replies.     A  sad  approaching  Friend 
Questions  the  Sick,  why  he  retires  so  fast; 
Who  says,  because  of  Fees  IVe  paid  the  Last, 
And,  whilst  all  Symptoms  tow'rd  my  Cure  agree, 
Am,  for  the  Better ^  Dyu%  as  yon  see.  50 

THE  JESTEB  AND  THE  LITTLE  FISHES 

A  FABLE 

Immitated  from  the  French 

Far,  from  Societies  where  I  haue  place 
Be  all  half  Witts,  and  Acters  of  grimace; 
Buffoons,  and  Mimmicks,  qnoters  of  old  saws, 
The  easy  purchasers  of  dull  Applause; 
Still,  plagues  to  men  of  true,  but  modest  sence. 
Who,  must  not  take,  though  Jesters  give  offence; 
Nor,  yett,  oppose  the  Laughers,  and  the  cry. 
And  but  by  Silence,  their  assent  deny. 

A  Jester,  was  the  man,  of  whom  we  treate 

Though  now,  more  Innocent  was  his  conceit  10 

And,  not  for  mischeif  uttered  but  for  meat. 

Received  a  Guest,  at  such  a  plenteous  Board 

As  did  of  Fish,  all  rarities  affoard. 

It  griev'd  him  sore,  that  next  to  him  were  placed 

By  chance,  or  malice,  but  the  worst  and  least. 

Whilst,  at  the  upper  end,  his  greedy  Eye 

Survey'd  such  Fish,  as  Killigrew  might  buy; 

A  Smelt  at  length,  from  out  his  slender  cheer 

He  draws,  and  seems  to  whisper  in  itts  ear; 

Does  then  another,  and  another,  take,  20 

And  with  them  all,  in  private,  feigns  to  speak. 

The  luckyer  feeders,  for  a  moment  ceased. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  169 

To  penetrate  the  meaning  of  the  jest; 

No  jest,  he  cries,  but  forreign  news  I  try 

To  learn,  by  conuersation  with  the  Fry, 

A  Scott,  my  Friend,  some  Akers  had  of  Land, 

Which,  since  no  Com,  nor  Tree  wou'd  on  them  stand. 

He  tom'd  to  pounds,  and  thought  his  fortune  made 

By  joyning  in  the  Caledonian  Trade; 

So,  crossed  the  waves,  but  now,  sad  rumours  come      30 

Th'  unhappy  youth,  abroad  has  found  his  Doom ; 

To  know  the  truth,  and  sett  my  thoughts  att  ease, 

I  questioned  with  these  Pigmies  of  the  Seas, 

Who  modestly  reply,  with  loosened  tongue, 

For  Dariens  Istmus  they  were  far  too  yong. 

Nor  from  the  Shoar,  a  League  cou'd  hard'ly  keep; 

But,  send  me,  to  those  Monsters  of  the  Deep, 

Which  round  the  World  a  yearly  course  maintain 

Till  now,  here  dress'd,  they  swim  in  sawce  again, 

Cou'd  I,  but  speak,  with  one  of  those  full-grown,        40 

My  Friend's  disaster  might  be  thoroughly  known; 

Whether,  detcdn'd  by  Death,  by  want,  or  wind, 

The  Project  broke,  he  stayes  so  long  behind? 

None,  need  demand,  if  his  invention  took. 

Who  for  his  teeth,  thus  made  his  tongue  the  hook. 

A  Jest,  well  tim'd,  though  from  a  worthless  Man 

Often  obtains,  more  then  true  merit  can. 

THE  ATHEIST  AND  THE  ACORN 

Methinks  this  World  is  oddly  made, 

And  ev'ry  thing's  amiss, 
A  dull  presuming  Atheist  said. 
As  stretch 'd  he  lay  beneath  a  Shade; 

And  instanced  in  this: 

Behold,  quoth  he,  that  mighty  thing, 
A  Pumpkin^  large  and  round. 


170  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Is  held  but  by  a  little  String, 
Which  upwards  cannot  make  it  spring, 
Or  bear  it  from  the  Ground. 

Whilst  on  this  Oak,  a  Fruit  so  small, 
So  disproportion'd,  grows; 

That,  who  with  Sence  surveys  this  All, 

This  universal  Casual  Ball, 
Its  ill  Contrivance  knows. 

My  better  Judgment  wou'd  have  hung 

That  Weight  upon  a  Tree, 
And  left  this  Mast,  thus  slightly  strung, 
'Mongst  things  which  on  the  Surface  sprung, 

And  small  and  feeble  be. 

No  more  the  Caviller  cou'd  say, 
Nor  farther  Faults  descry ; 
For,  as  he  upwards  gazing  lay. 
An  Acorriy  loosen'd  from  the  Stay, 
Fell  down  upon  his  Eye. 

Th'  offended  Part  with  Tears  ran  o'er, 

As  punish'd  for  the  Sin: 
Fool!  had  that  Bough  a  Pumpkin  bore. 
Thy  Whimseys  must  have  work'd  no  more. 

Nor  Scull  had  kept  them  in. 

THE  PREVALENCE  OF  CUSTOM 

A  Female,  to  a  Drunkard  marry'd. 
When  all  her  other  Arts  miscarry'd. 
Had  yet  one  Stratagem  to  prove  him. 
And  from  good  Fellowship  remove  him ; 
Finding  him  overcome  with  Tipple, 
And  weak,  as  Infant  at  the  Nipple, 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  171 

She  to  a  Vault  transports  the  Lumber, 

And  there  expects  his  breaking  Slumber. 

A  Table  she  with  Meat  provided, 

And  rob'd  in  Black,  stood  just  beside  it;  10 

Seen  only,  by  one  glim'ring  Taper, 

That  blewly  burnt  thro'  misty  Vapor. 

At  length  he  wakes,  his  Wine  digested, 

And  of  her  Phantomship  requested. 

To  leam  the  Name  of  that  close  Dwelling, 

And  what  oflpends  his  Sight  and  Smelling; 

And  of  what  Land  she  was  the  Creature, 

With  outspread  Hair,  and  ghastly  Feature  ? 

Mortal,  quoth  she,  (to  Darkness  hurry'd) 

Know,  that  thou  art  both  Dead  and  Bury'd;        20 

Convey'd,  last  Night,  from  noisie  Tavern, 

To  this  thy  still,  and  dreary  Cavern. 

What  strikes  thy  Nose,  springs  from  the  Shatters 

Of  Bodies  kill'd  with  Cordial  Waters, 

Stronger  than  other  Scents  and  quicker. 

As  urg'd  by  more  spirituous  Liquor. 

My  self  attend  on  the  Deceased, 

When  all  their  Earthly  Train's  releas'd; 

And  in  this  Place  of  endless  Quiet, 

My  Business  is,  to  find  them  Diet ;  80 

To  shew  all  sorts  of  Meats,  and  Salades, 

Till  I'm  acquainted  with  their  Palates; 

But  that  once  known,  then  less  suflSces. 

Quoth  he  (and  on  his  Crupper  rises) 

Thou  Guardian  of  these  lower  Regions, 

Thou  Provider  for  countless  Legions, 

Thou  dark,  but  charitable  Crony, 

Far  kinder  than  my  Tisiphony, 

Who  of  our  Victuals  thus  art  Thinking, 

If  thou  hast  Care  too  of  our  Drinking,  40 


172  The  Poems  of  Anne 

A  Bumper  fetch:  Quoth  she,  a  Halter 
Since  nothing  less  thy  Tone  can  alter, 
Or  break  this  Habit  thou'st  been  getting. 
To  keep  thy  Throat  in  constant  wetting. 

THE  MUSSULMAN'S  DREAM  OF  THE  VIZIER  AND 

DERVIS 

Where  is  that  World,  to  which  the  Fancy  flies, 
When  Sleep  excludes  the  Present  from  our  Eyes; 
Whose  Map  no  Voyager  cou'd  e'er  design, 
Nor  to  Description  its  wild  Parts  confine? 
Yet  such  a  Land  of  Dreams  We  must  allow. 
Who  nightly  trace  it,  tho'  we  know  not  how: 
Unfetter'd  by  the  Days  obtruded  Rules, 
We  All  enjoy  that  Paradise  of  Fools ; 
And  find  a  Sorrow,  in  resuming  Sense, 
Which  breaks  some  free  Delight,   and   snatches  us 
from  thence.  10 

Thus!  in  a  Dream,  a  Mussulman  was  shown 
A  Vizir^  whom  he  formerly  had  known, 
Wlien  at  the  Port  he  bore  deputed  Sway, 
And  made  the  Nations  with  a  Nod  obey. 
Now  all  serene,  and  splendid  was  his  Brow, 
Wliilst  ready  Waiters  to  his  Orders  bow; 
His  Residence,  an  artful  Garden  seem'd, 
Adom'd  with  all,  that  pleasant  he  esteem'd ; 
Ftdl  of  Reward,  his  glorious  Lot  appear'd. 
As  with  the  Sight,  our  Dreamer's  Mind  was  chear'd ; 
But  turning,  next  he  saw  a  dreadful  Sight,  21 

Which  fiU'd  his  Soul  with  Wonder  and  AflFright', 
Pursu'd  by  Fiends,  a  wretched  Dervis  fled 
Through  scorching  Plains,  which  to  wide    Distance 
spread ; 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  173 

Whilst  every  Torture,  gloomy  Poets  paint, 

Was  there  prepared  for  the  reputed  Saint. 

Amazed  at  this,  the  sleeping  Turk  enquires, 

Why  He  that  liv'd  above,  in  soft  Attires, 

Now  roll'd  in  Bliss,  while  t'other  roll'd  in  Fires? 

We're  taught  the  SufPrings  of  this  Future  State,   30 

Th'  Excess  of  Courts  is  likeliest  to  create; 

Whilst  solitary  Cells,  o'ergrown  with  Shade, 

The  readiest  way  to  Paradise  is  made. 

True,  quoth  the  Phantom  (which  he  dream'd  reply'd) 

The  lonely  Path  is  still  the  surest  Ghiide, 

Nor  is  it  by  these  Instances  deny'd. 

For,  know  my  Friend,  whatever  Fame  report, 

The  Vizier  to  Retirements  wou'd  Resort, 

Th'  ambitious  Dervia  wou'd  frequent  the  Court. 

THE  SHEPHERD  PEPINQ  TO  THE  FISHES 

A  Shepherd  seeking  with  his  Lass 

To  shun  the  Heat  of  Day ; 
Was  seated  on  the  shadow'd  Grass, 
Near  which  a  flowing  Stream  did  pass, 

And  Fish  within  it  play. 

To  Phillis  he  an  Angle  gave. 

And  bid  her  toss  the  Line ; 
For  sure,  quoth  he,  each  Fish  must  have, 
Who  do's  not  seek  to  be  thy  Slave, 

A  harder  Heart  than  mine. 

Assemble  here  you  watry  Race, 

Transportedly  he  cries; 
And  if,  when  you  behold  her  Face, 
You  e'er  desire  to  quit  the  Place, 

You  see  not  with  my  Eyes. 


174  The  Poems  of  Anne 

But  yon,  perhaps,  are  by  the  Ear, 

More  easie  to  be  canght ; 
If  so,  I  have  my  Bagpipe  here, 
The  only  Mnsick  thaf  s  not  dear. 

Nor  in  great  Cities  bought. 

So  sprightly  was  the  Tnne  he  chose, 

And  often  did  repeat ; 
That  Phillis,  tho'  not  up  she  rose. 
Kept  time  with  every  thrilling  Close, 

And  jigg'd  upon  her  Seat 

But  not  a  Fish  wou'd  nearer  draw, 

No  Harmony  or  Charms, 
Their  frozen  Blood,  it  seems,  cou'd  thaw. 
Nor  all  they  heard,  nor  all  they  saw 

Cou'd  woo  them  to  such  Terms. 

The  angry  Shepherd  in  a  Pett, 

Gives  o'er  his  wheedling  Arts, 
And  from  his  Shoulder  throws  the  Net, 
Resolv'd  he  wou'd  a  Supper  get 
By  Force,  if  not  by  Parts. 

Thus  stated  Laws  are  always  best 

To  rule  the  vulgar  Throng, 
Who  grow  more  Stubborn  when  Carest, 
Or  with  soft  Rhetorick  addrest, 
If  taking  Measures  wrong. 

THE  DECISION  OF  FORTUNE 
A  Fable 

Fortune  well  Pictured  on  a  rolling  Globe, 
With  waving  Locks,  and  thin  transparent  Robe, 
A  Man  beholding,  to  his  Neighbour  cry'd, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  175 

Whoe'er  would  catch  this  Dame,  must  swiftly  ride. 

Mark,  how  she  seems  to  Fly,  and  with  her  bears, 

All  that  is  worth  a  busie  Mortal's  Cares: 

The  gilded  Air  about  her  Statue  shines, 

As  if  the  Earth  had  lent  it  all  her  Mines; 

At  random  Here  a  Diadem  she  flings, 

And  There  a  scarlet  Hat  with  dangling  Strings,  10 

And    to    ten   Thousand    Fools    ten   Thousand    glorious 

Things. 
Shall  I  then  stay  at  Home,  Dull  and  Content 
With  Quarter-Days,  and  hard  extorted  Rent? 
No,  I'll  to  Horse,  to  Sea,  to  utmost  Isles, 
But  I'll  encounter  her  propitious  Smiles: 
Whilst  you  in  slothful  Ease  may  chuse  to  Sleep, 
And  scarce  the  few  Paternal  Acres  keep. 
Farewel,  reply'd  his  Friend,  may  you  advance. 
And  grow  the  Darling  of  this  Lady  Chance: 
Whilst  I  indeed,  not  courting  of  her  Grace,  20 

Shall  dwell  content,  in  this  my  Native  Place, 
Hoping  I  still  shall  for  your  Friend  be  known: 
But  if  too  big  for  such  Acquaintance  grown, 
I  shan't  be  such  a  fond  mistaken  Sot, 
To  think  Remembrance  should  become  my  Lot; 
When  you  Exalted,  have  your  self  Forgot. 
Nor  me  Ambitious  ever  shall  you  find. 
Or  hunting  Fortune,  who,  they  say,  is  Blind: 
But  if  her  Want  of  Sight  shou'd  make  her  Stray, 
She  shou'd  be  Welcome,  if  she  came  this  Way.  30 

'Tis  very  lik^  (the  Undertaker  cry'd) 
That  she  her  Steps  to  these  lost  Paths  shou'd  guide: 
But  I  lose  Time,  whilst  I  such  Thoughts  deride. 
Away  he  goes,  with  Expectation  chear'd. 
But  when  his  Course  he  roimd  the  World  had  steer'd. 
And  much  had  borne,  and  much  had  hop'd  and  fear'd. 


176  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Yet  con'd  not  be  informed  where  he  might  find 
This  fickle  Mistress  of  all  Human-kind: 
He  quits  at  length  the  Chace  of  flying  Game, 
And  back  as  to  his  Neighbor's  House  he  came,  40 

He  there  encounters  the  uncertain  Dame ; 
Who  lighting  from  her  gaudy  Coach  in  haste, 
To  him  her  eager  Speeches  thus  addrest. 
Fortune  behold,  who  has  been  long  pursu'd. 
Whilst  all  the  Men,  that  have  my  Splendors  view'd. 
Madly  enamour'd,  have  such  Flatt'ries  forg'd. 
And  with  such  Lies  their  vain  Pretensions  urg'd. 
That  Hither  I  am  fled  to  shun  their  Suits, 
And  by  free  Choice  conclude  their  vain  Disputes; 
Whilst  I  the  Owner  of  this  Mansion  bless,  50 

And  he  unseeking  Fortune  shall  possess. 
Tho'  rightly  charg'd  as  something  Dark  of  Sight, 
Yet  Merit,  when  'tis  found,  is  my  Delight; 
To  Knaves  and  Fools,  when  I've  some  Grace  allow'd, 
'  T  has  been  like  scattering  Money  in  a  Croud, 
To  make  me  Sport,  as  I  beheld  them  strive. 
And  some  observ'd  (thro'  Age)  but  Half -Alive ; 
Scrambling  amongst  the  Vigorous  and  Young, 
One  proves  his  Sword,  and  One  his  wheedling  Tongue, 
All  striving  to  obtain  me  right  or  wrong:  60 

Whilst  Crowns,  and  Crosiers  in  the  Contest  hurl'd, 
Shew'd  me  a  Farce  in  the  contending  World. 
Thou  wert  deluded,  whilst  with  Ship,  or  Steed, 
Thou  lately  didst  attempt  to  reach  my  Speed, 
And  by  laborious  Toil,  and  endless  Pains, 
Didst  sell  thy  Quiet  for  my  doubtful  Gains: 
Whilst  He  alone  my  real  Fav'rite  rises, 
Who  every  Thing  to  its  just  Value  prizes, 
And  neither  courts,  nor  yet  my  Gifts  despises. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  177 

THE  BRASS-POT,  AND  STONE-JUQG 
AFdbU 

A  Brazen  Poiy  by  sconring  vext, 

With  Beef  and  Pudding  still  perplext, 

BesolvM  t'  attempt  a  nobler  Life, 

Urging  the  Jugg  to  share  the  Strife: 

Brother,  qnoth  he,  (Love  to  endear) 

Why  should  We  Two  continue  here. 

To  serve  and  cook  such  homely  Cheer? 

Who  tho'  we  move  with  awkward  pace. 

Your  stony  Bowels,  and  my  Face, 

Abroad  canH  miss  of  Wealth  and  Place.  10 

Then  let  us  instantly  be  going, 

And  see  what  in  the  World  is  Doing. 

The  bloated  Jugg^  supine  and  lazy, 

Who  made  no  Wish,  but  to  be  easy, 

Nor,  like  it's  Owner,  e'er  did  think 

Of  ought,  but  to  be  fill'd  with  Drink; 

Yet  something  mov'd  by  this  fine  Story, 

And  frothing  higher  with  Vain-glory, 

Reply'd,  he  never  wanted  Metal, 

But  had  not  Sides,  like  sturdy  Kettle^  20 

That  in  a  Croud  cou'd  shove  and  bustle. 

And  to  Preferment  bear  the  Justle; 

When  the  first  Knock  would  break  His  Measures, 

And  stop  his  Rise  to  Place  and  Treasures. 

Sure  (quoth  the  Pot)  thy  Scull  is  thicker. 

Than  ever  was  thy  muddiest  Liquor: 

Go  I  not  with  thee,  for  thy  Ghiard, 

To  take  off  Blows,  and  Dangers  ward? 

And  hast  thou  never  heard,  that  Cully 

Is  borne  thro'  all  by  daring  Bully?  30 

Your  self  (reply'd  the  Drink-conveigher) 


178  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

May  be  my  Ruin  and  Betrayer: 

A  Superiority  you  boast, 

And  dress  the  Meat,  I  but  the  Toast: 

Than  mine  your  Constitution's  stronger 

And  in  Fatigues  can  hold  out  longer; 

And  should  one  Bang  from  you  be  taken, 

I  into  Nothing  should  be  shaken. 

A  (T autre  cry'd  the  Pot  in  scorn, 

Dost  think,  there's  such  a  Villain  bom,  40 

That,  when  he  proflFers  Aid  and  Shelter, 

Will  rudely  fall  to  Helter-Skelter? 

No  more,  but  follow  to  the  Boad, 

Where  Each  now  drags  his  pond'rous  Load, 

And  up  the  Hill  were  almost  clamber'd, 

When  (may  it  ever  be  remember'd!) 

Down  rolls  the  Jugg,  and  after  rattles 

The  most  perfidious  of  all  Kettles; 

At  every  Molehill  gives  a  Jump, 

Nor  rests,  till  by  obdurate  Thump,  50 

The  Pot  of  Stone,  to  shivers  broken, 

Sends  each  misguided  Fool  a  Token: 

To  show  them,  by  this  fatal  Test, 

That  Equal  Company  is  best. 

Where  none  Oppress,  nor  are  Opprest. 

THE  OWL  DESCRIBING  HER  YOUNG  ONES 

Why  was  that  baleful  Creature  made. 

Which  seeks  our  Quiet  to  invade, 

And  screams  ill  Omens  through  the  Shade? 

'Twas,  sure,  for  every  Mortals  good, 
When,  by  wrong  painting  of  her  Brood, 
She  doom'd  them  for  the  Eagle's  Food: 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  179 

Who  proflFer'd  Safety  to  her  Tribe, 
Won'd  she  bnt  shew  them  or  describe, 
And  serving  him,  his  Favour  bribe. 

When  thus  she  did  his  Highness  tell;  10 

In  Looks  my  Young  do  all  excel, 
Nor  Nightingales  can  sing  so  well. 

You'd  joy  to  see  the  pretty  Souls, 
With  wadling  Steps  and  frowzy  Poles, 
Come  creeping  from  their  secret  Holes. 

But  I  ne'er  let  them  take  the  Air, 
The  Fortune-hunters  do  so  stare; 
And  Heiresses  indeed  they  are. 

This  ancient  Yew  three  hundred  Years, 

Has  been  possess'd  by  Lineal  Heirs:  20 

The  Males  extinct,  now  All  is  Theirs. 

I  hope  I've  done  their  Beauties  right. 
Whose  Eyes  outshine  the  Stars  by  Night; 
Their  Muflfs  and  Tippets  too  are  White. 

The  King  of  Cedars  wav'd  his  Power, 
And  swore  he'd  fast  ev'n  from  that  Hour, 
Ere  he'd  such  Lady  Birds  devour. 

Th'  Agreement  seal'd,  on  either  part. 

The  Owl  now  promis'd,  from  her  Heart 

All  his  Night-Dangers  to  divert;  80 

As  Centinel  to  st€md  and  Whoop, 
If  single  Fowl,  or  Shoal,  or  Troop 
Should  at  his  Palace  aim  or  stoop. 

But  home,  one  Evening  without  Meat, 
The  Eagle  comes,  and  takes  his  Seat, 
Where  they  did  these  Conditions  treat. 


180  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

The  Mother-Owl  was  proPd  away, 
To  seek  abroad  for  needful  Prey, 
And  forth  the  Misses  came  to  play. 

What's  here!  the  hungry  Monarch  cry'd,  40 

When  near  him  living  Flesh  he  spy'd, 
With  which  he  hop'd  to  be  supply'd. 

But  recollecting,  Hwas  the  Place, 
Where  he'd  so  lately  promised  Grace 
To  an  enchanting,  beauteous  Race; 

He  paused  a  while,  and  kept  his  Maw, 
With  sober  Temperance,  in  awe, 
Till  all  their  Lineaments  he  saw. 

What  are  these  Things,  and  of  what  Sex, 

At  length  he  cry'd,  with  Vultur's  Becks,  50 

And  Shoulders  higher  than  their  Necks? 

These  wear  no  Palatines^  nor  Muffs, 
Italian  Silks,  or  Doyley  Stuffs, 
But  motley  Callicoes,  and  Ruffs. 

Nor  Brightness  in  their  Eyes  is  seen, 
But  through  the  Film  a  dusky  Green, 
And  like  old  Margery  is  their  Mien. 

Then  for  my  Supper  they're  designed. 

Nor  can  be  of  that  lovely  Kind, 

To  whom  my  Pity  was  inclin'd.  60 

No  more  Delays;  as  soon  as  spoke. 

The  Plumes  are  stripped,  the  Grisles  broke. 

And  near  the  Feeder  was  to  choak. 

When  now  retum'd  the  grizly  Dame, 
(Whose  Family  was  out  of  Frame) 
Against  League-Breakers  does  exclaim. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  181 

How!  qnoth  the  Lord  of  soaring  Fowls, 
(Whilst  horribly  she  wails  and  howls) 
Were  then  yonr  Progeny  bnt  Owls? 

I  thought  some  PJioenix  was  their  Sire,  70 

Who  did  those  charming  Looks  inspire. 
That  yon'd  prepar'd  me  to  admire. 

Upon  yonr  self  the  Blame  be  laid; 
My  Talons  yon've  to  Blood  betray'd. 
And  ly'd  in  every  Word  yon  said. 

Faces  or  Books,  beyond  their  Worth  extolVd, 
Are  censured  most,  and  thus  to  pieces  pulVd. 

THE  PHHiOSOPHER,  THE  YOUNG  MAN,  AND  HIS 
STATUE 

A  Fond  Athenian  Mother  brought 
A  Sculptor  to  indulge  her  Thought, 

And  carve  her  Only  Son; 
Who  to  such  strange  perfection  wrought, 
That  every  Eye  the  Statue  caught 

Nor  ought  was  left  undone. 

A  youthful  Smile  adom'd  the  Face,  • 
The  polish  gave  that  Smile  a  Grace ; 

And  through  the  Marble  reigns 
(Which  well  the  Artist's  Skill  cou'd  trace. 
And  in  their  due  Positions  place) 

A  Thread  of  purple  Veins. 

The  Parasites  about  it  came, 
(Whose  Praises  were  too  large  to  name) 

And  to  each  other  said ; 
The  Man  so  well  had  reached  his  Aim, 
Th'  Original  cou'd  o'er  it  claim 

Only  a  native  Red. 


182  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Mean  while  a  Sage,  cunidst  the  Crond, 
Thus,  with  a  Precept  wise  and  loud, 

Check'd  the  Vain-gloriotis  Boy ; 
By  telling  him,  who  now  grew  prond, 
That  tho'  with  Beanty  'twas  endow'd, 

The  Figure  was  a  Toy: 

Of  no  Advantage  to  the  State, 
'Twou'd  neither  combate,  nor  debate, 

But  idly  stand  alone ; 
Bids  him  beware,  whilst  Men  create 
In  Stone  thus  his  Resemblance  great. 

He  prove  not  like  the  stone. 

THE  HOG,  THE  SHEEP,  AND  GOAT,  CAEBYING  TO  A 

FAIR 

Who  does  not  wish,  ever  to  judge  aright, 

And,  in  the  Course  of  Life's  ^iPairs, 
To  have  a  quick,  and  far  extended  Sight, 
Tho'  it  too  often  multiplies  his  Cares? 
And  who  has  greater  Sense,  but  greater  Sorrow  shares? 

Thi8  felt  the  Swine,  now  carrying  to  the  Knife ; 

And  whilst  the  Lamb  and  silent  Ooat 
In  the  same  fatal  Cart  lay  void  of  Strife, 
He  widely  stretches  his  foreboding  Throat, 
Deaf'ning  the  easy  Crew  with  his  outragious  Note. 

The  angry  Driver  chides  th 'unruly  Beast, 

And  bids  him  all  this  Noise  forbear; 
Nor  be  more  loud,  nor  clamorous  than  the  rest. 

Who  with  him  travel'd  to  the  neighb'ring  Fair. 
And  quickly  shou'd  arrive,  and  be  unfetter'd  there. 

This,  quoth  the  Swine,  I  do  believe,  is  true. 
And  see  we're  very  near  the  Town; 


COUNTBSS  OP   WiNOHILSEA  183 

Whilst  these  poor  Fools  of  short,  and  bounded  View, 
Think  'twill  be  well,  when  yon  have  set  them  down. 
And  eas'd  One  of  her  Milk,  the  Other  of  her  Gown. 

But  all  the  dreadful  Butchers  in  a  Row, 

To  my  far-searching  Thoughts  appear, 
Who  know  indeed,  we  to  the  Shambles  go, 

Whilst  I,  whom  none  but  Belzebub  wou'd  shear, 
Nor  but  his  Dam  wou'd  milk,  must  for  my  Carcase  fear. 

But  tell  me  then,  will  it  prevent  thy  Fate? 

The  rude  unpitying  Farmer  cries ; 
If  not,  the  Wretch  who  tastes  his  sufTrings  late, 

Not  He,  who  thro'  th 'unhappy  Future  prys. 
Must  of  the  Two  be  held  most  Fortunate  and  Wise. 

THE  SHEPHERD  AND  THE  CALM 

Soothing  his  Passions  with  a  warb'ling  Sound, 
A  Shepherd-Swain  lay  stretch'd  upon  the  Ground ; 
Whilst  all  were  mov'd,  who  their  Attention  lent. 
Or  with  the  Harmony  in  Chorus  went. 
To  something  less  than  Joy,  yet  more  than  dull  Content. 
(Between  which  two  Extreams  true  Pleasure  lies, 
O'er-run  by  Fools,  unreach'd-at  by  the  Wife) 
But  yet,  a  fatal  Prospect  to  the  Sea 
Wou'd  often  draw  his  greedy  Sight  away. 
He  saw  the  Barques  unlading  on  the  Shore,  10 

And  guess'd  their  Wealth,  then  scom'd  his  little  Store. 
Then  wou'd  that  Little  lose,  or  else  wou'd  make  it  more. 
To  Merchandize  converted  is  the  Fold, 
The  Bag,  the  Bottle,  and  the  Hurdles  fold; 
The  Dog  was  chang'd  away,  the  pretty  Shell 
Whom  he  had  fed,  and  taught,  and  lov'd  so  well 
Li  vain  the  Phillia  wept,  which  heretofore 


184  The  Pobms  of  Anns 

ReceivM  his  Presents,  and  his  Garlands  wore. 

False  and  upbraided,  he  forsakes  the  Downs, 

Nor  courts  her  Smiles,  nor  fears  the  Ocean's  Frowns.  20 

For  smooth  it  lay,  as  if  one  single  Wave 

Made  all  the  Sea,  nor  Winds  that  Sea  cou'd  heave ; 

Which  blew  no  more  than  might  his  Sails  supply: 

Clear  was  the  Air  below,  and  Phoebus  laugh'd  on  high. 

With  this  Advent'rer  ev'ry  thing  combines, 

And  Gold  to  Gold  his  happy  Voyage  joins; 

But  not  so  prosperous  was  the  next  Essay, 

For  rugged  Blasts  encountered  on  the  way. 

Scarce  cou'd  the  Men  escape,  the  Deep  had  all  their 

Prey. 
Our  broken  Merchant  in  the  Wreck  was  thrown  30 

Upon  those  Lands,  which  once  had  been  his  own; 
Where  other  Flocks  now  pastur'd  on  the  Grass, 
And  other  Corydons  had  woo'd  his  Lass. 
A  Servant,  for  small  Profits,  there  he  turns. 
Yet  thrives  again,  and  less  and  less  he  mourns; 
Re-purchases  in  time  th'abandon'd  Sheep, 
Which  sad  Experience  taught  him  now  to  keep. 
When  from  that  very  Bank,  one  Halcyon  Day, 
On  which  he  lean'd,  when  tempted  to  the  Sea, 
He  notes  a  Calm ;  the  Winds  and  Waves  were  still,    40 
And  promis'd  what  the  Winds  nor  Waves  fulfill, 
A  settrd  Quiet,  and  Conveyance  sure. 
To  him  that  Wealth,  by  Traffick,  wou'd  procure. 
But  the  rough  part  the  Shepherd  now  performs. 
Reviles  the  Cheat,  and  at  the  Flatt'ry  storms. 
Ev'n  thus  (quoth  he)  you  seem'd  all  Rest  and  Ease, 
You  sleeping  Tempests,  you  untroubl'd  Seas, 
That  ne'er  to  be  forgot,  that  luckless  Hour, 
In  which  I  put  my  Fortunes  in  your  Pow'r; 
Quitting  my  slender,  but  secure  Estate,  50 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  185 

My  undisturb'd  Repose,  my  sweet  Retreat, 
For  Treasures  which  you  ravish'd  in  a  Day, 
But  swept  my  Folly,  with  my  Goods,  away. 
Then  smile  no  more,  nor  these  false  Shews  employ, 
Thou  momentary  Calm,  thou  fleeting  Joy; 
No  more  on  me  shall  these  fair  Signs  prevail, 
Some  other  Novice  may  be  won  to  Sail, 
Give  me  a  certain  Fate  in  the  obscurest  Vale. 

THE  LORD  AND  THE  BRAMBLE 

To  view  his  stately  Walks  and  Groves, 

A  Man  of  Pow'r  and  Place 
Was  hast'ning  on;  but  as  he  roves. 
His  Foe  the  slighted  Bramble  proves, 

And  stops  his  eager  Pace. 

That  Shrub  was  qualify'd  to  Bite; 

And  now  there  went  a  Tale, 
That  this  injurious  partial  Wight 
Had  bid  his  Gard'ner  rid  it  quite. 

And  throw  it  o'er  the  PaiL 

Often  the  Bry^r  had  wish'd  to  speak, 

That  this  might  not  be  done; 
But  from  the  Abject  and  the  Weak, 
Who  no  important  Figure  make. 

What  Statesman  does  not  run? 

But  clinging  now  about  his  Waste, 

Ere  he  had  time  to  fly, 
My  Lord  (quoth  he)  for  all  your  haste, 
I'll  know  why  I  must  be  displac'd. 

And  'mongst  the  Rubbish  lie. 

Must  none  but  buffle-headed  Trees 
Within  your  Ground  be  seen? 


186  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Or  tap'ring  Yews  here  court  the  Breeze, 
That,  like  some  Beaux  whom  Time  does  freeze, 
At  once  look  Old  and  Green? 

I  snarl,  His  tme,  and  sometimes  scratch 

A  tender-footed  Squire ; 
Who  does  a  rugged  Tartar  catch. 
When  me  he  thinks  to  over-match. 

And  jeers  for  my  Attire. 

As  to  Yourself,  who  'gainst  me  fret, 

E'en  give  this  Project  o'er: 
For  know,  where'er  my  Root  is  set, 
These  rambling  Twigs  will  Passage  get, 

And  vex  you  more  and  more. 

No  WantSy  no  Threatnings^  nor  the  Jail 

Will  curb  an  angry  Wit: 
Then  think  not  to  chastise,  or  rail; 
Appease  the  Man,  if  you^d  prevail, 

Who  some  sharp  Satire  writ, 

THE  HOUSE  OF  SOCRATES 

For  Socrates  a  House  was  built, 

Of  but  inf eriour  Size ; 
Not  highly  Arch'd,  nor  Carv'd,  nor  Gilt ; 

The  Man,  'tis  said,  was  Wise. 

But  Mob  despis'd  the  little  Cell, 
That  struck  them  with  no  Fear; 

Whilst  Others  thought,  there  should  not  dwell 
So  great  a  Person  there. 

How  shou'd  a  due  Recourse  be  made 

To  One,  so  much  Admir'd? 
Where  shou'd  the  spacious  Cloth  be  laid. 

Or  where  the  Guests  retir'd? 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  187 

Believe  me,  quoth  the  listening  Sage, 

'Twas  not  to  save  the  Charge ; 
That  in  this  over-building  Age, 

My  House  was  not  more  large. 

But  this  for  faithful  Friends,  and  kind, 

Was  only  meant  by  me ; 
Who  fear  that  what  too  streight  you  find, 

Must  yet  contracted  be. 

THE  YOUNG  RAT  AND  HIS  DAM,  THE  COCK  AND 
THE  CAT 

No  Cautions  of  a  Matron,  Old  and  Sage, 

Young  Rattlehead  to  Prudence  cou'd  engage; 

But  forth  the  Offspring  of  her  Bed  wou'd  go, 

Nor  reason  gave,  but  that  he  wou*d  do  so. 

Much  Counsel  was,  at  parting,  thrown  away, 

Ev'n  all,  that  Mother-Rat  to  Son  cou'd  say; 

Who  foUow'd  him  with  utmost  reach  of  Sight, 

Then,  lost  in  Tears,  and  in  abandon'd  Plight, 

Tum'd  to  her  mournful  Cell,  and  bid  the  World  Good 

Night. 
But  Fortune,  kinder  than  her  boding  Thought,  10 

In  little  time  the  Vagrant  homewards  brought. 
Raised  in  his  Mind,  and  mended  in  his  Dress, 
Who  the  BeUair  did  every  way  confess. 
Had  learnt  to  flow'r  his  Wigg,  nor  brusht  away 
The  falling  Meal,  that  on  his  Shoulders  lay ; 
And  from  a  Nutshell,  wimbl'd  by  a  Worm, 
Took  Snuff,  and  cou'd  the  Government  reform. 
The  Mother,  weeping  from  Maternal  Love, 
To  see  him  thus  prodigiously  improve. 
Expected  mighty  Changes  too,  within,  20 

And  Wisdom  to  avoid  the  Cat,  and  Gin. 


188  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Whom  did  yon  chiefly  note,  Sweetheart,  qnoth  she, 

Of  all  the  Strangers  yon  abroad  did  see? 

Who  grac'd  yon  most,  or  did  yonr  Fancy  take? 

The  yonnger  Rat  than  cnrs'd  a  noisy  Bake, 

That  barr'd  the  best  Acquaintance  he  con'd  make; 

And  fear'd  him  so,  he  trembPd  ev'ry  Part; 

Nor  to  describe  him,  scarce  con'd  have  the  Heart. 

High  on  his  Feet  (qnoth  he)  himself  he  bore, 

And  terribly,  in  his  own  Language,  swore;  80 

A  feather'd  Arm  came  ont  from  either  Side, 

Which  lond  he  clapp'd,  and  Combatants  defy'd. 

And  to  each  Leg  a  Bayonette  was  ty'd: 

And  certainly  his  Head  with  Wonnds  was  sore ; 

For  That,  and  both  his  Cheeks  a  Sanguine  Colour  wore. 

Near  Him  there  lay  the  Creature  I  admired, 

And  for  a  Friend  by  Sympathy  desirM: 

His  Make,  like  Ours,  as  f  €ur  as  Tail  and  Feet, 

With  Coat  of  Furr  in  parallel  do  meet; 

Yet  seeming  of  a  more  exalted  Bace,  40 

Tho'  humble  Meekness  beautify 'd  his  Face: 

A  purring  Sound  compos'd  his  gentle  Mind, 

Whilst  frequent  Slumbers  did  his  Eye-lids  bind; 

Whose  soft,  contracted  Paw  lay  calmly  still. 

As  if  unus'd  to  prejudice,  or  kill 

I  paused  a  while,  to  meditate  a  Speech, 

And  now  was  stepping  just  within  his  reach; 

When  that  rude  Clown  began  his  hect'ring  Cry, 

And  made  me  for  my  Life,  and  from  th'  Attempt  to  fly. 

Indeed  'twas  Time,  the  shiv'ring  Beldam  said,  50 

To  scour  the  Plain,  and  be  of  Life  afraid. 

Thou  base,  degen'rate  Seed  of  injur'd  Bats, 

Thou  veriest  Fool  (she  cry'd)  of  all  my  Brats; 

Would' st  thou  have  shaken  Hands  with  hostile  Cats, 

And  dost  not  yet  thine  Own,  and  Country's  Foe, 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  189 

At  this  expence  of  Time,  and  Travel  know? 

Alas!  that  swearing,  staring,  bullying  Thing, 

That  tore  his  Throat,  and  blustered  with  his  Wing, 

Was  but  some  paltry,  Dunghill,  Craven  Cock, 

Who  serves  the  early  Household  for  a  Clock.  60 

And  We  his  Oats,  and  Barley  often  steal. 

Nor  fear,  he  shou'd  revenge  the  pilfer'd  Meal: 

Whilst  that  demure,  and  seeming  harmless  Puss 

Herself,  and  mewing  Chits  regales  with  Us. 

If  then,  of  useful  sense  thou'st  gained  no  more. 

Than  ere  thou'dst  past  the  Threshold  of  my  Door; 

Be  here,  my  Son,  content  to  Dress  and  Dine, 

Steeping  the  List  of  Beauties  in  thy  Wine, 

And  neighb'ring  Vermin  with  false  Gloss  outshine. 

Amongst  Mankind  a  Thousand  Fop8  we  see,  70 

Who  in  their  Rambles  learn  no  more  than  Thee; 
Cross  o'er  the  Alpes,  and  make  the  Tour  of  France 
To  learn  a  paltry  Song,  or  antick  Dance; 
Bringing  their  Noddles,  and  Valizes  pack'd 
With  Mysteries,  from  Shops  and  Taylors  wreck'd: 
But  what  may  prejudice  their  Native  Land; 
Whose  Troops  are  raising,  or  whose  Fleet  is  mann'd. 
Ne'er  moves  their  Thoughts,  nor  do  they  understand. 
Thou,  my  dear  Rattlehead,  and  such  as  These 
Might  keep  at  home,  and  brood  on  Sloth  and  Ease;  80 
Whilst  Others,  more  adapted  to  the  Age, 
May  vig'rously  in  Warlike  Feats  engage, 
And  live  on  foreign  Spoils,  or  dying  thin  the  Stage. 

THE  EXECUTOR 

A  Greedy  Heir  long  waited  to  fulfill, 
As  his  Executor,  a  Kinsmari^s  Will; 
And  to  himself  his  Age  repeated  o'er, 
To  his  Infirmities  still  adding  more; 


190  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  nicely  kept  th'  Account  of  the  expected  Store: 

When  Deathj  at  last,  to  either  gave  Release, 

Making  One's  Pains,  the  Other's  Longings  cease; 

Who  to  the  Grave  must  decently  convey, 

Ere  he  Possession  takes  the  kindred  Clay, 

Which  in  a  Coach  was  plac'd,  wherein  he  rides,        10 

And  so  no  Hearse,  or  following  Train  provides ; 

Rejecting  Russel^  who  wou'd  make  the  Charge 

Of  one  dull  tedious  Day,  so  vastly  Large. 

When,  at  his  Death  the  humble  Man  declar'd. 

He  wished  thus  privately  to  be  Interr'd. 

And  now,  the  Luggage  moves  in  solemn  State, 

And  what  it  wants  in  Number,  gains  in  Weight 

The  happy  Heir  can  scarce  contain  his  Joy, 

Whilst  sundry  Musings  do  his  Thoughts  employ. 

How  he  shalt  act,  now  Every  thing's  his  Own,  20 

Where  his  Revenge,  or  Favour  shall  be  shown ; 

Then  recollecting,  draws  a  counterfeited  Groan. 

The  Avenues,  and  Gardens  shall  be  chang'd. 

Already  he  the  Furniture  has  ranged. 

To  ransack  secret  Draw'rs  his  Phancy  flies. 

Nor  can  th'  appearing  Wealth  his  Mind  suffice. 

Thus  he  an  Age  runs  o'er  betwixt  the  Porch 

Of  his  Friend's  House,  and  the  adjacent  Church: 

Whilst  the  slow  Driver,  who  no  reck'ning  kept 

Of  what  was  left,  indulging  Nature,  slept;  30 

Till  on  a  Bank,  so  high,  the  Wheel  was  borne 

That  in  a  Moment  All  must  overturn: 

Whilst  the  rich  Heir  now  finds  the  giving  Dead 

Less  weighty  in  his  Gold,  than  in  his  Lead; 

Which  falling  just  on  his  contriving  Breast, 

Expell'd  the  Soul,  leaving  the  corpse  to  rest 

In  the  same  Grave,  intended  for  his  Friend. 

Then  why  shou'd  We  our  Days  in  Wishes  spend. 

Which,  ere  we  see  fulfiU'd,  are  often  at  an  End? 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  191 

A  TALE  OF  THE  MISER  AND  THE  POET 
Written  about  the  Year  1709 

A  Wit,  transported  with  Inditing, 

Unpay'd,  unprais'd,  yet  ever  Writing; 

Who,  for  all  Fights  and  Fav'rite  Friends, 

Had  Poems  at  his  Finger  Ends; 

For  new  Events  was  still  providing; 

Yet  now  desirous  to  be  riding, 

He  pack'd-up  ev'ry  Ode  and  Ditty 

And  in  Vacation  left  the  City ; 

So  rapt  with  Figures,  and  Allusions, 

With  secret  Passions,  sweet  Confusions;  10 

With  Sentences  from  Plays  well-known, 

And  thousand  Couplets  of  his  own ; 

That  ev'n  the  chalky  Road  look'd  gay. 

And  seem'd  to  him  the  Milky  Way. 

But  Fortune,  who  the  Ball  is  tossing. 

And  Poets  ever  will  be  crossing. 

Misled  the  Steed,  which  ill  he  guided, 

Where  several  gloomy  Paths  divided. 

The  steepest  in  Descent  he  followed, 

Enclosed  by  Rocks,  which  Time  had  hoUow'd;    20 

Till,  he  believed,  alive  and  booted. 

He'd  reach'd  the  Shades  by  Homer  quoted. 

But  all,  that  he  cou'd  there  discover. 

Was,  in  a  Pit  with  Thorns  grown  over, 

Old  Mammon  digging,  straining,  sweating. 

As  Bags  of  Gold  he  thence  was  getting ; 

Who,  when  reproved  for  such  Dejections 

By  him,  who  lived  on  high  Reflections, 

Reply'd;  Brave  Sir,  your  Time  is  ended. 

And  Poetry  no  more  befriended.  30 


192  Thb  Pobms  of  Akkb 

I  hid  this  Coin,  when  Charles  was  swaying; 
When  all  was  Biot,  Masking,  Playing; 
When  witty  Beggars  were  in  fashion, 
And  Learning  had  o^er-mn  the  Nation, 
Bnt,  since  Mankind  is  so  mnch  wiser, 
•  That  none  is  valned  like  the  Miser^ 
I  draw  it  hence,  and  now  these  Sums 
In  proper  Soil  grow  np  to  Plumbs; 
Which  gathered  once,  from  that  rich  Minnte 
We  role  the  World,  and  all  that's  in  it.  40 

But,  qnoth  the  Poel^  can  yon  raise. 
As  well  as  Plnmb-trees,  Groves  of  Bays? 
Where  yon,  which  I  won'd  chnse  mnch  rather. 
May  Fmits  of  Bepntation  gather? 
Will  Men  of  Quality,  and  Spirit, 
Begard  yon  for  intrinsick  Merit? 
And  seek  yon  out,  before  your  Betters, 
For  Conversation,  Wit,  and  Letters? 

Fool,  qnoth  the  Churl,  who  knew  no  Breeding; 
Have  these  been  Times  for  such  Proceeding?      50 
Instead  of  Honoured  and  Rewarded, 
Are  you  not  Slighted,  or  Discarded? 
What  have  you  met  with,  but  Disgraces? 
Your  Pbiob  cou'd  not  keep  in  Places; 
And  your  Van-Bbuq  had  found  no  quarter, 
But  for  his  dabbling  in  the  Morter. 
RowE  no  Advantages  cou'd  hit  on. 
Till  Verse  he  left,  to  write  North-Briton. 
Philips,  who's  by  the  Shilling  known, 
Ne'er  saw  a  Shilling  of  his  own.  60 

Meets  Philomela,  in  the  Town 
Her  due  Proportion  of  Renown? 
What  Pref 'rence  has  Abdelia  seen, 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  193 

T'expel,  the'  she  cou'd  write  the  Spleen? 

Of  Coach,  or  Tables,  can  you  brag, 

Or  better  Cloaths  than  Poet  Rag? 

Do  wealthy  Kindred,  when  they  meet  you, 

With  Eandness,  or  Distinction,  greet  you? 

Or  have  your  lately  flatter'd  Heroes 

Enrich'd  you  like  the  Roman  Maroesf  70 

No — quoth  the  Man  of  broken  Slumbers: 
Yet  we  have  Patrons  for  our  Numbers; 
There  are  Meccenas^^  among  'em. 

Quoth  Mammony  pray  Sir,  do  not  wrong  'em; 
But  in  your  Censures  use  a  Conscience, 
Nor  charge  Great  Men  with  thriftless  Nonsense: 
Since  they,  as  your  own  Poets  sing, 
Now  grant  no  Worth  in  any  thing 
But  so  much  Money  as  Hwill  bring. 
Then,  never  more  from  your  Endeavours  80 

Expect  Preferment,  or  less  Favours. 
But  if  you'll  'scape  Contempt,  or  worse. 
Be  sure,  put  Money  in  your  Purse; 
Money!  which  only  can  relieve  you 
When  Fame  and  Friendship  will  deceive  you. 

Sir,  (quoth  the  Poet  humbly  bowing. 
And  all  that  he  had  said  allowing) 
Behold  me  and  my  airy  Fancies 
Subdu'd,  like  Giants  in  Romances. 
I  here  submit  to  your  Discourses;  90 

Which  since  Experience  too  enforces, 
I,  in  that  solitary  Pit, 
Your  Gold  withdrawn,  will  hide  my  Wit: 
Till  Time,  which  hastily  advances. 
And  gives  to  all  new  Turns  and  Chances, 


194  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Again  may  bring  it  into  use ; 

Roscommons  may  again  produce; 

New  Augustean  Days  revive, 

When  Wit  shall  please,  and  Poets  thrive. 

Till  when,  let  those  converse  in  private,  100 

Who  taste  what  others  donH  arrive  at ; 

Yielding  that  Mammonists  surpass  us; 

And  let  the  Bank  out-swell  Parnassus. 


THE  TRADESMAN  AND  THE  SCHOLAB 

A  Citizen  of  mighty  Pelf, 
But  much  a  Blockhead,  in  himself 
Disdained  a  Man  of  shining  Parts, 
Master  of  Sciences  and  Arts, 
Who  left  his  Book  scarce  once  a  day 
For  sober  Coffee,  Smoak,  or  Tea; 
Nor  spent  more  Money  in  the  Town 
Than  bought,  when  need  required,  a  Qt)wn; 
Which  way  of  Living  much  offends 
The  Aldermanj  who  gets  and  spends,  10 

And  grudges  him  the  Yital  Air, 
Who  drives  no  Trade,  and  takes  no  Care. 
Why  Bookworm!  to  him  once  he  cry'd, 
Why,  setting  thus  the  World  aside, 
Dost  thou  thy  useless  Time  consume, 
Enclosed  within  a  lonely  Room, 
And  poring  damnify  thy  Wit, 
*Till  not  for  Men  or  Manners  fit  ? 
Hop'st  thou,  with  urging  of  thy  Vein, 
To  spin  a  Fortune  from  thy  Brain?  20 

Or  gain  a  Patron,  that  shall  raise 
Thy  solid  State,  for  empty  Praise? 
No ;  trust  not  to  your  Soothings  vile. 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  195 

Received  per  me*B  the  only  Stile. 

Your  Book^s  but  frown'd  on  by  My  Lord; 

If  Miners  uncross^,  I  reach  his  Board. 

In  slighting  Yours,  he  shuts  his  Hand; 

Protracting  Mine,  devolves  the  Land. 

Then  let  Advantage  be  the  Test, 

Which  of  us  Two  ev'n  Writes  the  best  30 

Besides,  I  often  Scarlet  wear. 

And  strut  to  Church,  just  next  the  Mayor. 

Whilst  rusty  Black,  with  Inch  of  Band, 

Is  all  the  Dress  you  understand; 

Who  in  the  Pulpit  thresh  to  Please, 

Whilst  I  below  can  snore  at  Ease. 

Yet,  if  you  prove  me  there  a  Sinner, 

I  let  you  go  without  a  Dinner. 

This  Prate  was  so  beneath  the  Sence 

Of  One,  who  Wisdom  cou'd  dispense,  40 

Unheard,  or  unretum'd  it  past: 

But  War  now  lays  the  City  waste, 

And  plunder'd  Goods  profusely  fell 

By  length  of  Pike,  not  length  of  Ell. 

Abroad  th'  Inhabitants  are  forc'd. 

Prom  Shops,  and  Trade,  and  Wealth  divorc'd. 

The  Student  leaving  but  his  Book, 

The  Tumult  of  the  Place  forsook. 

In  Foreign  Parts,  One  tells  his  Tale, 

How  Rich  he'd  been,  how  quick  his  Sale,  50 

Which  do's  for  scanty  Alms  prevail. 

The  Chance  of  War  whilst  he  deplores, 

And  dines  at  Charitable  Doors; 

The  Man  of  Letters,  known  by  Fame, 

Was  welcom'd,  wheresoe'er  he  came. 

Still,  Potentates  entreat  his  Stay, 

Whose  Coaches  meet  him  on  the  Way: 


196  The  Poems  op  Anne 

And  Universities  contest 

Which  shall  exceed,  or  use  him  best. 

Amazed  the  Burgomaster  sees  60 

On  Foot,  and  scom'd  such  Turns  as  these; 

And  sighing,  now  deplores  too  late 

His  cumb'rous  Trash,  and  shallow  Pate: 

Since  loaded  but  with  double  Chest 

Of  learned  Head,  and  honest  Breast, 

The  Scholar  moves  from  Place  to  Place, 

And  finds  in  every  Climate  Grace. 

Wit  and  the  Arta^  on  that  Foundaiion  ra%8*d^ 
{Houoe^er  the  Vulgar  are  with  Shows  amazed) 
Is  all  that  recommends^  or  can  be  justly  praised.   70 

MAN'S  INJUSTICE  TOWARDS  PROVIDENCE 

A  Thriving  Merchant,  who  no  Loss  sustained, 

In  little  time  a  mighty  Fortune  gain'd. 

No  Pyrate  seiz'd  his  still  returning  Freight; 

Nor  foundring  Vessel  sunk  with  its  own  Weight: 

No  Kuin  enter'd  through  dissever'd  Planks; 

No  Wreck  at  Sea,  nor  in  the  Publick  Banks. 

Aloft  he  sails,  above  the  Reach  of  Chance, 

And  do's  in  Pride,  as  fast  as  Wealth,  advance. 

His  Wife  too,  had  her  Town  and  Country-Seat, 

And  rich  in  Purse,  concludes  her  Person  Great.  10 

A  Dutchess  wears  not  so  much  Gold  and  Lace ; 

Then  'tis  with  Her  an  undisputed  Case, 

The  finest  Petticoat  must  take  the  Place. 

Her  Rooms,  anew  at  ev'ry  Christ'ning  drest. 

Put  down  the  Court,  and  vex  the  City-Guest. 

Grinning  Malottos  in  true  Ermin  stare ; 

The  best  Japan,  and  clearest  China  Ware 

Are  but  as  common  Delft  and  English  Laquar  there. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  197 

No  Luxury's  by  either  unenjoy'd, 
Or  cost  withheld,  tho'  awkardly  employ'd.  20 

How  comes  this  Wealth  ?  a  Country  Friend  demands, 
Who  scarce  cou'd  live  on  Product  of  his  Lands, 
How  is  it  that,  when  Trading  is  so  bad 
That  some  are  Broke,  and  some  with  Fears  run  Mad, 
You  can  in  better  State  yourself  maintain. 
And  your  Effects  still  unimpaired  remain! 
My  Industry y  he  cries,  is  all  the  Cause; 
Sometimes  I  interlope,  and  slight  the  Laws ; 
I  wiser  Measures,  than  my  Neighbours,  take. 
And  better  speed,  who  better  Bargains  make.  30 

I  knew,  the  iSmymo-Fleet  wou'd  fall  a  Prey, 
And  therefore  sent  no  Vessel  out  that  way: 
My  busy  Factors  prudently  I  chuse, 
And  in  streight  Bonds  their  Friends  and  Kindred  noose: 
At  Home,  I  to  the  Publick  Sums  advance, 
Whilst,  under-hand  in  Fee  with  hostile  France^ 
I  care  not  for  your  TourvillSy  or  Du-BartSj 
No  more  than  for  the  Rocks,  and  Shelves  in  Charts: 
My  own  sufficiency  creates  my  Gain, 
Bais'd,  and  secured  by  this  unfailing  Brain.  40 

This  idle  Vaunt  had  scarcely  past  his  Lips, 
When  Tydings  came,  his  ill-provided  Ships 
Some  thro'  the  want  of  Skill,  and  some  of  Care, 
Were  lost,  or  back  retum'd  without  their  Fare. 
From  bad  to  worse,  each  Day  his  State  declin'd, 
'Till  leaving  Town,  and  Wife,  and  Debts  behind, 
To  his  Acquaintance  at  the  Bural  Seat 
He  Sculks,  and  humbly  sues  for  a  Betreat. 
Whence  comes  this  Change,  has  Wisdom  left  that  Head, 
(His  Friend  demands)  where  such  right  Schemes  were 
bred?  50 

What  Phrenzy,  what  Delirium  mars  the  Scull, 


198  The  Poems  op  Anns 

Which  fill'd  the  Chests,  and  was  it  self  so  fall? 
Here  interrupting,  sadly  he  Reply'd, 
In  Me^s  no  Change,  but  Fate  must  all  Things  guide; 
To  Promdence  I  attribute  my  Loss. 

Vain-glorious  Man  do's  thus  the  Praise  engross^ 
When  Prosperous   Days  around  him    spread    their 

Beams: 
But,  if  revolved  to  opposite  Extreams^ 
Still  his  oum  Sence  he  fondly  will  prefer^ 
And  Providence,  not  He,  in  his  Affairs  must  Err!  60 

THE  EAGLE,  THE  SOW,  AND  THE  CAT 

The  Queen  of  Birds,  t'encrease  the  Regal  Stock, 
Had  hatched  her  young  Ones  in  a  stately  Oak, 
Whose  Middle-part  was  by  a  Cat  possest, 
And  near  the  Root  with  Litter  warmly  drest, 
A  teeming  Sow  had  made  her  peaceful  Nest. 
(Thus  Palaces  are  cramm'd  from  Roof  to  Ground, 
And  Animals,  as  various,  in  them  found.) 
When  to  the  Sow,  who  no  Misfortune  fear'd. 
Puss  with  her  fawning  Compliments  appeared, 
Rejoicing  much  at  her  Deliv'ry  past,  10 

And  that  she  'scaped  so  well,  who  bred  so  fast. 
Then  every  little  Piglin  she  commends, 
And  likens  them  to  all  their  swinish  Friends; 
Bestows  good  Wishes,  but  with  Sighs  implies, 
That  some  dark  Fears  do  in  her  Bosom  rise. 
Such  Tempting  Flesh,  she  cries,  will  Eagles  spare? 
Methinks,  good  Neighbour,  you  should  live  in  Care: 
Since  I,  who  bring  not  forth  such  dainty  Bits, 
Tremble  for  my  unpalatable  Chits; 
And  had  I  but  foreseen,  the  Eagle's  Bed  20 

Was  in  this  fatal  Tree  to  have  been  spread ; 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  199 

I  sooner  would  have  kittened  in  the  Road, 

Than  made  this  Place  of  Danger  my  abode. 

I  heard  her  young  Ones  lately  cry  for  Pig, 

And  pity'd  you,  that  were  so  near,  and  big. 

In  Friendship  this  I  secretly  reveal. 

Lest  Pettitoes  should  make  th'  ensuing  Meal; 

Or  else,  perhaps.  Yourself  may  be  their  aim. 

For  a  8ou)*8  Papa  has  been  a  Dish  of  Fame. 

No  more  the  sad,  affrighted  Mother  hears,  80 

But  overturning  all  with  boisterous  Fears, 

She  from  her  helpless  Young  in  haste  departs, 

Whilst  Puss  ascends,  to  practice  farther  Arts. 

The  Anti-chamber  passed,  she  scratched  the  Door; 

The  Eagle^  ne'er  alarum'd  so  before. 

Bids  her  come  in,  and  look  the  Cause  be  great. 

That  makes  her  thus  disturb  the  Royal  Seat; 

Nor  think,  of  Mice  and  Rats  some  pest'ring  Tale 

Shall,  in  excuse  of  Insolence,  prevail. 

Alas!  my  Gracious  Lady,  quoth  the  Cat,  40 

I  think  not  of  such  Vermin;  Mouse,  or  Rat 

To  me  are  tasteless  grown ;  nor  dare  I  stir 

To  use  my  Phangs,  or  to  expose  my  Fur. 

A  Foe  intestine  threatens  all  around. 

And  ev'n  this  lofty  Structure  will  confound; 

A  Pestilential  Sow,  a  meazPd  Pork 

On  the  Foundation  has  been  long  at  work, 

Help'd  by  a  Rabble,  issu'd  from  her  Womb, 

Which  she  has  foster'd  in  that  lower  Room; 

Who  now  for  Acorns  are  so  madly  bent,  50 

That  soon  this  Tree  must  fall,  for  their  Content. 

I  wou'd  have  fetch'd  some  for  th'  unruly  Elves; 

But  'tis  the  Mob's  delight  to  help  Themselves: 

Whilst  your  high  Brood  must  with  the  meanest  drop, 

And  steeper  be  their  Fall,  as  next  the  Top; 


200  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

Unless  you  soon  to  Jupiter  repair, 

And  let  him  know,  the  Case  demands  his  Oare. 

Oh!  may  the  Trunk  but  stand,  Hill  you  oome  back! 

But  hark!  already  sure,  I  hear  it  crack. 

Away,  away — The  Eagle^  all  agast,  60 

Soars  to  the  Sky,  nor  falters  in  her  haste: 

Whilst  crafty  Puss^  now  o'er  the  Eyry  reigns. 

Replenishing  her  Maw  with  treacherous  Gains. 

The  Sow  she  plunders  next,  and  lives  alone; 

The  Pigs^  the  Eaglets^  and  the  House  her  own. 

Cursed  Sycophants!  How  wretched  is  the  Fate 
Of  those^  who  know  you  not^  till  His  too  late  I 

THE  MAN  BITTEN  BY  PLEAS 

A  Peevish  Fellow  laid  his  Head 

On  Pillows  stuff 'd  with  Down; 
But  was  no  sooner  warm  in  bed. 

With  hopes  to  rest  his  Crown, 

But  Animals  of  slender  size, 

That  feast  on  humane  Gore, 
From  secret  Ambushes  arise, 

Nor  suffer  him  to  snore ; 

Who  starts,  and  scrubs,  and  frets,  and  swears, 

^Till,  finding  all  in  vain, 
He  for  Relief  employs  his  Pray'rs 

In  this  old  Heathen  strain. 

Great  Jupiter!  thy  Thunder  send 

From  out  the  pitchy  Clouds, 
And  give  these  Foes  a  dreadful  End, 

That  lurk  in  Midnight  Shrouds: 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  201 

Or  Hercules  might  with  a  Blow, 

If  once  together  brought, 
This  Crew  of  Monsters  overthrow, 

By  which  such  Harms  are  wrought. 

The  Strife,  ye  Gods!  is  worthy  You, 

Since  it  our  Blood  has  cost; 
And  scorching  Fevers  must  ensue, 

When  cooling  Sleep  is  lost. 

Strange  Revolutions  wou'd  abound, 

Did  Men  ne'er  close  their  Eyes; 
Whilst  those,  who  wrought  them  would  be  found 

At  length  more  Mad,  than  Wise. 

Passive  Obedience  must  be  us'd. 

If  this  cannot  be  Cur'd; 
But  whilst  One  Flea  is  slowly  bruis'd, 

Thousands  must  be  endur'd. 

Confusion,  Slav'ry,  Death  and  Wreck 

Will  on  the  Nation  seize. 
If,  whilst  you  keep  your  Thunders  back, 

We're  massacred  by  Fleas. 

Why,  prithee,  shatter-headed  Fop, 

The  laughing  Gods  reply; 
Hast  thou  forgot  thy  Broom,  and  Mop, 

And  Wormwood  growing  nigh  ? 

Go  sweep,  and  wash,  and  strew  thy  Floor, 

As  all  good  Housewives  teach; 
And  do  not  thus  for  Thunders  roar. 

To  make  some  fatal  Breach: 

Which  You,  nor  your  succeeding  Heir, 

Nor  yet  a  long  Descent 
Shall  find  out  Methods  to  repair, 

Tho'  Prudence  may  prevent. 


202  Thb  Pobms  of  Anns 

Far  Clubj  and  BoltSy  a  Nation  calFd  of  latey 
Nor  wou*d  be  eas^d  by  Engines  of  less  Weight: 
But  whether  lighter  had  not  done  as  welly 
Let  their  OrecU-Orandsons^  or  their  Chrandsons 
tell 

REFORMATION 

A  Gentleman,  most  wretched  in  his  Lot, 

A  wrangling  and  reproving  Wife  had  got, 

Who,  tho'  she  cnrb'd  his  Pleasures,  and  his  Food, 

CalPd  him  My  Dear^  and  did  it  for  his  Good, 

nis  to  prevent ;  She  of  all  His  the  worst. 

So  wisely  Froward,  and  so  kindly  Curst. 

The  Servants  too  experiment  her  Lungs, 

And  find  they've  Breath  to  serve  a  thousand  Tongues. 

Nothing  went  on  ;  for  her  eternal  Clack 

Still  rectifying,  set  all  Matters  back  ;  10 

Nor  Town,  nor  Neighbours,  nor  the  Court  oou'd  please. 

But  furnish 'd  Matter  for  her  sharp  Disease. 

To  distant  Plains  at  length  he  gets  her  down. 

With  no  AflFairs  to  manage  of  her  own  ; 

Hoping  from  that  unactive  State  to  find 

A  calmer  Habit,  grown  upon  her  Mind: 

But  soon  retum'd  he  hears  her  at  his  Door, 

As  noisy  and  tempestuous  as  before; 

Yet  mildly  ask'd,  How  she  her  Days  had  spent 

Amidst  the  Qxiiet  of  a  sweet  Content,  20 

Where  Shepherds  'tend  their  Flocks,  and  Maids  their 

Pails, 
And  no  harsh  Mistress  domineers,  or  rails? 

Not  rail!  she  cries Why,  I  that  had  no  share 

In  their  Concerns,  cou'd  not  the  Trollops  spare ; 

But  told  'em,  they  were  Sluts And  for  the  Swains, 

My  Name  a  Terror  to  them  still  remains; 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  203 

So  often  I  reprov'd  their  slothful  Faults, 

And  with  such  Freedom  told  'em  all  my  Thoughts, 

That  I  no  more  amongst  them  cou'd  reside. 

Has  then,  alas!  the  Gentleman  reply 'd,  30 

One  single  Month  so  much  their  patience  tryM? 

Where  you  by  Day,  and  but  at  Seasons  due, 

Ck)u'd  with  your  Clamours  their  Defects  pursue; 

How  had  they  shrunk,  and  justly  been  afraid, 

Had  they  with  me  one  Curtain  Lecture  heard! 

Yet  enter  Madam^  and  resxmie  your  Sway; 

Who  canH  Command,  must  silently  Obey. 

In  secret  here  let  endless  Faults  be  found, 

Till,  like  Reformers  who  in  States  abound, 

You  all  to  Ruin  bring,  and  ev'ry  Part  confound.       40 


THE  LYON  AND  THE  GNAT 

To  the  still  Covert  of  a  Wood, 
About  the  prime  of  Day, 
A  Lyouj  satiated  with  Food, 
With  stately  Pace,  and  sullen  Mood, 
Now  took  his  lazy  way. 

To  Rest  he  there  himself  composed, 

And  in  his  Mind  revolv'd. 
How  Great  a  Person  it  enclosed. 
How  free  from  Danger  he  repos'd. 
Though  now  in  Ease  dissolv'd! 

Who  Guard,  nor  Centinel  did  need. 

Despising  as  a  Jest 
All  whom  the  Forest  else  did  feed. 
As  Creatures  of  an  abject  Breed, 

Who  durst  not  him  molest. 


204  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

But  in  the  Air  a  Sound  he  heard, 
That  gave  him  some  dislike; 
At  which  he  shook  his  grisly  Beard, 
Enough  to  make  the  Woods  affeard. 
And  stretched  his  Paw  to  strike. 

When  on  his  lifted  Nose  there  fell 

A  Creatnre,  slight  of  Wing, 
Who  neither  fear'd  his  Grin,  nor  Yell, 
Nor  Strength,  that  in  his  Jaws  did  dwell. 
But  gores  him  with  her  Sting. 

Transported  with  th'  Afi^ont  and  Pain, 

He  terribly  exclaims. 
Protesting,  if  it  comes  again, 
Its  guilty  Blood  the  Grass  shall  stain. 

And  to  surprize  it  aims. 

The  scoffing  Gnai  now  laughM  aloud. 

And  bids  him  upwards  view 
The  Jupiter  within  the  Cloud, 
That  humbl'd  him,  who  was  so  proud, 
And  this  sharp  Thunder  threw. 

That  Taunt  no  Lyori's  Heart  cou'd  bear; 

And  now  much  more  he  raves, 
Whilst  this  new  Perseus  in  the  Air 
Do's  War  and  Strife  again  declare. 

And  all  his  Terrour  braves. 

Upon  his  haughty  Neck  she  rides, 

Then  on  his  lashing  Tail ; 
(Which  need  not  now  provoke  his  Sides) 

Where  she  her  slender  Weapon  guides. 
And  makes  all  Patience  fail. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  205 

A  Trace  at  length  he  must  propose^ 

The  Terms  to  be  her  Own; 
Who  likewise  Best  and  Quiet  chose. 
Contented  now  her  Life  to  close, 

When  sheM  such  Tritimph  known. 

You  mighty  JIfen,  wJio  meaner  ones  despise^ 
Learn  from  this  Fable  to  become  more  Wise; 
You  see  the  Lyon  may  be  vext  with  Flies. 

THE  MAN  A^ro  HIS  HOBSE 

Within  a  Meadow,  on  the  way, 
A  sordid  Churl  resolv'd  to  stay, 

And  give  his  Horse  a  Bite; 
Purloining  so  his  Neighbours  Hay, 
That  at  the  Tun  he  might  not  pay 

For  Forage  all  the  Nighi 

With  Heart's  content  th'  unloaded  Steed 
Began  to  neigh,  and  frisk,  and  feed; 

For  nothing  more  he  car'd. 
Since  none  of  all  his  Master's  breed 
E'er  found  such  Pasture,  at  their  need. 

Or  half  so  well  had  far'd. 

When,  in  the  turning  of  a  Hand, 
Out  comes  the  Owner  of  the  Land, 

And  do's  the  Trespass  eye; 
Which  puts  poor  Bayard  to  a  Stand,       ^ 
For  now  his  Master  do's  command 

Him  to  return  and  fly. 

But  Hunger  quick'ning  up  his  Wit, 
And  Grass  being  sweeter  than  the  Bit, 
He  to  the  Clown  reply'd: 


206  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Shall  I  for  you  this  Dinner  quit, 
Who  to  my  Back  hard  Burdens  fit, 
And  to  the  Death  wou'd  ride? 

No;  shou'd  I  as  a  Stray  be  found, 
And  seizM  upon  forbidden  Ground, 

m  on  this  Spot  stand  still; 

For  tho'  new  Riders  shou'd  abound, 

(Or  did  Mankind  this  Field  surround) 

They  cou'd  but  use  me  ilL 

Urge  no  Man  to  despair;  lest  in  the  Fit 
He  with  some  Counterblow  thy  Head  may  hit. 

THE  DOG  AND  HIS  MASTER 

No  better  Dog  e'er  kept  his  Master's  Door 
Than  honest  Snarly  who  spar'd  nor  Rich  nor  Poor; 
But  gave  the  Alarm,  when  any  one  drew  nigh 
Nor  let  pretended  Friends  pass  fearless  by: 
For  which  reprov'd,  as  better  Fed  than  Taught, 
He  rightly  thus  expostulates  the  Fault. 

To  keep  the  House  from  Rascals  was  my  Charge ; 
The  Task  was  great,  and  the  Commission  large. 
Nor  did  your  Worship  e'er  declare  your  Mind, 
That  to  the  begging  Crew  it  was  confin'd;  10 

Who  shrink  an  Arm,  or  prop  an  able  Knee, 
Or  turn  up  Eyes,  till  they're  not  seen,  nor  see. 
To  Thieves,  who  know  the  Penalty  of  Stealth, 
And  fairly  stake  their  Necks  against  your  Wealth, 
These  are  the  known  Delinquents  of  the  Times, 
And  Whips  and  Tyburn  testify  their  Crimes. 
But  since  to  Me  there  was  by  Nature  lent 
An  exquisite  Discerning  by  the  Scent ; 
I  trace  a  Flatt'rer,  when  he  fawns  and  leers, 


COUNTBSS   OP   WiNOHILSEA  207 

A  rallying  Wit,  when  he  commends  and  jeers:  20 

The  greedy  Parasite  I  grudging  note, 

Who  praises  the  good  Bits,  that  oil  his  Throat; 

I  mark  the  Lady,  you  so  fondly  toast, 

That  plays  your  Gold,  when  all  her  own  is  lost: 

The  Knave,  who  fences  your  Estate  by  Law, 

Yet  still  reserves  an  undermining  Flaw. 

These  and  a  thousand  more,  which  I  couM  tell, 

Provoke  my  Growling,  and  offend  my  SmelL 

THE  BATTLE  BETWEEN  THE  RATS  AND  THE 
WEAZLES 

Li  dire  Contest  the  Rata  and  Weazles  met. 
And  Foot  to  Foot,  and  Point  to  Point  was  set: 
An  ancient  Quarrel  had  such  Hatred  wrought. 
That  for  Revenge,  as  for  Renown,  they  fought. 
Now  bloody  was  the  Day,  and  hard  the  Strife, 
Wherein  bold  Warriors  lost  neglected  Life: 
But  as,  some  Errors  still  we  must  commit, 
Nor  Valour  always  ballanc'd  is  by  Wit; 
Among  the  Eats  some  Officers  appear^. 
With  lofty  Plumage  on  their  Foreheads  rear'd. 
Unthinking  they,  and  ruin'd  by  their  Pride: 
For  when  the  Weazles  prov'd  the  stronger  Side, 
A  gen'ral  Rout  befell,  and  a  Retreat, 
Was  by  the  Vanquish'd  now  implor'd  of  Fate; 
To  slender  Crannies  all  repaired  in  haste, 
Where  easily  the  undress'd  Vulgar  past: 
But  when  the  Rats  of  Figure  wou'd  have  fled. 
So  wide  those  branching  Marks  of  Honour  spread, 
The  Feather  in  the  Cap  was  fatal  to  the  Head. 


208  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

DEMOCBITUS  AND  HIS  NEIGHBOUBS 
Imitated  from  Fontaine 

In  Vulgar  Minds  what  Errors  do  arise! 
How  diFring  are  the  Notions,  they  possess, 

From  theirs,  whom  better  Sense  do^s  bless, 
Who  justly  are  enrolled  amongst  the  Learned  and  Wise! 
Democrittis^  whilst  he  all  Science  taught, 

Was  by  his  foolish  Neighbours  thought 
Distracted  in  his  Wits; 

Who  call  his  speculative  Flights, 

His  solitary  Walks  in  starry  Nights, 

But  wild  and  frantick  Fits.  10 

Bless  me,  each  cries,  from  such  a  working  Brain! 

And  to  Hippocraies  they  send 

The  Sage's  long-acquainted  Friend, 
To  put  in  Tune  his  jarring  Mind  again, 

And  Pericranium  mend. 
Away  the  Skilful  Doctor  comes 

Of  Recipes  and  Med'cines  full. 
To  check  the  giddy  Whirl  of  Nature's  Fires, 

If  so  th'  unruly  Case  requires; 
Or  with  his  Cobweb-cleansing  Brooms  20 

To  sweep  and  clear  the  over-crouded  Scull, 
If  settl'd  Spirits  flag,  and  make  the  Patient  dull. 

But  asking  what  the  Symptoms  were. 

That  made  'em  think  he  was  so  bad? 

The  Man  indeed,  they  cry'd,  is  wond'rous  Mad. 
You,  at  this  Distance,  may  behold  him  there 

Beneath  that  Tree  in  open  Air, 
Surrounded  with  the  Engines  of  his  Fate, 

The  Gimcracks  of  a  broken  Pate. 

Those  Hoops  a  Sphere  he  calls,  80 

That^aZUhe  Earth; 


COUNTBSS  OP  WiNOHILSEA  209 

And  when  into  his  raving  Fit  he  falls, 

'Twou'd  move  at  once  your  Pity,  and  your  Mirth, 

To  hear  him,  as  yon  will  do  soon, 
Declaring,  there^s  a  Eangdom  in  the  Moon; 

And  that  each  Star,  for  onght  he  knows, 

May  some  Inhabitants  enclose: 
Philosophers,  he  says,  may  there  abound. 
Such  Jugglers  as  himself  be  in  them  found; 
Which  if  there  be,  the  World  may  well  turn  round;  40 

At  least  to  those,  whose  Whimsies  are  so  strange. 

That,  whilst  they're  fixt  to  one  peculiar  Place, 

Pretend  to  measure  far  extended  Space, 

And  'mongst  the  Planets  range. 

Behold  him  now  contemplating  that  Head, 
From  which  long-since  both  Flesh,  and  Brains  are  fled; 
Questioning,  if  that  empty,  hollow  Bowl 
Did  not  ere  while  contain  the  Human  Soul: 
Then  starts  a  Doubt,  if  H  were  not  to  the  Heart 
That  Nature  rather  did  that  Gift  impart.  50 

Good  Sir,  employ  the  utmost  of  your  Skill, 
To  make  him  Wiser,  tho'  against  his  Will; 
Who  thinks,  that  he  already  All  exceeds, 
And  laughs  at  our  most  solemn  Words  and  Deeds: 
Tho'  once  amongst  us  he  wou'd  try  a  Cause, 

And  Business  of  the  Town  discuss. 

Knowing  as  well  as  one  of  us. 
The  Price  of  Com,  and  standing  Market-Laws; 

Wou'd  bear  an  Office  in  his  Turn, 
For  which  good  Purposes  all  Men  were  bom;  60 

Not  to  be  making  Circles  in  the  Sand, 
And  scaling  Heav'n,  till  they  have  sold  their  Land; 
Or,  when  unstock'd  below  their  Pasture  lies. 
To  find  out  Bulls  and  Rams,  amidst  the  Skies. 
From  these  Mistakes  his  Madness  we  conclude; 


210  Thb  Pokms  of  Anne 

And  hearing,  you  was  with  much  Skill  endued, 

Your  Aid  we  sought.     Hippocrates  amazed. 

Now  on  the  Sage,  now  on  the  Rabble  gaz^d; 

And  whilst  he  needless  finds  his  artful  Rules, 

Pities  a  Man  of  Sense,  judg'd  by  a  Croud  of  Fools.  70 

Tlien  how  can  toe  with  their  Opinions  join, 

Who^  to  promote  some  Infrest^  uxm'd  define 

The  Peoples  Voice  to  be  the  Voice  Divine? 

FANSCOMB  BARN 

In  Imitation  of  MILTON 

In  Fanscomb  Bam  (who  knows  not  Fanscomb  Bam?) 
Seated  between  the  sides  of  rising  Hills, 
Whose  airy  Tops  o'erlook  the  Oallick  Seas, 
Whilst,  gentle  Stower,  thy  Waters  near  them  flow, 
To  beautify  the  Seats  that  crown  thy  Banks. 

—  In  this  Retreat 
Through  Ages  passM  consign'd  for  Harbour  meet, 
And  Place  of  sweet  Repose  to  Wanderers  poor. 
The  weary  Strolepedon  felt  that  Ease, 
Which  many  a  dangerous  Borough  had  deny'd  10 

To  him,  and  his  Budgeta  lov'd  Compeer; 
Nor  Food  was  wanting  to  the  happy  Pair, 
Who  with  meek  Aspect,  and  precarious  Tone, 
Well  suited  to  their  Hunger  and  Degree, 
Had  mov'd  the  Hearts  of  hospitable  Dames, 
To  furnish  such  Repast  as  Nature  crav'd. 
Whilst  more  to  please  the  swarthy  Bowl  appears. 
Replete  with  Liquor,  globulous  to  fight. 
And  threat'ning  Inundation  o'er  the  Brim ; 
Yet,  ere  it  to  the  longing  Lips  was  rais'd  20 

Of  him  who  held  it  at  its  due  Desert, 
And  more  than  all  entreated  Bounty  priz'd. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  211 

Into  the  strong  Profundity  he  throws 

The  floating  Healths  of  Females,  blith  and  young, 

Who  there  had  rendezvouz'd  in  past  Delight, 

And  to  stoPn  Plenty  added  clamorous  Mirth, 

With  Song  and  Dance,  and  every  jovial  Prank 

Befitting  buxom  Crew,  untied  by  Forms: 

Whilst  kind  Budgeta  nam'd  such  sturdy  Youths, 

As  next  into  her  tender  Thoughts  revolv'd,  30 

And  now  were  straggling  Edst,  and  West,  and  South, 

Hoof -beating,  and  at  large,  as  Chance  directs. 

Still  shifting  Paths,  lest  Men  (tho'  stil'd  of  Peace) 

Should  urge  their  calmer  Thoughts  to  Iron  War, 

Or  force  them  to  promote  coercive  Laws, 

Beating  that  Hemp  which  oft  entraps  their  Lives; 

Or  into  Cordage  pleated,  and  amassed. 

Deprives  unruly  Flesh  of  tempting  Skin. 

Thus  kind  Remembrance  brought  the  Absent  near 

And  hastened  the  Return  of  cither's  Pledge:  40 

Brown  were  the  Toasts,  but  not  unsav'ry  found 

To  Fancies  clear'd  by  Exercise  and  Air, 

Which  the  spirituous  Nectar  still  improves. 

And  gliding  now  thro'  every  cherish 'd  Vein, 

New  Warmth  diffused,  new  Cogitations  bred. 

With  Self-conceit  of  Person,  and  of  Parts. 

When  Strolepedon  (late  distorted  Wight, 

Limb-wanting  to  the  View,  and  all  mis-shap'd) 

Permits  a  pinion'd  Arm  to  fill  the  sleeve. 

Erst  pendant,  void,  and  waving  with  the  Wind,  50 

The  Timber-Leg  obsequiously  withdraws, 

And  gives  to  that  of  Bone  Precedence  due. 

Thus  undisguised  that  Form  again  he  wears. 

Which  Damsel  fond  had  drawn  from  houshold  Toils, 

And  strict  Behests  of  Parents,  old  and  scom'd ; 

Whilst  farther  yet  his  Intellects  confess 


212  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

The  bouzy  Spell  dilated  and  inhans^d, 

Ripe  for  Description,  and  sett  Turns  of  Speech, 

Which  to  Conjugal  Sponse  were  thus  addrest. 

My  Wife  (acknowledged  such  thro'  maunding  Tribes, 

As  long  as  mutual  Love,  the  only  Law,  61 

Of  Hedge  or  Bam,  can  bind  our  easy  Faiths) 

Be  thou  observant  of  thy  Husband's  Voice, 

Sole  Auditor  of  Flights  and  Figures  bold; 

Know,  that  the  Valley  which  we  hence  descry 

Richly  adom'd,  is  Fanscomb-Bottom  call'd: 

But  whether  from  these  Walls  it  takes  the  Name, 

Or  they  from  that,  let  Antiquaries  tell. 

And  Men,  well-read  in  Stories  obsolete. 

Whilst  such  Denomination  either  claims,  70 

As  speaks  Affinity  contiguous 

Thence  let  thy  scatter'd  Sight,  and  oft-griev'd  Smell 

Engulf  the  Sweets,  and  Colours  free  dispos'd 

To  Flowers  promiscuous,  and  redundant  Plants. 

And  (if  the  drouzy  Vapour  will  admit. 

Which  from  the  Bowl  soon  triumphs  o'er  thy  Lidds, 

And  Thee  the  weaker  Vessel  still  denotes) 

With  Looks  erect  observe  the  verdant  Slope 

Of  graceful  Hills,  fertile  in  Bush  and  Brake, 

Whose  Height  attain' d,  th'  expatiated  Downs  80 

Shall  wider  Scenes  display  of  rural  Glee; 

Where  banner 'd  Lords,  and  fair  escutcheon' d  Knights, 

With  gentle  Squires,  and  the  StaflF-griping  Clown, 

Pursue  the  trembling  Prey  impetuous; 

Which  yet  escaping,  when  the  Night  returns. 

And  downy  Beds  enfold  their  careless  Limbs, 

More  wakeful  Trundle  (Knapsack-bearing  Cur) 

Follows  the  Scent  untrac'd  by  nobler  Hounds, 

And  brings  to  us  the  Fruit  of  all  their  Toil. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  213 

Thus  sung  the  Bard,  whom  potent  Liquor  rais'd,    90 
Nor  so  contented,  wish'd  sublimer  Aid. 
Ye  Wits!  (he  cry'd)  ye  Poets!  (Loiterers  vain. 
Who  like  to  us,  in  Idleness  and  Want 
Consume  fantastick  Hours)  hither  l-epair, 
And  tell  to  listening  Mendicants  the  Cause 
Of  Wonders,  here  observed  but  not  discussed: 
Where,  the  White  Sparrow  never  soilM  her  Plumes, 
Nor  the  dull  Russet  cloaths  the  Snowy  Mouse. 
To  Helicon  you  might  the  Spring  compare, 
That  flows  near  Pickersdane  renowned  Stream,         100 
Which,  for  Disport  and  Play,  the  Youths  frequent. 
Who,  train'd  in  Learned  School  of  ancient  Wye^ 
First  at  this  Fount  suck  in  the  Muses  Lore, 
When  mixt  with  Product  of  the  Indian  Cane, 
They  drink  delicious  Draughts,  and  part  inspir'd. 
Fit  for  the  Banks  of  Isis,  or  of  Cham, 
(For  Cham  and  Isis  to  the  Bard  were  known, 
A  Servitor,  when  young  in  College-Hall, 
Tho'  vagrant  Liberty  he  early  chose. 
Who  yet,  when  Drunk,  retained  Poetick  Phrase.)      110 
Nor  shou'd  (quoth  he)  that  Well,  o'erhung  with  shade. 
Amidst  those  neighbVing  Trees  of  dateless  growth. 
Be  left  unfathom'd  by  your  nicer  Skill 
Who  thence  cou'd  extricate  a  thousand  Charms, 
Or  to  oblivious  Lethe  might  convert 
The  stagnant  Waters  of  the  sleepy  PooL 
But  most  unhappy  was  that  Morphean  Sound 
For  lull'd  Budgeta,  who  had  long  desir'd 
Dismission  fair  from  Tales,  not  throughly  scanned. 
Thinking  her  Love  a  Sympathy  confest,  120 

When  the  Word  Sleepy  parted  from  his  Lips, 
Sunk  affable  and  easy  to  that  Rest, 
Which  Straw  affords  to  Minds,  unvex'd  with  Cares. 


214  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 


PSALM  THE  137TH  PARAPHRASED  TO  THE  7™  VERSE 

Proud  Babylon!  Thou  saw'st  us  weep; 

Euphrates,  as  he  pass'd  along, 
Saw,  on  his  Banks,  the  Sacred  Throng 

A  heavy,  solemn  Mourning  keep. 
Sad  Captives  to  thy  Sons,  and  Thee, 
When  nothing  but  our  Tears  were  Free! 

A  Song  of  Sum  they  require, 

And  from  the  neighb'ring  Trees  to  take 

Each  Man  his  dumb,  neglected  Lyre, 
And  chearful  Sounds  on  them  awake: 

But  chearful  Sounds  the  Strings  refuse. 

Nor  will  their  Masters  Griefs  abuse. 

How  can  We,  Lord,  thy  Praise  proclaim. 
Here,  in  a  strange  unhallowM  Land! 

Lest  we  provoke  them  to  Blaspheme 
A  Name,  they  do  not  understand ; 

And  with  rent  Garments,  that  deplore 

Above  whate'er  we  felt  before. 

But,  Thou,  Jerusalem,  so  Dear! 

If  thy  lov'd  Image  e'er  depart. 
Or  I  forget  thy  Suflf 'rings  here ; 

Let  my  right  Hand  forget  her  Art; 
My  Tongue  her  vocal  Gift  resign. 

And  Sacred  Verse  no  more  be  mine! 


A  PREPARATION  TO  PRAYER 

Lett  no  bold  Pray'r,  presume  to  rise, 

Lett  no  unhallow'd  Incense,  goe 
A  fruitlesse  progresse,  throo'  the  skyes. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  215 

Whilst  here  thy  heart  remains  below, 
Thy  heart,  adom'd  in  all  its  best  desires. 
The  Father  kindly  courts,  thy  awful  God  reqxdres. 

Think,  with  what  reverence,  and  state. 

Thy  Maker  is  ador'd  above, 
What  mighty  Beings,  round  him  waite, 

And  pay  their  Worship,  and  their  Love. 
That  Cherubims,  are  in  his  sight  afraid, 
And  with  enfolded  wings  their  glorious  faces  shade. 

How  must  that  Ghiardian  Angel  greive, 

That  to  attend  thy  soul  is  sent, 
Such  cold  petitions  to  receive. 

As  his  warm  zeal,  can  n'ere  present? 
How  must  he  greive,  thy  empty  forms  to  see, 
In  spirit,  and  in  truth,  his  God  must  worship'd  bee? 

How  will  itt  swell  thy  final  cares, 

How,  will  it  all  thy  hopes  defeat. 
To  see  thy  Sins,  encreas't  by  Pray'rs, 

Which  only  cou'd  their  force  abate? 
How  can^st  thou  hope,  V  escape  those  forrain  harms. 
Who  thus  against  thy  self,  tum'st  thy  defensive 

arms? 

A  PASTORAL 

Behveen  Menalcus  and  Damon,  on  the  Appearance  of  the  Angela 
to  the  Shephearda  on  Our  Saviour's  Birth  Day 

Menalc: 

Damon,  whilst  thus,  we  nightly  watches  keep, 
Breaking  the  gentle  bands  of  downy  sleep. 
Least  to  the  greedy  woolves,  that  hungry  stray, 
Our  wandering  flocks,  become  an  easy  Prey, 
Do  thou,  for  song  renown'd,  some  one  recite, 


216  The  Poems  of  Anns 

To  charm  the  season,  and  deceive  the  night 

Whether,  thou  Sampson^s  nervous  strength  willt  chnse, 
And  in  bold  numbers,  exercise  thy  Muse? 
Or  if  to  tender  subjects  more  enclin'd. 
That  move  soft  pitty,  and  dissolve  the  mind,  10 

Thou  Joseph^s  story,  rather  wilt  rehearse. 
And  weep  o're  Benjamin,  in  melting  Verse, 
Begin,  whilst  list'ning  to  thy  voyce,  we  lye, 
Nor  mind  the  whist'ling  winds,  that  o're  us  fly. 
So!  Jesse's  Son,  upon  these  plaines,  when  yong, 
Watch'd  ore  his  flocks,  and  so,  the  Shepheard  sung. 

Dam: 

So,  rais'd  indeed,  that  youth,  his  voyce  devine, 

Fir'd  with  the  promis'd  glorys  of  his  Line, 

As  if,  on  Heavens  high  Mount  himself  had  trod. 

And  seen  his  Seed,  ascend  the  seat  of  God.  20 

Oh !  had  he  lately,  on  our  pastures  been, 
And  heard  the  tydings,  and  the  Vision  seen, 
When  Heav'nly  Spirits,  cloath'd  in  Robes  of  light. 
Broke  the  thick  Shaddows,  and  expell'd  the  Night, 
Proclaiming  Peace  below,  and  Praise  above. 
And  op'ning  all  the  misteries  of  Love, 
How  had  he  then,  above  all  others  skill' d. 
In  raptures  sung,  of  Prophecys  fullfiU'd? 
Our  gath'ring  flocks,  upon  the  splendour  gaz'd, — 
The  weary  slept  not,  nor  the  hungry  graz'd,  30 

Their  leaders,  by  them  stood,  delighted,  and  amazed. 
A  pleasing  wonder,  tho'  allay'd  with  fear, 
Fill'd  every  breast,  and  open'd  every  ear. 
When  thus  began  the  Messengers  of  Heaven; 

To  you  a  Child  is  bom,  to  you  a  Son  is  giv'n, 
Prayses  they  gave,  and  titles  did  encrease. 
Wonderful!!  Councellour!  and  Prince  of  Peace! 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  217 

Long  since  Emanuel,  by  the  Prophett  stil'd, 
Now,  God  with  us!  They  call'd  the  glorious  Child. 

"  But  hold,  a  Shepheard  while  his  flock  does  feed,  40 
"  Must  chuse  a  subject  suited  to  his  Beed, 
Nor  with  mistaken  strength,  attempt  the  Sky, 
But  o're  the  Plaines,  with  easy  motion  fly. 
Enough  by  us,  Menalcus  may  be  said. 
Of  the  first  Shepheards,  and  that  lovely  Maid 
Whose  eyes,  cou'd  seven  years  servitude  allay, 
And  make  them  doubPd  seem  but  as  a  day. 

Now,  to  the  silver  streams  their  flock  they  led, 
Now,  where  the  friendly  beech  his  arms  had  spread 
Wide  open,  to  envite  'em  to  his  shade,  50 

Behold  the  happy  pair,  securely  lay'd. 
Oh  Israel!  how  did  Heav'n  thy  joys  approve. 
Who  placed  thy  profitt,  where  itt  plac'd  thy  Love? 
This,  be  my  subject,  while  with  reverend  awe 
My  words,  from  what  they  cannot  reach,  withdraw. 
Begin  my  Muse,  begin  the  tender  song, 
The  season  sha'nt  be  cold,  nor  shall  the  Night  be  long, 

Menalc : 
As  much  this  Song  (att  other  times  approv'd) 
Wou'd  grate  thy  hearers,  with  those  wonders  mov'd. 
As  if  wild  gourds  were  oflFer'd  to  the  taste,  60 

When  the  full  Vine  with  purple  fruit  was  grac't. 

As  if,  Dametas  should  to  sing  encline, 
And  raise  his  voyce,  when  we  expected  thine. 

But  lett  thy  Muse  attempt  that  Nobler  song. 
The  season  sha'nt  be  cold,  nor  shall  the  night  be  long. 

Dam: 
Then  be  itt  so,  tho'  much  I  fear  to  try 
The  lofty  measures  of  a  flight  so  high: 
The  fallen  Moon,  had  now  her  beams  withdrawn. 


218  Thb  Poems  op  Anne 

And  left  the  Skyes,  'ere  morning  light  cou'd  dawn. 
The  Swaynes  were  silent,  and  the  flocks  were  still,      70 
The  rappid  stresmi,  that  flows  from  yonder  hill, 
Did  by  itts  winding  banks  so  softly  stray, 
As  if  itt  meant  unseen,  to  steal  away. 
A  general  darknesse  o're  the  world  was  spread, 
And  not  one  Star,  wou'd  show  his  trembling  head, 
Conscions  no  doubt,  (their  dwellings  being  so  nigh) 
Of  greater  Glory,  breaking  from  the  sky. 

And  loe!  itt  came.     Th'  Etherial  Princes  came. 
Gently  reclui'd  on  hills  of  harmlesse  flame. 
Upon  the  Winds  officious  Wings  they  flew,  80 

And  fairer  seem'd,  still  as  they  neerer  drew. 
Misterious  wreaths  upon  their  heads,  they  wore. 
And  in  their  hands,  the  smiling  Olive  bore. 
Emblems  no  doubt,  of  what  they  came  to  move. 
For  all  their  words  were  Peace,  and  all  their  looks  were 

love. 
But  ne're  by  me,  the  Vision  be  expresst 
By  the  Suns  rising,  from  the  radiant  East. 
But  ne're  by  me,  their  voyces  be  compar'd 
To  Pans  own  notes,  when  on  the  mountains  heard. 
But  ne're  by  me,  be  that  transcendent  show,  90 

Liken'd  to  ought  we  glorious  call,  below. 
Night,  in  her  sable  mantle  wrapt  her  head. 
And  with  unusual  haste,  to  lower  Worlds  she  fled. 

Fear,  that  att  distance,  had  our  hearts  possesst. 
To  softer  passions,  yeilded  ev'ry  breast, 
When  thus  began  the  Messengers  of  Heav'n, 
To  you  a  Child  is  born,  to  you  a  Son  is  given. 

Such  joy,  as  ends  the  harvests  happy  toyle. 
Such  joy,  as  when  the  Victors,  part  the  spoyl. 
Upon  your  ransom'd  heads,  shall  ever  smile.  100 

When  to  full  Stature,  and  perfection  grown 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  219 

Possessed  of  holy  Davids  sacred  Throne, 

He  shall,  th'  Immortal  and  trynmphant  Boy, 

Th'  Infernal  Powers,  and  all  their  rule  destroy. 

The  cursed  Serpent's  head,  his  weight  shall  feel. 

And  threatened  vengance,  for  his  brused  heel. 

The  flaming  Cherub,  shall  his  guard  remitt, 

And  Paradice,  again  be  open  sett. 

Angels  and  God,  shall  dwell  with  men  below. 

And  men  released,  to  God,  and  Angels  go.  110 

Peace,  to  the  troubl'd  World  he  shall  restore. 

And  bloody  discord,  shall  prevail  no  more, 

The  Lamb,  his  side  by  the  tam'd  Wolflf  shall  lay. 

And  o're  the  Aspicks  den,  the  child  shall  play. 

Contending  Elements,  his  Pow'r  shall  own. 

The  Winds,  shall  att  his  word  their  rage  lay  down, 

And  the  chaf  t  billows,  shall  forbear  to  frown. 

Th'  untun'd  Creation  (by  the  fall  of  man) 

Shall  move  harmoniously  as  itt  began. 

The  fruitfull  Autumn,  and  the  gaudy  Spring,  120 

Shall  sure  returns,  of  sweets,  and  plenty  bring. 

And  thorough  every  Grove,  the  holy  swaynes  shall  sing 

Of  weighty  truths,  preserved  in  sacred  Rimes, 

T'  instruct  the  Pastors  of  succeeding  times. 

In  the  soft  rules,  of  Charity  and  Love, 

Goodwill  to  men,  and  praise  to  Heaven  above. 

And  thou,  poor  Bethlehem,  enclos'd  with  shade, 

Shalt  throo'  all  ages,  be  illustrious  made. 

Since  in  thy  bosome,  the  Redeemer's  layd ; 

Thousands  in  Juda,  did  thy  state  dispise,  130 

Thousands  in  Juda  now,  thy  lott  shall  prise. 

Now  Beor's  Son,  the  Star  by  thee  foretold. 

Newly  adom'd,  in  pointed  Rays  of  Gold, 

Call's  from  thy  learned  East,  th'  adoring  Kings, 

And  ev'ry  one,  a  several  Tribute  brings. 


220  Thb  Pobms  of  Anne 

Sabean  odours,  and  Arabian  ore, 

Shall  now  be  offerM  from  their  choicest  store. 

Go  with  them,  Shepheards  go,  and  with  like  faith  adore. 

Bat  see!  whilst  in  these  pleasing  paths  I  stray, 
Night,  has  resign'd  her  rule  to  rising  day,  140 

Behind  those  Eastern  hills,  the  sun  appears, 
And  the  gay  Horizon,  about  him  chears. 
Our  joyfull  flocks,  the  chearfull  morning  view, 
And  from  their  fleeces,  shake  the  orient  dew. 
No  more,  Menalcus,  we,  no  more,  must  sing. 
But  now  our  sheep  to  the  fresh  pastures  bring. 

Menalc: 
Oh!  happy  shepheard,  favour^  with  that  sight. 
That  can  when  but  repeated,  thus  delight. 

Not  flow'ry  Garlands,  in  the  pride  of  May, 
Nor  rural  presents,  can  thy  meritts  pay.  150 

Not  our  first  Lambs,  or  choices[t]  fruits  that  grow. 
Enough,  alas!  our  gratitude  can  show! 
There  shall  a  Bowl,  of  antique  date,  be  thine. 
And  Joseph's  'twas,  by  which  he  did  devine ; 
Upon  the  sides,  is  carv'd  in  works  of  gold 
The  mystick  sense,  of  what  thou  doest  unfold, 
Clusters  of  grapes,  about  itts  borders  twine. 
That  seem  when  fiU'd,  to  have  produc'd  the  wine. 
To  me,  by  long  inheritance,  itt  came, 
Now  thy  reward,  and  witnesse  to  thy  fame.  160 

When  night  returns,  repeat  again  this  song, 
The  Season  sha'nt  be  cold,  nor  shall  itt  then,  be  long. 

ON  EASTER  DAY 

Hark!  sure  I  hear  Vrania  play, 

I  hear  her  tune  the  heavenly  strings, 
Some  wondrous  tidings,  sure  she  brings, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  221 

O  now!  methinks,  I  hear  her  say, 
The  Sun  of  Righteonsnesse  today. 
Must  break,  must  rise,  must  come  away, 
With  healing  in  his  wings. 

'Tis  done,  behold  the  God  appear. 

Fulfilling  all  that  he  has  said; 

Captivity,  is  Captive  led, 
Death,  of  his  old  invenom'd  spear 
Behold  disarm'd,  and  Conquer'd  here; 
The  Grave,  no  more  the  Members  fear, 

Since  risen  in  the  Head. 

In  vain  the  silly  Rabbins  strove, 

A  Strattagem  of  force  to  find, 

The  Lord  Omnipotent  to  bind. 
Too  weak,  to  stop  Almighty  love. 
Their  guard,  their  stone,  their  seal  must  prove. 
The  trembling  Earth,  does  all  remove 

Like  dust  before  the  wind. 

Lett  ransom^  men  in  praises  vye, 
Lett  ev'ry  faithfuU  Soul,  rejoyce. 
And  tune  to  Angels  notes,  his  voyce. 

Hail!  Son  of  David,  lett  them  cry. 

Hail!  Thou  that  livest,  and  didst  dye. 

That  left'st  thy  glorious  Seat,  on  high. 
And  Sufferings  mad'st  thy  choyce. 

Unfold,  ye  Everlasting  Gates, 

That  guard  the  great  Jehova's  Towers, 
Those  sacred,  mystick  leaves  of  yours. 

The  King  of  Glory  for  you  waites ; 
Receive  him,  oh!  ye  blissful!  Bowers, 
Ye  Thrones,  Dominions,  Scepter'd  Powers, 
He  Comes!  accomplish^  are  the  hours. 

Appointed  by  the  Fates. 


222  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Be  now,  thy  foes,  thy  footstool  made. 
Exalted  high,  on  GKxl's  right  hand, 
A  Preist  for  ever  may^st  thou  stand. 
Thy  dear  Redeeming  blood,  to  plead, 
Th'  imperfect  Sacrafice,  to  aid. 
Which  is,  by  wretched  man  convey'd 
And  never  must  be  scann'd. 


HALLELUJAH 

Seraphick  sound!  Eternal  Praise! 

Upon  whose  wings,  my  Soul  I  raise. 

Till  Heaven  is  reach'd  by  heavenly  Layes. 

Our  Hallelujah's  hence,  that  fly, 
Repose  not,  till  they  meet   on  high 
With  those,  the  Church  tryumphant  cry. 

This  Sacred  Musick,  in  my  ear, 
I  cry,  transported,  God  is  here. 
Such  tastes  of  Glory,  doe  appear. 

Before  the  dread  Jehovah's  seat, 
Glad  Cherubims,  this  praise  repeat. 
Whilst  miriads,  worship  att  his  feet. 

Mongst  whom,  my  searching  Faith  can  see 
A  voyce,  and  Lyre,  bestow'd  shall  be, 
And  Hallelujah's  sung  by  mee. 

My  soul,  which  hungars  here,  for  Grace, 
Attending  Spirits,  there,  shall  place. 
To  see  th'  Eternal,  face  to  face. 

This  hope  makes  all  afflictions  light, 
Directs  my  heart,  and  actions  right. 
My  cloud  by  day,  my  fire  by  night. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  223 

Thy  Saints,  throe'  hopes  refreshment,  shall 
With  hourly  Hallelujah's  fall, 
Untill  the  great  Arcangell's  call. 

Which  hasten  Lord,  thy  Chosen  Pray, 
Th'  Elect,  all  languish  for  that  day, 
Oh  come!  Lord  Jesus,  come  away! 

SOME  REFLECTIONS 

In  a  Dialogue  Between  TERESA  and  ARDEUA.    On  the  2^ 
and  3^  Verses  of  y^  75"*  Psalm 

My  feet  were  allmost  gone,  my  treadings  had  well  nigh 
slipped;  and  why,  I  was  greived  att  the  wicked,  I  doe  also 
see  the  Vngodly  in  such  prosperity. 

Teresa 

Heither,  Ardelia,  I  your  stepps  persue, 
No  solitude  shou'd  e're  exclude  a  freind. 

Your  greife  I  see,  and  as  to  freindship  due, 

Demand  the  cause,  to  which  these  sorrows  tend, 

What  their  beginnings  were,  and  what  may  be  their 

end? 

Ardelia 

Alas!  Ardelia  is  not  vainly  sad. 

Nor  to  the  clouds,  that  shade  my  carefull  brow, 

Can  fancys,  dark  and  false  suggestions  add. 
But  my  Teresa,  since  you  wish  to  know, 
I  all  my  cares  will  tell,  and  all  my  greife  will  show.  10 

How,  I  my  God,  and  his  just  laws  adore, 
How  I  have  serv'd  him,  with  my  early  years. 

How  I  have  lov'd  his  Name,  and  fear'd  his  Pow'r, 
Wittnesse  his  Temples,  where  my  falling  teares. 
Have  foUow'd  still  my  faults,  and  usher' d  in  my 
fears. 


224  The  Poems  of  Anne 

But  oh  I  this  God,  the  Glorious  Architect 
Of  this  fair  world,  of  this  large  Globe  we  see. 

Seems  those  who  trust  him  most,  most  to  neglect, 
Else  my  Teresa,  else,  how  could  itt  be, 

That  all  his  storms  attend,  and  tempests  fall  on  me.    20 

The  Proud  he  hates,  yett  me  he  does  expose 
Empty  of  all  things,  naked  to  their  scorn. 

His  world,  on  them  he  liberally  bestows, 

Theirs  are  his  Vines,  his  feilds,  his  flocks,  his  com. 
And  all  that  can  sustain,  and  all  that  can  adorn. 

These  are  the  men,  posses  the  mighty  store, 

Compasse  the  Earth,  and  with  the  boundlesse  Deep 

All  they  bestow,  receive  again,  with  more; 
Whilst  I,  in  fears  to  loose,  and  cares  to  keep. 
Obtain  but  daily  bread,  with  interrupted  sleep.       SO 

Teresa 

Ardelia  hold,  if  more  thou  hast  to  say 
On  this  pemitious  subject,  lett  it  dye; 

The  subtill  Fiend,  that  leads  thy  soul  astray, 
Thou  doest  not  in  this  hour  of  sin,  descry. 
Oh!  if  we  wander  once,  how  soon  the  serpent's  nigh. 

Art  thou  content,  to  have  thy  portion  here, 
The  Tyrian  purple,  and  the  costly  fare. 

The  purchase  waits  thee,  but  will  cost  thee  dear. 
For  mighty  sums  of  Vice,  thou  must  not  spare. 
Do,  as  the  wicked  does,  and  thou,  with  him  may^st 

share?  40 

Canst  thou  repine,  that  Earth  is  not  thy  lott, 
And  in  that  want,  thy  bounteous  God  distrust, 

Confining  all  his  mercys  to  that  spott  ? 

Others  of  weight,  acknowledge  sure,  we  must, 
Or  be  to  truth  oppos'd,  and  Providence  unjust. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  225 

Who,  seals  thy  forehead,  when  the  Plague  is  nigh, 
Ere  the  destroying  Angel  can  descend? 

Who,  guides  th'  avenging  shafts,  that  o're  thee  fly? 
When  thou  didst  yett  upon  the  breast  depend, 
Who  was  thy  Father  then,  and  who  was  then  thy 
freind?  50 

Who  gave  his  blood,  when  thine  could  not  suffice 
To  pay  thy  debt,  who  for  thee  sighM  and  wept. 

And  bought  that  Glory,  att  a  wondrous  price. 
Which  is  to  future  Ages  for  thee  kept, 
Unlesse  thou  chuse  this  world,  and  that  to  come, 
neglect? 

Who  leads  thee  throo'  this  Vale  of  tears  below. 
To  bring  thee  to  thy  Country,  safe  att  last? 

Who  in  the  way,  does  all  thou  want'st  below. 
For  more  than  this,  his  sacred  word  n'ere  passt, 
And  all  thou  truly  want^st,  assuredly  thou  hast?     60 

What  if  to  prove  thee,  when  the  billows  rise. 

He  from  thy  danger  turns,  and  seems  to  sleep. 
Wilt  thou  to  murmures,  strait  convert  thy  crys. 
The  crowd  we  see,  the  shoar  may  safely  keep. 
Whilst  the  distinguished  twelve  are  threatn'd  by  the 
deep? 

Ardelia 

Teresa,  from  my  guilty  dream,  I  wake. 

The  truth  has  reach'd  me,  and  my  fault  I  find, 

Forgive  me  God,  forgive  the  short  mistake, 
How  cou^d  itt  enter  my  deluded  mind. 

That  all,  both  Worlds  cou'd  give,  was  for  one  Wretch 
designed?  70 

I  saw  the  Mighty,  and  began  to  slide, 
My  feet  were  gone,  but  I  return  again. 


226  The  Poems  op  Anne 

And  woaM  not  with  them  here,  the  spoyles  devide ; 
Nor  look'd  I  att  the  end  of  Glorious  men, 
Nor  thought  how  lost  they  were,  nor  how  abandoned 
then. 

A  while,  the  Servant  of  Elisha,  soe 

Altho'  his  Master's  pow'r  with  Heav'n  he  knew, 

His  faith  forgoes,  surrounded  with  the  foe. 

Till  by  the  Prophett's  pray'r,  the  Vaile  withdrew 
And  show'd  the  doubted  aid  of  Providence  in  view.    80 

THE  lOTH  PART  OF  THE  119™  PSALM  PARAPHRASED 
In  the  manner  of  a  Prayer  from  the  lat  to  y^  6th  Verse 

Thy  workmanship,  O  Lord,  I  am. 

Thy  hands  have  moulded,  and  designed, 

And  for  thy  Glory,  rais'd  this  frame, 
Which  is  to  thee,  again  resigned. 

O  thou  !  who  did'st  create  the  whole, 

Cheifly  regard  the  nobler  part. 
With  understanding  cloath  my  Soul, 

And  plant  thy  doctrine  in  my  heart. 

Then  shall  the  Pious  and  the  Just, 
Beholding  me,  their  hopes  improve. 

Then  shall  my  full  rewarded  trust, 
Assure  their  faith,  and  fix  their  love. 

'Tis  of  thy  mercy,  Lord  I  know 

That  I  afflictions  have  sustained  ; 
Afflictions,  from  thy  mercy  flow, 

By  which  we  are  from  sin  restrain'd. 

O  !  Lett  that  mercy,  still  to  me 
(According  to  thy  gracious  word) 

A  just  proportioned  Cordial  be, 

When  thou  these  tryals  doest  afFoard. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  227 

That  I  may  live,  thy  mercy  send, 

From  thence,  my  vital  breath  I  draw, 

My  life  does  on  thy  love  depend, 
And  all  my  love,  is  on  thy  law. 

THE  liffTH  PSALM  PAKAPHRAS'D 

Oh !  praise  the  Lord,  and  lett  his  fame  be  told, 
Oh!  now  my  Soul,  thy  best  affections  raise, 

To  him,  who  gave,  and   does  thy  being  hold, 

Retnm  thy  gratefull  Hymns,  and  thy  loud  songs  of  Praise. 

Li  man,  in  Princes,  who  the  Scepter's  sway, 
Can  there  be  faith  repos'd,  can  there  be  trust? 

Their  promises,  alas !  are  vain  as  they. 

Their  promises  are  air,  and  they  alas!  are  dust. 

The  breath  of  man,  shall  certainly  expire. 

His  Soul  forsake  him,  and  his  thoughts  shall  dye. 

His  body,  to  the  lowly  Grave  retire, 

Who  then  can  trust  on  man,  who,  can  on  man  relye. 

He  only  can  be  safe,  he  only  blest. 

Above  the  reach  of  falsehood,  or  decay. 
His  hopes  at  Anchor,  and  his  fears  att  rest. 

Whose  trust  is  in  the  Lord,  whose  God,  is  all  his  stay. 

He  who  the  Heavens,  and  Air,  and  Earth,  the  Deep 

With  all  therein,  created  by  his  word, 
His  word  to  all  Eternity  shall  keep  ; 

His  Will  is  sacred  truth,  and  Power,  is  with  the  Lord. 

Mercy,  and  Justice,  still  with  him  remain, 

That  feeds  the  hungry,  this  th'  oprest  releives  ; 

Mercy,  dissolves  th'  afflicted  Pris'ner's  chain. 

To  long  benighted  Eyes,  mercy  the  light  retreives. 


228  The  Poems  op  Anne 

The  Righteous,  are  the  Lord's  peculiar  care, 
To  him,  for  refuge,  the  poor  Widdows  come. 

The  Fatherlesse,  is  God's  adopted  Heir, 

The  stranger  too,  in  God,  is  sure  to  find  an  home. 

Those  that  are  fallen,  he  again  erects. 

The  wicked,  that  persue  ungodly  ways, 
He  searches  out,  he  frustrates,  and  detects. 

He  mines  their  designs,  and  on  them  builds  his  praise. 

Thy  Lord,  O  Sion!  this,  thy  Lord,  is  King; 

Throughout  all  ages,  shall  his  reign  endure, 
Thou,  Everlasting  praise,  may'st  to  him  sing. 

And  ever  may'st  thou  rest,  beneath  his  love,  secure. 


GOLD  IS  TRY'D  IN  THE  FIRE,  AND  ACCEPTABLE 
MEN  IN  THE  TIME  OF  ADVERSITY 

If  all  th'  appointed  days  of  man  were  fair. 

And  his  few  hours,  mov'd  o're  him,  like  a  breeze, 

That  gently  plays  among  the  trees. 
Soft,  and  smooth,  and  void  of  care. 
As  infants  balmy  slumber  are, 

How,  shou'd  we  then  assured  bee. 

That  even  temper,  we  might  see. 

Were  Vertue,  not  prosperity. 

Not  so,  th'  Almighty  wisdom  has  design'd. 
We  shou'd  in  ease,  and  luxury  remain, 
Untry'd  by  sorrow,  or  by  pain. 

No,  the  searcher  of  the  mind. 

Unshaken  vertue,  there  must  find. 
The'  low,  as  to  the  dunghill  brought. 
With  him,  whose  sifted  patience  taught. 
He  serv'd  for  Duty,  else  for  naught. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  229 

We  see  the  wealthyest  ore  the  earth  does  hide, 

Is  not  receav'd  or  passM  for  currant  gold, 

Nor  by  the  greedy  Miser,  told. 
Till  by  the  cleansing  furnace  try'd. 
It  does  the  sevenfold  test,  abide; 

So  must  the  path  of  greif,  be  trod, 

(That  certain,  purifying  roade) 

By  all  th'  accepted  sons  of  God. 

Who  in  this  method,  to  our  needs,  has  bow'd. 

Nor  is  itt  reason  guides,  when  we  complain, 

Favours,  alas!  but  fall  in  vain, 
And  the  good  things,  that  are  allow'd. 
Instead  of  happy,  make  us  proud, 

Lett  us  not  then  refuse  this  part, 

But  wisely  learn,  the  saving  art, 

Our  tears,  to  comforts  to  convert. 

THE  POOB  MAN'S  LAMB 

Otj  Nathan's  Parable  to  David  after  the  Murder  of  Uriahs  and 

his  Marriage  with  Bathaheba 

Tum'd  into  Verse  and  Paraphrased 

Now  spent  the  alter'd  King,  in  amorous  Cares, 

The  Hours  of  sacred  Hynms  and  solenm  Pray'rs: 

In  vain  the  Altar  waits  his  slow  returns, 

Where  unattended  Incense  faintly  bums: 

In  vain  the  whisp'ring  Priests  their  Fears  express. 

And  of  the  Change  a  thousemd  Causes  guess. 

Heedless  of  all  their  Censures  He  retires, 

And  in  his  Palace  feeds  his  secret  Fires; 

Impatient,  till  from  Bdbbah  Tydings  tell, 

That  near  those  Walls  the  poor  Uriah  fell,  10 

Led  to  the  Onset  by  a  Chosen  Few, 

Who  at  the  treacherous  Signal,  soon  withdrew; 


230  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Nor  to  his  Rescue  e'er  return 'd  again, 

Till  by  fierce  AmmorCs  Sword  they  saw  the  Victim  slain. 

'Tis  passed,  'tis  done!  the  holy  Marriage-Knot, 

Too  strong  to  be  unty'd,  at  last  is  cut 

And  now  to  Bathsheba  the  King  declares, 

That  with  his  Heart,  the  Kingdom  too  is  hers; 

That  IsraeVs  Throne,  and  longing  Monarch's  Arms 

Are  to  be  fiU'd  but  with  her  widow'd  Charms.  20 

Nor  must  the  Days  of  formal  Tears  exceed, 

To  cross  the  Living,  and  abuse  the  Dead. 

This  she  denies;  and  signs  of  Grief  are  worn; 

But  mourns  no  more  than  may  her  Face  adorn. 

Give  to  those  Eyes,  which  Love  and  Empire  fir'd, 

A  melting  softness  more  to  be  desir'd; 

Till  the  fixt  Time,  tho'  hard  to  be  endur'd, 

Was  pass'd,  and  a  sad  Consori's  Name  procur'd: 

When,  with  the  Pomp  that  suits  a  Prince's  Thought, 

By  Passion  sway'd,  and  glorious  Woman  taught,  80 

A  Queen  she's  made,  than  Michal  seated  higher. 

Whilst  light  unusual  Airs  prophane  the  hallow'd  Lyre, 

Where  art  thou  Nathan?  where 's  that  Spirit  now, 
Giv'n  to  brave  Vice,  tho'  on  a  Prince's  Brow? 
Li  what  low  Cave,  or  on  what  Desert  Coast, 
Now  Virtue  wants  it,  is  thy  Presence  lost? 

But  lo!  he  comes,  the  Rev'rend  Bard  appears, 
Defil'd  with  Dust  his  awful  silver  Hairs, 
And  his  rough  Garment,  wet  with  falling  Tears. 
The  King  this  mark'd,  and  conscious  wou'd  have  fled,    40 
The  healing  Balm  which  for  his  Wounds  was  shed: 
Till  the  more  wary  Priest  the  Serpents  Art, 
Join'd  to  the  Dove-like  Temper  of  his  Heart, 
And  thus  retards  the  Prince  just  ready  now  to  pari. 
Hear  me,  the  Cause  betwixt  two  Neighbours  hear. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  231 

Thou,  who  for  Justice  doth  the  Scseptre  bear: 

Help  the  Opprest,  nor  let  me  weep  alone 

For  him,  that  calls  for  Succour  from  the  Throne. 

Good  Princes  for  Protection  are  Ador'd, 

And  Greater  by  the  Shield  than  by  the  Sword.  50 

This  clears  the  Doubt,  and  now  no  more  he  fears 

The  Cause  his  Own,  and  therefore  stays  and  hears: 

When  thus  the  Prophet: 

— In  a  flow'ry  Plain 
A  Eing-like  Man  does  in  full  Plenty  reign; 
Casts  round  his  Eyes,  in  vain,  to  reach  the  Bound, 
Which  Jordan* 3  Flood  sets  to  his  fertile  Ground: 
Countless  his  Flocks,  whilst  Lebanon  contains 
A  Herd  as  large,  kept  by  his  numerous  Swains, 
That  fill  with  morning  Bellowings  the  cool  Air, 
And  to  the  Cedar's  shade  at  scorching  Noon  repair.       60 
Near  to  this  Wood  a  lowly  Cottage  stands. 
Built  by  the  humble  Owner's  painful  Hands; 
Fenc'd  by  a  Stubble-roof,  from  Rain  and  Heat, 
Secur'd  without,  within  all  Plain  and  Neat. 
A  Field  of  small  Extent  surrounds  the  place. 
In  which  One  single  Ewe  did  sport  and  graze: 
This  his  whole  Stock,  till  in  full  time  there  came. 
To  bless  his  utmost  Hopes,  a  snowy  Lamb ; 
Which,  lest  the  Season  yet  too  Cold  might  prove. 
And  Northern  Blasts  annoy  it  from  the  Grove,  70 

Or  tow'ring  Fowl  on  the  weak  Prey  might  sieze, 
(For  with  his  Store  his  Fears  must  too  increase) 
He  brings  it  Home,  and  lays  it  by  his  Side, 
At  once  his  Wealth,  his  Pleasure  and  his  Pride; 
Still  bars  the  Door,  by  Labour  call'd  away. 
And,  when  returning  at  the  Close  of  Day, 
With  One  small  Mess  himself,  and  that  sustains. 
And  half  his  Dish  it  shares,  and  half  his  slender  Gains. 


232  The  Poems  of  Anne 

When  to  the  great  Man^s  table  now  there  comes 

A  Lord  as  great,  follow'd  by  hungry  Grooms:  80 

For  these  must  be  provided  sundry  Meats, 

The  best  for  Some,  for  Others  coarser  Gates. 

One  Servant,  diligent  above  the  rest 

To  help  his  Master  to  contrive  the  Feast, 

Extols  the  Lamb  was  nourished  with  such  Care, 

So  fed,  so  lodg'd,  it  must  be  Princely  Fare; 

And  having  this,  my  Lord  his  own  may  spare. 

In  haste  he  sends,  led  by  no  Law,  but  Will, 

Not  to  entreat,  or  purchase,  but  to  Ball. 

The  Messenger's  arrived:  the  harmless  Spoil,  90 

Unus'd  to  fly,  runs  Bleating  to  the  Toil: 

Whilst  for  the  Innocent  the  Owner  fear'd. 

And,  sure  wou'd  move,  cou'd  Poverty  be  heard. 

Oh  spare  (he  cries)  the  Product  of  my  CareSj 

My  Stock* 3  Encreasey  the  Blessing  on  my  PrayWs\ 

My  growing  Hope^  and  Treasure  of  my  Life! 

More  was  he  speaking,  when  the  murd'ring  E[nife 

Shew'd  him,  his  Suit,  tho'  just,  must  be  deny'd, 

And  the  white  Fleece  in  its  own  Scarlet  dy'd; 

Whilst  the  poor  helpless  Wretch  stands  weeping  by,     100 

And  lifts  his  Hands  for  Justice  to  the  Sky. 

Which  he  shall  find,  th'  incensed  King  replies. 
When  for  the  proud  Offence  th'  Oppressor  dies. 
O  Nathan!  by  the  Holy  Name  I  swear. 
Our  Land  such  Wrongs  unpunished  shall  not  bear 
If,  with  the  Fault,  th'  Offender  thou  declare. 

To  whom  the  Prophet,  closing  with  the  Time, 
Thou  art  the  Man  replies,  and  thine  th'  ill-natur'd  Crime. 
Nor  think,  against  thy  Place,  or  State,  I  err; 
A  Pow'r  above  thee  does  this  Charge  prefer;  110 

Urg'd  by  whose  Spirit,  hither  am  I  brought 
T'  expostulate  his  Ooodness  and  thy  Fault; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  238 

To  lead  thee  back  to  those  forgotten  Years, 

In  Labour  spent,  and  lowly  Rostick  Cares, 

When  in  the  Wilderness  thy  Flocks  but  few 

Thou  didst  the  Shepherd's  simple  Art  pursue 

Thro'  crusting  Frosts,  and  penetrating  Dew: 

Till  wondring  Jesse  saw  six  Brothers  past, 

And  Thou  Elected,  Thou  the  Least  and  Last ; 

A  Sceptre  to  thy  Rural  Hand  convey'd,  120 

And  in  thy  Bosom  Royal  Beauties  laid; 

A  lovely  Princess  made  thy  Prize  that  Day, 

When  on  the  shaken  Ground  the  Giant  lay 

Stupid  in  Death,  beyond  the  Reach  of  Cries 

That  bore  thy  shouted  Fame  to  list'ning  Skies, 

And  drove  the  flying  Foe  as  fast  away. 

As  Winds,  of  old.  Locusts  to  Egypfs  Sea. 

Thy  Heart  with  Love,  thy  Temples  with  Renown, 

Th'  All-giving  Hand  of  Heav'n  did  largely  crown, 

Whilst  yet  thy  Cheek  was  spread  with  youthful  Down.    180 

What  more  cou'd  craving  Man  of  God  implore? 

Or  what  for  favour'd  Man  cou'd  God  do  more? 

Yet  cou'd  not  these,  nor  IsraeVs  Throne,  suffice 

Intemp'rate  Wishes,  drawn  thro'  wand'ring  Eyes. 

One  Beauty  (not  thy  own)  and  seen  by  chance, 

Melts  down  the  Work  of  Grace  with  an  alluring  Glance; 

Chafes  the  Spirit,  fed  by  sacred  Art, 

And  blots  the  Title  after  God's  own  Heart; 

Black  Murder  breeds  to  level  at  his  Head, 

Who  boasts  so  fair  a  Part'ner  of  his  Bed,  140 

Nor  longer  must  possess  those  envy'd  Charms, 

The  single  Treasure  of  his  House,  and  Arms: 

Giving,  by  this  thy  Fall,  cause  to  Blaspheme 

To  all  the  Heathen  the  Almighty  Name. 

For  which  the  Sword  shall  still  thy  Race  pursue, 

And^  in  revolted  IsraeVs  scornful  View, 


234  Thb  Pobms  of  Annb 

Thy  captiv'd  Wives  shall  be  in  Trinmph  led 

Unto  a  bold  Usurper's  shameful  Bed; 

Who  from  thy  Bowels  sprung  shall  seize  thy  Throne, 

And  scourge  thee  by  a  Sin  beyond  thy  own.  150 

Thou  hast  thy  Fault  in  secret  Darkness  done ; 

But  this  the  World  shall  see  before  the  Noonday's  Sun. 

Enough !  the  King,  enough !  the  Saint  replies, 
And  pours  his  swift  Repentance  from  his  Eyes; 
Falls  on  the  Ground  and  tears  the  Nuptial  Vest, 
By  which  his  Crime's  Completion  was  exprest: 
Then  with  a  Sigh  blasting  to  Carnal  Love, 
Drawn  deep  as  Hell,  and  piercing  Heaven,  above 
Let  Me  (he  cries)  let  Me  attend  his  Bod, 
For  /  have  sinn'd,  for  /  have  lost  my  God.  160 

Hold!  (says  the  Prophet)  of  that  Speech  beware, 
God  ne'er  was  lost,  unless  by  Man's  Despair. 
The  Wound  that  is  thus  willingly  reveal' d, 
Th'  Almighty  is  as  willing  should  be  heal'd. 
Thus  wash'd  in  Tears,  thy  Soul  as  fair  does  show 
As  the  first  Fleece,  which  on  the  Lamb  does  grow, 
Or  on  the  Mountain's  top  the  lately  fallen  Snow. 
Yet  to  the  World  that  Justice  may  appear 
Acting  her  Part  impartial,  and  severe. 
The  Offspring  of  thy  Sin  shall  soon  resign  170 

That  Life,  for  which  thou  must  not  once  repine ; 
But  with  submissive  Grief  his  Fate  deplore, 
And  bless  the  Hand,  that  does  inflict  no  more. 

Shall  I  then  pay  but  Part,  and  owe  the  Whole  ? 
My  Body's  Fruit,  for  my  oflFending  Soul? 
Shall  I  no  more  endure  (the  King  demands) 
And  'scapo  thus  lightly  his  offended  Hands? 
Oh!  let  him  All  resume,  my  Crown,  my  Fame; 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  235 

Beduce  me  to  the  Nothing,  whence  I  came; 

Call  back  his  Favours,  faster  than  he  gave;  180 

And,  if  but  Pardon'd,  strip  me  to  my  Grave: 

Since  (tho^  he  seems  to  Lose)  He  surely  TFVns, 
Who  gives  but  earthly  Comforts  for  his  Sins. 

THE  SECOND  CHAPTER  OF  THE  WISDOM  OF 
SOLOMON  PARAPHRASED 

The  first  twelve  VerseSy  being  an  Introduction 

How  weak  is  man,  that  wou'd  himself  persuade 

Out  of  his  IntVest,  and  his  Tempter  aid; 

Mislead  by  present  joys,  and  human  pride, 

Wou'd  gladly  lay  his  future  hopes  aside. 

Uncloath  himself,  of  all  he  holds  Devine, 

And  to  the  Earth,  his  ashes  wou'd  confine; 

Consent  his  Soul,  all  pains  on  itt  to  spare, 

ShouM  vanish,  like  the  soft,  and  silent  air; 

This  Doctrine,  which  in  ancient  times  was  penned, 

Th'  industrious  Devil,  took  care  shou'd  still  descend,  10 

And  we  by  Atheists  now,  the  same  are  told, 

Which  Israel's  wisest  Prince,  describes  of  old, 

THE  CHAPTER  BEGINS 

Thus  reasoned  they,  said  he,  but  not  aright, 

Deluded,  by  the  charms  of  vain  delight. 

Tho'  life  be  short,  how  tedious  is  the  day. 

Which  some  new  pleasure,  does  not  drive  away  ? 

Death,  hastens  on,  all  human  things  to  seize. 

And  there's  no  remedy,  for  that  desease ; 

None  from  the  Grave  return,  not  Moses'  Laws, 

Have  seen  him  come,  to  vindicate  their  cause.  20 

Chance  made  the  World,  and  the  same  hand  of  Chance 


236  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Does  blindly  man,  into  that  World  advance; 

And  when  the  date  of  certain  years  expires, 

As  he  had  never  been,  he  back  retires: 

That  active  fire,  which  annimat^s  the  heart, 

And  thence,  all  life,  and  motion  does  impart, 

By  some  contending  Element  oppresst, 

Extinguish't  fails,  and  quitts  the  darkened  brest. 

The  Vapour,  in  our  nostrills,  stealls  away, 

And  all  that  now  remains  is  common  clay.  80 

Time,  preys  upon  our  memory,  and  name, 

And  deep  oblivion,  swallows  up  our  fame; 

Like  a  swift  cloud,  we  passe  unheeded  by,  • 

No  track  is  left,  no  mark  where  itt  did  fly. 

Nor  shall  itt  e're  return,  to  shade  the  sky. 

Since  past,  and  future,  we  att  distance  see. 

And  present  time,  can  only  usefull  bee, 

Voluptuous,  and  in  pleasures  lett  us  live, 

And  freely  spend,  what  moments  we  receive. 

Still,  lett  us  gay,  and  warm  aflPections  hold,  40 

And  when  in  Age,  forgett  thatt  we  are  old. 

Koses,  about  our  youthful  tresses  tye, 

Koses,  shall  when  they  fall,  their  place  supply. 

The  chearfull  spring,  shall  round  our  temples  twine, 

And  our  full  bowls,  flow  with  Autumnal  Wine. 

The  poUish'd  skin,  with  ointments  shall  be  gay. 

Circling  perfumes,  shall  usher  on  the  way. 

And  soft  harmonious  airs,  about  us  play. 

Diffusing  as  we  passe,  luxuriant  Bliss, 

This,  is  our  Portion,  and  our  Lott,  is  this,  50 

Justice,  shall  lay  aside  her  uselesse  scales. 
And  force,  shall  justice  be,  when  force  prevailes; 
No  Law  shall  govern,  no  dull  Rule  take  place. 
The  Widdow,  nor  the  hoary  head  find  grace; 
Oppression,  shall  the  righteous  man  devour, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  237 

Fassion'd  by  Conscience,  for  the  Tyrant's  pow'r, 

Who  meekly  yeilds  to  wrong,  or  vile  disgrace, 

Yett,  from  th'  Immortal  God  derives  his  Race; 

And  by  himself,  is  arrogantly  stil'd 

Of  Him  he  worships,  the  apparent  Child.  60 

Him,  lett  ns  wait  for,  that  upbraids  us  still, 

With  breach  of  Laws,  and  Education  ill; 

That  but  at  distance,  views  our  loose  delight, 

And  blasts  our  mirth,  with  his  reproachfull  sight; 

Who,  not  like  us,  his  youth  to  pleasure  gives. 

But  singular,  and  solitary  lives; 

And,  does  his  Eyes  on  distant  prospects  bend, 

Saying,  the  Just  is  blessed  in  his  end; 

That  lett  us  hasten,  and  his  patience  prove, 

And  his  cool  temper,  with  rough  usage  move;  70 

If  Son  to  Him,  whom  he  Almighty  calls. 

He  sure  will  save,  when  in  our  hands  he  falls, 

Let  us  in  shame,  and  tortures  make  him  dye. 

And  so  his  truth,  and  his  Protectour  try. 

Full  place,  did  such  immaginations  find 

With  men  in  mists  of  Sin,  and  errour  blind: 

That  knew  not  God,  nor  did  his  Laws  regard, 

Undmindfull  of  the  Work,  or  the  Reward 

That  shall  on  blameless  Souls,  here-after  rest, 

When  with  Eternity  of  Pleasures  blesst.  80 

God,  stamped  His  Immage,  on  created  Earth, 

And  made  itt  so,  Immortal  in  itts  birth; 

And  tho'  th'  infernal  Fiend  (with  envy  fiU'd) 

Brought  Death  into  the  world,  and  some  has  kill'd, 

Yett,  only  those,  that  do  his  part  embrace. 

Shall  fall  to  Him,  and  his  appointed  place. 


238  The  Poems  of  Anne 


JEALOUSIE  IS  THE  RAOE  OF  A  MAN 

Whilst  with  his  falling  wings,  the  conrtly  Dove 
Sweeps  the  low  earth,  and  singles  out  his  Love, 
Now  murmurs  soft,  then  with  a  rowling  note 
Extends  his  crop,  and  fills  his  amorous  throate. 
On  ev'ry  side  accosts  the  charming  Fair, 
Turns  round,  and  bows  with  an  inticing  ayre, 
She,  carelessly  neglecting  all  his  pain. 
Or  shifts  her  ground,  or  pecks  the  scatter'd  grain. 
But  if  he  cease,  and  through  the  flight  wou'd  range, 
(For  though  renown'd  for  truth,  e'vn  Doves  will  change) 
The  mildnesse  of  her  nature  laid  aside. 
The  seeming  coldnesse,  and  the  carelesse  pride. 
On  the  next  Bival,  in  a  rage  she  flies; 
Smooth,  ev'ry  clinging  plume,  with  anger  lies. 
Employs  in  feeble  fight  her  tender  beck. 
And  shakes  the  Favrites,  parti-colour'd  neck. 
Thus,  jealousy,  through  ev'ry  species  moves; 
And  if  so  furious,  in  the  gallesse  Doves, 
No  wonder,  that  th'  experienced  Hebrew  sage. 
Of  Man,  pronounc'd  itt  the  extremest  Kage. 

ALL  IS  VANITY 


How  vain  is  Life!  which  rightly  we  compare 

To  flying  Posts^  that  haste  away ; 
To  Plants,  that  fade  with  the  declining  Day ; 

To  Clouds^  that  sail  amidst  th^  yielding  Air; 
Till  by  Extention  into  that  they  flow, 

Or,  scattering  on  the  World  below, 
Are  lost  and  gone,  ere  we  can  say  they  were ; 

To  Autumn-Leaves,  which  every  Wind  can  chace; 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  239 

To  rising  Bubbles,  on  the  Waters  Face ; 

To  fleeting  Dreams,  that  will  not  stay,  10 

Nor  in  th'  abnsed  Fancy  dance, 

When  the  returning  Rays  of  Light, 
Resuming  their  alternate  Right, 

Break  on  th'  ill-order'd  Scene  on  the  fantastick  Trance: 
As  weak  is  Man,  whilst  Tenant  to  the  Earth ; 
As  frail  and  as  uncertain  all  his  Ways, 
From  the  first  moment  of  his  weeping  Birth, 
Down  to  the  last  and  best  of  his  few  restless  Days ; 

When  to  the  Land  of  Darkness  he  retires 
From  disappointed  Hopes,  and  frustrated  Desires ;     20 

Reaping  no  other  Fruit  of  all  his  Pain 
Bestow'd  whilst  in  the  vale  of  Tears  below, 
,  But  this  unhappy  Truth,  at  last  to  know. 
That  Vanitjfs  oxir  Lot,  and  all  Mankind  is  Vain. 

II 

If  past  the  hazard  of  his  tendrest  Years, 

Neither  in  thoughtless  Sleep  opprest, 

Nor  poison'd  with  a  tainted  Breast, 
Loosed  from  the  infant  Bands  and  female  Cares, 

A  studious  Boy,  advanced  beyond  his  Age, 
Wastes  the  dim  Lamp,  and  turns  the  restless  Page ;   30 

For  some  lov'd  Book  prevents  the  rising  Day, 

And  on  it,  stoln  aside,  bestows  the  Hours  of  Play ; 
Him  the  observing  Master  do's  design 
For  search  of  darkned  Truths  and  Mysteries  Divine ; 

Bids  him  with  unremitted  Labour  trace 
The  Rise  of  Empires,  and  their  various  Fates, 
The  several  Tyrants  o'er  the  several  States, 

To  BabeVs  lofty  Towers,  and  warlike  Nimrod^s  Race ; 
Bids  him  in  Paradice  the  Bank  survey. 

Where  Man,  new-moulded  from  the  temper'd  Clay,  40 


240  The  Poems  of  Anne 

(Till  fir'd  with  Breath  Divine)  a  helpless  Figure  lay: 

Could  he  be  led  thus  far  —  What  were  the  Boast, 

What  the  Reward  of  all  the  Toil  it  cost, 
What  from  that  Land  of  ever-blooming  Spring, 

For  our  Instruction  could  he  bring. 
Unless,  that  having  Humane  Nature  found 
Unseparated  from  its  Parent  Ground, 
(Howe'er  we  vaunt  our  Elevated  Birth) 

The  Epicure  in  soft  Array, 

The  lothsome  Beggar,  that  before  50 

His  rude  unhospitable  Door, 

Unpity'd  but  by  Brutes,  a  broken  Carcass  lay, 
Were  both  alike  deriv'd  from  the  same  common  Earth? 

But  ere  the  Child  can  to  these  Heights  attain, 

Ere  he  can  in  the  Learned  Sphere  arise; 

A  guiding  Star,  attracting  to  the  Skies, 
A  fever,  seizing  the  o'er-labour'd  Brain, 

Sends  him,  perhaps,  to  Death's  concealing  Shade; 
Where,  in  the  Marble  Tomb  now  silent  laid. 

He  better  do's  that  useful  Doctrine  show,  60 

(Which  all  the  sad  Assistants  ought  to  know. 

Who  round  the  Grave  his  short  continuance  mourn) 
That  first  from  Dust  we  came,  and  must  to  Dust  return. 

Ill 

A  holder  Youth,  grown  capable  of  Arms, 
Bellona  courts  with  her  prevailing  Charms; 

Bids  th'  inchanting  Trumpet  sound, 

Loud  as  Triumph,  soft  as  Love, 

Striking  now  the  Poles  above. 

Then  descending  from  the  Skies, 

Soften  every  falling  Note ;  70 

As  the  harmonious  Lark  that  sings  and  flies, 
When  iLQBx  the  Earth,  contracts  her  narrow  Throat, 


COUKTESS   OP   WiNOHILSEA  241 

And  wcurbles  on  the  Ground: 
Shews  the  proud  Steed,  impatient  of  the  Check, 

'Gainst  the  loudest  Terrors  Proof, 
Pawing  the  Valley  with  his  steeled  Hoof, 
With  Lightning  arm'd  his  Eyes,  with  Thunder  cloth'd 
his  Neck; 

Who  on  th'  advanced  Foe,  (the  Signal  giv'n) 
Flies,   like   a  rushing  Storm  by  mighty  Whirlwinds 
driv'n; 

Lays  open  the  Records  of  Fame,  80 

No  glorious  Deed  omits,  no  Man  of  mighty  Name; 

Their  Stratagems,  their  Tempers  she'll  repeat, 

From  Alexander^Sy  (truly  stil'd  the  Great) 

From  CcBsar^s  on  the  World's  Imperial  Seat, 

To  Turenne^s  Conduct,  and  to  Conde^s  Heat 
'Tis  done!  and  now  th'  ambitious  Youth  disdains 

The  safe,  but  harder  Labours  of  the  Gown, 

The  softer  pleasures  of  the  Courtly  Town, 
The  once  lov'd  rural  Sports,  and  Chaces  on  the  Plains; 

Does  with  the  Soldier's  Life  the  Garb  assume,        90 

The  gold  Embroid'ries,  and  the  graceful  Plume ; 

Walks  haughty  in  a  Coat  of  Scarlet  Dip, 

A  Colour  well  contrived  to  cheat  the  Eye, 
Where  richer  Blood,  alas!  may  undistinguisht  lye. 

And  oh !  too  near  that  wretched  Fate  attends ; 

Hear  it  ye  Parents,  all  ye  weeping  Friends! 

Thou  fonder  Maid!  won  by  those  gaudy  Charms, 
(The  destin'd  Prize  of  his  Victorious  Arms) 

Now  fainting  Dye  upon  the  mournful  Sound, 
That  speaks   his   hasty   Death,   and   paints  the   fatal 
Wound!  100 

Trail  all  your  Pikes,  dispirit  every  Drum, 

March  in  a  slow  Procession  from  afcu:. 

Ye  silent,  ye  dejected  Men  of  War! 


242  The  Poems  op  ASne 

Be  still  the  Hautboys,  and  the  Flute  be  dumb! 
Display  no  more,  in  vain,  the  lofty  Banner; 
For  see !  where  on  the  Bier  before  ye  lies 
The  pale,  the  fall'n,  th'  untimely  Sacrifice 
To  your  mistaken  Shrine,  to  your  false  Idol  Honour  I 

IV 

As  Vain  is  Beauty,  and  as  short  her  Power; 

Tho'  in  its  proud,  and  transitory  Sway,  110 

The  coldest  Hearts  and  wisest  Heads  obey   . 

That  gay  fantastick  Tyrant  of  an  Hour. 

On  Beauttfs  Charms,  (altho'  a  Father's  Bight, 

Tho'  grave  Seleucus!  to  thy  Boyal  Side 

By  holy  Vows  fair  Stratonice  be  ty'd) 

With  anxious  Joy,  with  dangerous  Delight, 

Too  often  gazes  thy  unwary  Son, 

Till  past  all  Hopes,  expiring  and  undone, 

A  speaking  Pulse  the  secret  Cause  impart; 

The  only  time,  when  the  Physician's  Art  120 

Could  ease  that  laVring  Grief,  or  heal  a  Lover's  Smart. 
See  Great  Antonius  now  impatient  stand, 

Expecting,  with  mistaken  Pride, 
On  Cydnus  crowded  Shore,  on  Cydnus  fatal  Strand, 
A  Queen,  at  his  Tribunal  to  be  try'd, 
A  Queen  that  arm'd  in  Beauty,  shall  deride 
His  feeble  Bage,  and  his  whole  Fate  command: 
O'er  the  still  Waves  her  bumisht  Galley  moves, 
Row'd  by  the  Graces,  whilst  officious  Loves 
To  silken  Cords  their  busie  Hands  apply,  130 

Or  gathering  all  the  gentle  Gales  that  fly, 
To  their  fair  Mistress  with  those  Spoils  repair. 

And  from  their  purple  Wings  disperse  the  balmy  Air. 
Hov'ring  Perfumes  ascend  in  od'rous  Clouds, 
Curl  o'er  the  Barque,  and  play  among  the  Shrouds; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  243 

Whilst  gently  dashing  every  Silver  Oar, 

Guided  by  the  Rules  of  Art, 

With  tuneful  Instruments  designed 
To  soften,  and  subdue  the  stubborn  Mind, 
A  strangely  pleasing  and  harmonious  Part  140 

In  equal  Measures  bore. 
Like  a  new  Venus  on  her  native  Sea, 

In  midst  of  the  transporting  Scene, 
(Which  Pen  or  Pencil  imitates  in  vain) 
On  a  resplendent  and  conspicuous  Bed, 
With  all  the  Pride  of  Persia  loosely  spread. 

The  lovely  Syrene  lay. 

Which  but  discem'd  from  the  yet  distant  Shore, 

Th'  amazed  Emperor  could  hate  no  more; 

No  more  a  baffled  Vengeance  could  pursue ;  150 

But  yielding  still,  still  as  she  nearer  drew, 

When  Cleopatra  anchor'd  in  the  Bay, 

Where  every  Charm  cou'd  all  its  Force  display. 
Like  his  own  Stattie  stood,  and  gaz'd  the  World  away. 

Where  ends  alas!  this  Pageantry  and  State; 

Where  end  the  Triumphs  of  this  conqu'ring  Face, 
Envy'd  of  Roman  Wives,  and  all  the  Female  Bace? 

Oh  swift  Vicissitude  of  Beauty's  Fate! 

Now  in  her  Tomb  withdrawn  from  publick  Sight, 
From  near  Captivity  and  Shame,  160 

The  Vanquish'd,  the  abandoned  Dame 

ProflPers  the  Arm,  that  held  another's  Right, 

To  the  destructive  Snake's  more  just  Embrace, 
And  courts  deforming  Death,  to  mend  his  Leaden  Pace. 


But  Wit  shall  last  (the  vaunting  Poet  cries) 
Th'  immortal  Streams  that  from  Parnassus  flow, 
Shall  make  his  never-fading  Lawrels  grow. 


244  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Above  this  mouldring  Earth  to  flourish  in  the  Skies: 
"And  when  his  Body  falls  in  Funeral  Fire 

When  late  revolving  Ages  shall  consume  170 

The  very  Pillars,  that  support  his  Tomb, 
"  His  name  shall  live,  and  his  best  Part  aspire. 

Deluded  Wretch !  grasping  at  future  Praise, 
Now  planting,  with  mistaken  Care, 

Round  thy  enchanted  Palace  in  the  Air, 

A  Grove,  which  in  thy  Fancy  time  shall  raise, 

A  Grove  of  soaring  Palms,  and  ever-lasting  Bays; 

Could'st  Thou  alas!  to  such  Benown  arrive, 

As  thy  Imaginations  wou'd  contrive ; 

Should  numerous  Cities,  in  a  vain  contest,  180 

Struggle  for  thy  famous  Birth ; 

Should  the  sole  Monarch  of  the  conquered  Earth, 
His  wreathed  Head  upon  thy  Volume  rest; 
Like  MarOj  could'st  thou  justly  claim, 
Amongst  th'  inspired  tuneful  Eace, 
The  highest  Room,  the  undisputed  Place; 
And  after  near  Two  Thousand  Years  of  Fame, 
Have  thy  proud  Work  to  a  new  People  shown ; 

Th'  unequal'd  Poems  made  their  own. 
In  such  a  Dress,  in  such  a  perfect  Stile  190 

As  on  his  Labours  Dryden  now  bestows, 
As  now  from  DryderCs  just  Improvement  flows, 

In  every  polish'd  Verse  throughout  the  British  Isle; 
What  Benefit  alas!  would  to  thee  grow? 
What  Sense  of  Pleasure  wou'dst  thou  know? 
What  swelling  Joy  ?  what  Pride  ?  what  Glory  have. 
When  in  the  Darkness  of  the  abject  Grave, 
Insensible,  and  Stupid  laid  below, 
No  Atom  of  thy  Heap,  no  Dust  wou'd  move. 

For    all    the   Airy    Breath    that    form'd    thy    Praise 
above?  200 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  245 

VI 

True,  says  the  Man  to  Luxury  inclin'd; 

Without  the  Study  of  uncertain  Art, 
Without  much  Labour  of  the  Mind, 

Meer  uninstructed  Nature  will  impart. 
That  lAfe  too  swiftly  flieSj  and  leaves  all  good  behind. 

Sieze  then,  my  Friends,  (he  cries)  the  present  Hour; 
The  Pleasure  which  to  that  belongs, 

The  Feasts,  th'  o'erflowing  Bowls,  the Miri;h,  the  Songs, 

The  Orange-Bloom,  that  with  such  Sweetness  blows, 
AnacreorCs  celebrated  Rose,  210 

The  Hyacinth,  with  every  beateous  Flower, 
Which  just  this  happy  Moment  shall  disclose. 
Are  out  of  Fortune's  reach,  and  all  within  our  Power. 
Such  costly  Garments  let  our  Slaves  prepare, 
As  for  the  gay  Demetrius  were  design'd; 
Where  a  new  Sun  of  radiant  Diamonds  shin'd. 
Where  the  enamel'd  Earth,  and  scarce-discerned  Air, 

With  a  transparent  Sea  were  seen, 
A  Sea  composed  of  the  Em' raid's  Green, 
And  with  a  golden  Shore  encompass'd  round;  220 

Where  every  Orient  Shell,  of  wondrous  shape  was  found. 

The  whole  Creation  on  his  Shoulders  hung, 

The  whole  Creation  with  his  wish  comply' d. 
Did  swiftly,  for  each  Appetite  provide, 
And  fed  them  all  when  Young. 

No  less,  th'  Assyrian  Prince  enjoy'd, 
Of  Bliss  too  soon  depriv'd,  but  never  cloy'd, 

Whose  Counsel  let  us  still  pursue. 
Whose  Monument,  did  this  Inscription  shew 

To  every  Passenger,  that  trod  the  way,  230 

Where,  with  a  slighting  Hand,  and  scornful  Smile 
The  proud  Efl^ies,  on  th'  instructive  Pile, 


246  The  Pobms  of  Anne 

A  great  Example  lay. 
/,  here  EntomVd,  did  mighty  Kingdoms  sway, 
Two  Cities  raised  in  one  prodigious  Day: 
Thou  wandering  Traveller,  no  longer  gaze, 
No  longer  dwell  upon  this  useless  Place; 
Go  Feed,  and  Drink,  in  Sports  consume  thy  Life; 
For  All  that  else  we  gain^s  not  worth  a  MomenVs  Strife. 
Thus!  talks  the  Fool,  whom  no  Bestraint  can  bound, 
When  now  the  Glass  has  gone  a  frequent  round ;  241 

When  soaring  Fancy  lightly  swims. 
Fancy,  that  keeps  above,  and  dances  o'er  the  Brims ; 
Whilst   weighty   Season    sinks,    and    in    the    bot- 
tom's drown 'd: 
Adds  to  his  Own,  an  artificial  Fire, 

Doubling  ev'ry  hot  Desire, 
Till  th'  auxiliary  Spirits,  in  a  Flame, 
The  Stomach's  Magazine  defy, 
That  standing  Pool,  that  helpless  Moisture  nigh 
Thro'  every  Vital  part  impetuous  fly,  250 

And  quite  consume  the  Frame ; 
When  to  the  Under-world  despis'd  he  goes, 
A  pamper'd  Carcase  on  the  Worms  bestows, 

Who  rioting  on  the  unusual  Chear, 
As  good  a  Life  enjoy,  as  he  could  boast  of  here. 

VII 

But  hold  my  Muse !  thy  farther  Flight  restrain. 

Exhaust  not  thy  declining  Force, 
Nor  in  a  long,  pursu'd,  and  breathless  Course, 

Attempt,  with  slacken'd  speed,  to  run 
Through  ev'ry  Vanity  beneath  the  Sun,  260 

Lest  thy  o'erweary'd  Reader,  should  complain, 
That  of  all  Vanities  beside, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  247 

Which  thine,  or  his  Experience  e'er  have  try'd, 

Thou  art,  too  tedious  Muse,  most  frivolous  and  vain ; 
Yet,  tell  the  Man,  of  an  aspiring  Thought, 

Of  an  ambitious,  restless  Mind, 
That  can  no  Ease,  no  Satisfaction  find, 
Till  neighb'ring  States  are  to  Subjection  brought. 

Till  Universal  Awe,  enslav'd  Mankind  is  taught; 

That,  should  he  lead  an  Army  to  the  Field,  270 

For  whose  still  necessary  Use, 
Th'  extended  Earth  cou'd  not  enough  produce, 
Nor  Kivers  to  their  Thirst  a  full  Contentment  yield; 
Yet,  must  their  dark  Reverse  of  Fate 
Roll  round,  within  that  Course  of  Years, 
Within  the  short,  the  swift,  and  fleeting  Date 
Prescribed  by  Xerxes,  when  his  falling  Tears 
Bewail'd  those  Numbers,  which  his  Sword  employ'd. 

And  false,  Hyena-like,  lamented  and  destroyed. 

Tell  Him,  that  does  some  stately  Building  raise,  280 

A  Windsor  or  Versailles  erect. 
And  thorough  all  Posterity  expect. 

With  its  unshaken  Base,  a  firm  unshaken  Praise ; 
Tell  Him,  Juded's  Temple  is  no  more. 
Upon  whose  Splendour,  Thouscmds  heretofore 

Spent  the  astonish'd  Hours,  forgetful  to  adore: 
Tell  him,  into  the  Earth  agen  is  hurPd, 
That  most  stupendious  Wonder  of  the  World, 
Justly  presiding  o'er  the  boasted  Seven, 
By  humane  Art  and  Industry  design'd,  290 

This!  the  rich  Draught  of  the  Immortal  Mind, 

The  Architect  of  Heaven. 
Remember  then,  to  fix  thy  Aim  on  High, 
Project,  and  build  on  t'other  side  the  Sky, 
For,  after  all  thy  vain  Expence  below. 
Thou  canst  no  Fame,  no  lasting  Pleasure  know; 


248  The  Poems  op  Anne 

No  Good,  that  shall  not  thy  Embraces  fly, 
Or  thou  from  that  be  in  a  Moment  caught, 
Thy  Spirit  to  new  Claims,  new  Interests  brought. 
Whilst  unconcem'd  thy  secret  Ashes  lye,  300 

Or  stray  about  the  Globe,  O  Man  ordairCd  to  Dye! 

THE  SPLEEN 
A  Pindarik  Poem 

What  art  thou,  SPLEEN,  which  ev'ry  thing  dost  ape? 

Thou  Proteus  to  abus'd  Mankind, 

Who  never  yet  thy  real  Cause  cou'd  find, 
Or  fix  thee  to  remain  in  one  continued  Shape. 

Still  varying  thy  perplexing  Form, 

Now  a  Dead  Sea  thou'lt  represent, 

A  Calm  of  stupid  Discontent, 
Then,  dashing  on  the  Bocks  wilt  rage  into  a  Storm. 

Trembling  sometimes  thou  dost  appear. 

Dissolved  into  a  Panick  Fear;  10 

On  Sleep  intruding  dost  thy  Shadows  spread. 

Thy  gloomy  Terrours  round  the  silent  Bed, 
And  croud  with  boading  Dreams  the  Melancholy 
Head; 

Or,  when  the  Midnight  Hour  is  told, 

And  drooping  Lids  thou  still  dost  waking  hold. 

Thy  fond  Delusions  cheat  the  Eyes, 

Before  them  antick  Spectres  dance. 
Unusual  Fires  their  pointed  Heads  advance. 

And  airy  Phantoms  rise. 

Such  was  the  monstrous  Vision  seen,  20 

When  Brutus  (now  beneath  his  Cares  opprest. 
And  all  Rome^s  Fortunes  rolling  in  his  Breast, 

Before  Philippics  latest  Field, 
Before  his  Fate  did  to  Octavius  lead) 

Was  vanquish'd  by  the  Spleen. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  249 

Falsly,  the  Mortal  Part  we  blame 

Of  our  deprest,  and  pond'rons  Frame, 

Which,  till  the  First  degrading  Sin 

Let  Thee,  its  dull  Attendant,  in. 

Still  with  the  Other  did  comply,  30 

Nor  clogg'd  the  Active  Soul,  dispos'd  to  fly. 
And  range  the  Mansions  of  it's  native  Sky. 

Nor,  whilst  in  his  own  Heaven  he  dwelt. 

Whilst  Man  his  Paradice  possest. 
His  fertile  Garden  in  the  fragrant  East, 

And  all  united  Odours  smelt. 

No  armed  Sweets,  until  thy  Reign, 

Cou'd  shock  the  Sense,  or  in  the  Face 

A  flusht,  unhandsom  Colour  place. 
Now  the  Jonquille  o'ercomes  the  feeble  Brain;  40 

We  faint  beneath  the  Aromatick  Pain, 
Till  some  offensive  Scent  thy  Pow'rs  appease. 
And  Pleasure  we  resign  for  short,  and  nauseous  Ease. 

In  ev'ry  One  thou  dost  possess. 

New  are  thy  Motions,  and  thy  Dress: 

Now  in  some  Grove  a  list'ning  Friend 

Thy  false  Suggestions  must  attend. 
Thy  whisper'd  Griefs,  thy  fancy'd  Sorrows  hear, 
Breath'd  in  a  Sigh,  and  witness'd  by  a  Tear; 

Whilst  in  the  light,  and  vulgar  Croud,  50 

Thy  Slaves,  more  clamorous  and  loud. 
By  Laughters  unprovok'd,  thy  Influence  too  confess. 
In  the  Imperious  Wife  thou  Vapours  art. 

Which  from  o'erheated  Passions  rise 

In  Clouds  to  the  attractive  Brain, 

Until  descending  thence  again. 

Thro'  the  o'er-cast,  and  show'ring  Eyes, 

Upon  her  Husband's  soften'd  Heart, 


250  The  Poems  of  Anne 

He  the  disputed  Point  must  yield, 
Something  resign  of  the  contested  Field;  60 

Till  Lordly  Man^  bom  to  Imperial  Sway, 
Compounds  for  Peace,  to  make  that  Bight  away, 
And  Woman^  arm'd  with  Spleen^  do's  servilely  Obey. 

The  Fool,  to  imitate  the  Wits, 

Complains  of  thy  pretended  Fits, 

And  Dulness,  bom  with  him,  wou'd  lay 

Upon  thy  accidental  Sway ; 

Because,  sometimes,  thou  dost  presume 

Into  the  ablest  Heads  to  come: 

That,  often.  Men  of  Thoughts  refin'd,  70 

Impatient  of  unequal  Sence, 
Such  slow  Beturns,  where  they  so  much  dispense, 
Betiring  from  the  Croud,  are  to  thy  Shades  inclined. 

O'er  me  alas!  thou  dost  too  much  prevail: 

I  feel  thy  Force,  whilst  I  against  thee  rail ; 
I  feel  my  Verse  decay,  and  my  crampt  Numbers  fail. 
Thro'  thy  black  Jaundice  I  all  Objects  see, 

As  Dark,  and  Terrible  as  Thee, 
My  Lines  decry' d,  and  my  Employment  thought 
An  useless  Folly,  or  presumptuous  Fault:  80 

Whilst  in  the  Muses  Paths  I  stray, 
Whilst  in  their  Groves,  and  by  their  secret  Springs 
My  Hand  delights  to  trace  unusual  Things, 
And  deviates  from  the  known,  and  common  way ; 

Nor  will  in  fading  Silks  compose 

Faintly  th'  inimitable  Rose, 
Fill  up  an  ill-drawn  Bird,  or  paint  on  Glass 
The  Sovereign's  blurr'd  and  undistinguish'd  Face, 
The  threatning  Angel,  and  the  speaking  Ass, 

Patron  thou  art  to  ev'ry  gross  Abuse,  90 

The  sullen  HusbancTs  feign'd  Excuse, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  251 

When  the  ill  Humonr  with  his  Wife  he  spends, 
,  And  bears  recruited  Wit,  and  Spirits  to  his  Friends. 
The  Son  of  Bacchus  pleads  thy  Pow'r, 
As  to  the  Glass  he  still  .repairs. 
Pretends  but  to  remove  thy  Cares, 
Snatch  from  thy  Shades  one  gay,  and  smiling  Hour, 
And  drown  thy  Kingdom  in  a  purple  Show'r. 
When  the  Coquette^  whom  ev'ry  Fool  admires, 

Wou'd  in  Variety  be  Fair,  100 

And,  changing  hastily  the  Scene 
From  Light,  Impertinent,  and  Vain, 
Assumes  a  soft,  a  melancholy  Air, 
And  of  her  Eyes  rebates  the  wand'ring  Fires, 
The  careless  Posture,  and  the  Head  reclin'd, 

The  thoughtful,  and  composed  Face, 
Proclaiming  the  withdrawn,  the  absent  Mind, 
Allows  the  Fop  more  liberty  to  gaze. 
Who  gently  for  the  tender  Cause  inquires ; 
The  Cause,  indeed,  is  a  Defect  in  Sense,  110 

Yet  is  the  Spleen  alledg'd,  and  still  the  dull  Pretence. 
But  these  are  thy  fantastic  Harms, 
The  Tricks  of  thy  pernicious  Stage, 
Which  do  the  weaker  Sort  engage ; 
Worse  are  the  dire  Effects  of  thy  more  pow'rful  Charms. 
By  Thee  Religion^  all  we  know, 
That  shou'd  enlighten  here  below. 
Is  veil'd  in  Darkness,  and  perplext 
With  anxious  Doubts,  with  endless  Scruples  vext, 
And  some  Restraint  imply 'd  from  each  perverted  Text. 
Whilst  Touch  not,  Taste  not,  what  is  freely  giv'n,  121 
Is  but  thy  niggard  Voice,  disgracing  bounteous  Heav'n. 
From  Speech  restrain'd,  by  thy  Deceits  abus'd. 
To  Deserts  banish'd,  or  in  Cells  reclus'd. 
Mistaken  Vot'ries  to  the  Pow'rs  Divine, 


252  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

Whilst  they  a  purer  Sacrifice  design, 
Do  but  the  Spleen  obey,  and  worship  at  thy  Shrine» 
In  vain  to  chase  thee  ev'ry  Art  we  try, 
In  vain  all  Remedies  apply. 

In  vain  the  Indian  Leaf  infuse,  130 

Or  the  parch 'd  Eastern  Berry  bruise; 
Some  pass,  in  vain,  those  Bounds,  and  nobler  Liquors  use. 
Now  Harmony  J  in  vain,  we  bring. 
Inspire  the  Flute,  and  touch  the  String. 
From  Harmony  no  help  is  had ; 
Mustek  but  soothes  thee,  if  too  sweetly  sad, 
And  if  too  light,  but  turns  thee  gayly  Mad. 
Tho'  the  Physicians  greatest  Gains, 
Altho'  his  growing  Wealth  he  sees 
Daily  increas'd  by  Ladies  Fees,  140 

Yet  doft  thou  baffle  all  his  studious  Pains. 

Not  skilful  Lower  thy  Source  cou'd  find. 
Or  thro'  the  well-dissected  Body  trace 
The  secret,  the  mysterious  ways. 
By  which  thou  dost  surprise,  and  prey  upon  the  Mind. 
The'  in  the  Search,  too  deep  for  Humane  Thought, 

With  unsuccessful  Toil  he  wrought, 
'Till  thinking  Thee  to've  catch'd,  Himself  by  thee 
was  caught, 
Retain'd  thy  Pris'ner,  thy  acknowledged  Slave, 
And  sunk  beneath  thy  Chain  to  a  lamented  Grave.  150 

A  PINDARICK  POEM 

Upon  the  Hurricane  in  November  1703,  refen'ing  to  this  Text  in 
Psalm  148.  ver,  8,Winds  and  Storms  fulfilling  his  Word, 

With  a  Hymn  composed  of  the  148th  Psalm  Paraphrased 

You  have  obey'd,  you  Winds,  that  must  fulfill 

The  Great  Disposer's  righteous  Will; 
Throughout  the  Land,  unlimited  you  flew, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  253 

Nor  sought,  as  heretofore,  with  Friendly  Aid 

Only,  new  Motion  to  bestow 
Upon  the  sluggish  Vapours,  bred  below, 
Condensing  into  Mists,  and  melancholy  Shade. 
No  more  such  gentle  Methods  you  pursue. 
But  marching  now  in  terrible  Array, 

Undistinguish'd  was  your  Prey:  10 

In  vain  the  Shrubs,  with  lowly  Bent, 
Sought  their  Destruction  to  prevent; 
The  Beech  in  vain,  with  out-stretch'd  Arms, 
Deprecates  th 'approaching  Harms; 
In  vain  the  Oak  (so  often  storm'd) 
Rely'd  upon  that  native  Force, 
By  which  already  was  perform'd 
So  much  of  his  appointed  Course, 
As  made  him,  fearless  of  Decay, 

Wait  but  the  accomplished  Time  20 

Of  his  long-wish 'd  and  useful  Prime, 
To  be  remov'd,  with  Honor,  to  the  Sea. 
The  strait  and  ornamental  Pine 
Did  in  the  like  Ambition  joyn. 
And  thought  his  Fame  should  ever  last, 
When  in  some  Royal  Ship  he  stood  the  planted  Mast ; 
And  shou'd  again  his  Length  of  Timber  rear, 
And  new  engrafted  Branches  wear 
Of  fibrous  Cordage  and  impending  Shrouds, 
Still  trimm'd  with  human  Care,  and  water'd  by  the 

Clouds.  30 

But  oh,  you  Trees!  who  solitary  stood; 
Or  you,  whose  Numbers  form'd  a  Wood; 
You,  who  on  Mountains  chose  to  rise, 
And  drew  them  nearer  to  the  Skies; 
Or  you,  whom  Valleys  late  did  hold 
In  flexible  and  lighter  Mould ; 


254  The  Poems  op  Anne 

You  num'rous  Brethren  of  the  Leafy  Kind, 

To  whatsoever  Use  designed, 

Now,  vain  yon  found  it  to  contend 
With  not,  alas!  one  Element;  your  Friend  40 

Your  Mother  Earth,  thro'  long  preceding  Bains, 

(Which  undermining  sink  below) 
No  more  her  wonted  Strength  retains; 
Nor  you  so  fix'd  within  her  Bosom  grow. 
That  for  your  sakes  she  can  resolve  to  bear 

These  furious  Shocks  of  hurrying  Air; 
But  finding  All  your  Ruin  did  conspire. 
She  soon  her  beauteous  Progeny  resigned 
To  this  destructive,  this  imperious  Wind, 
That  check'd  your  nobler  Aims,  and  gives  you  to  the 

Fire.  50 

Thus!  have  thy  Cedars,  Ldbantis,  been  struck 

As  the  lythe  Oziers  twisted  round ; 
Thus!  Cadez,  has  thy  Wilderness  been  shook, 
When  the  appalling,  and  tremendous  Sound 

Of  rattl'ing  Tempests  o'er  you  broke. 

And  made  your  stubborn  Glories  bow. 
When  in  such  Whirlwinds  the  Almighty  spoke. 
Warning  Judea  then,  as  our  Britannia  now. 

Yet  these  were  the  remoter  Harms, 
Foreign  the  Care,  and  distant  the  Alarms:  60 

Whilst  but  sheltring  Trees  alone, 

Master'd  soon,  and  soon  o'erthrown. 

Felt  those  Gusts,  which  since  prevail. 

And  loftier  Palaces  assail ; 

Whose  shaken  Turrets  now  give  way. 
With  vain  Inscriptions,  which  the  Freeze  has  borne 
Through  Ages  past,  t'extol  and  to  adorn. 

And  to  our  latter  Times  convey ; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  255 

Who  did  the  Structures  deep  Foundation  lay, 

Forcing  his  Praise  upon  the  gazing  Croud,  70 

And,  whikt  he  moulders  in  a  scanty  Shroud, 

Telling  both  Earth  and  Skies,  he  when  alive  was  proud. 
Now  down  at  once  comes  the  superfluous  Load, 

The  costly  Fret- work  with  it  yields. 
Whose  imitated  Fruits  and  Flow'rs  are  strew'd. 

Like  those  of  real  Growth  o'er  the  Autumnal  Fields. 
The  present  Owner  lifts  his  Eyes, 
And  the  swift  Change  with  sad  AfPrightment  spies: 
The  Cieling  gone,  that  late  the  Roof  conceal'd; 
The  Roof  untyl'd,  thro'  which  the  Heav'ns  reveal'd,  80 

Exposes  now  his  Head,  when  all  Defence  has  fail'd. 

What  alas,  is  to  be  done! 
Those,  who  in  Cities  wou'd  from  Dangers  run, 
Do  but  encreasing  Dangers  meet, 
And  Death,  in  various  shapes,  attending  in  the  Street; 
While  some,  too  tardy  in  their  Flight, 
O'ertaken  by  a  worse  Mischance, 
Their  upward  Parts  do  scarce  advance, 
When  on  their  following  Limbs  th'  extending  Ruins  light. 
One  half's  interr'd,  the  other  yet  survives,  90 

And  for  Release  with  fainting  Vigour  strives; 
Implores  the  Aid  of  absent  Friends  in  vain ; 
With  fault'ring  Speech,  and  dying  Wishes  calls 
Those,  whom  perhaps,  their  own  Domestick  Walls 
By  parallel  Distress,  or  swifter  Death  retains. 

O  Wells!  thy  Bishop's  Mansion  we  lament. 
So  tragical  the  Fall,  so  dire  th'Event! 
But  let  no  daring  Thought  presume 
To  point  a  Cause  for  that  oppressive  Doom. 
Yet  strictly  pious  Ken!  had'st  Thou  been  there,        100 
This  Fate,  we  think,  had  not  become  thy  share; 


256  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Nor  had  that  awful  Fabrick  bow'd. 
Sliding  from  its  loosened  Bands; 
Nor  yielding  Timbers  been  allow'd 
To  crush  thy  ever-lifted  Hands, 
Or  interrupt  thy  Pray'r. 
Those  Orizons,  that  nightly  Watches  keep, 
Had  call'd  thee  from  thy  Bed,  or  there  secur'd  thy  Sleep. 
Whilst  you,  bold  Winds  and  Storms!  his  Word  obey'd, 
Whilst  you  his  Scourge  the  Great  Jehova  made,       110 
And  into  ruin'd  Heaps  our  Edifices  laid. 

You  South  and  West  the  Tragedy  began, 
As,  with  disorder'd  haste,  you  o'er  the  Surface  ran ; 
Forgetting,  that  you  were  design'd 
(Chiefly  thou  Zephyrus,  thou  softest  Wind !) 
Only  our  Heats,  when  sultry,  to  allay. 
And  chase  the  od'rous  Gums  by  your  dispersing  Play. 
Now,  by  new  Orders  and  Decrees, 
For  our  Chastisement  issu'd  forth, 
You  on  his  Confines  the  alarmed  North  120 

With  equal  Fury  sees, 
And  summons  swiftly  to  his  Aid 
Eurus,  his  Confederate  made, 
His  eager  Second  in  th 'opposing  Fight, 
That  even  the  Winds  may  keep  the  Balance  right, 
Nor  yield  increase  of  Sway  to  arbitrary  Might. 
Meeting  now,  they  all  contend. 
Those  assail,  while  These  defend; 
Fierce  and  turbulent  the  War, 

And  in  the  loud  tumultuous  Jar  130 

Winds  their  own  Fifes,  and  Clarions  are. 
Each  Cavity,  which  Art  or  Nature  leaves, 
Their  Inspiration  hastily  receives; 

Whence,  from  their  various  Forms  and  Size, 
As  various  Symphonies  arise, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  257 

Their  Trumpet  ev'ry  hollow  Tube  is  made, 
And,  when  more  solid  Bodies  they  invade 

Enrag'd,  they  can  no  farther  come, 
The  beaten  Flatt,  whilst  it  repels  the  Noise, 
Resembles  but  with  more  outrageous  Voice  140 

The  Soldier's  threatning  Drum: 
And  when  they  compass  thus  our  World  around. 
When  they  our  Rocks  and  Mountains  rend. 
When  they  our  Sacred  Piles  to  their  Foundations  send, 
No  wonder  if  our  ecchoing  Caves  rebound; 
No  wonder  if  our  list'ning  Sense  they  wound. 
When  arm'd  with  so  much  Force,  and  usher'd  with  such 
Sound. 

Nor  scarce,  amidst  the  Terrors  of  that  Night, 
When  you,  fierce  Winds,  such  Desolations  wrought. 
When   you   from  out  his  Stores  the  Great  Commander 
brought,  150 

Cou'd  the  most  Righteous  stand  upright; 
Scarcely  the  Holiest  Man  performs 
The  Service,  that  becomes  it  best. 
By  ardent  Vows,  or  solemn  Pray'rs  addrest; 
Nor  finds  the  Calm,  so  usual  to  his  Breast, 
Full  Proof  against  such  Storms. 
How  shou'd  the  Guilty  then  be  found. 
The  Men  in  Wine,  or  looser  Pleasures  drown'd. 
To  fix  a  stedfast  Hope,  or  to  maintain  their  Ground! 

When  at  his  Glass  the  late  Companion  feels,  160 

That  Giddy,  like  himself,  the  tott'ring  Mansion  reels! 
The  Miser,  who  with  many  a  Chest 
His  gloomy  Tenement  opprest. 
Now  fears  the  over-burthen'd  Floor, 
And  trembles  for  his  Life,  but  for  his  Treasure  more. 
What  shall  he  do,  or  to  what  Pow'rs  apply  ? 


258  The  Poems  of  Anne 

To  those,  which  threaten  from  on  High, 
By  him  ne'er  call'd  upon  before. 
Who  also  will  suggest  th'  impossible  Restore? 

No;  Mammon^  to  thy  Laws  he  will  be  true,  170 

And,  rather  than  his  Wealth,  will  bid  the  World  adieu. 
The  Rafters  sink,  and  bury'd  with  his  Coin 
That  Fate  does  with  his  living  Thoughts  combine; 
For  still  his  Heart's  inclos'd  within  a  Golden  Mine. 

Contention  with  its  angry  Brawls 
By  Storms  o'er-clamour'd,  shrinks  and  falls; 
Nor  WHIG,  nor  TORY  now  the  rash  Contender  calls. 
Those,  who  but  Vanity  allow'd, 
Nor  thought,  it  reach'd  the  Name  of  Sin, 
To  be  of  their  Perfections  proud,  180 

Too  much  adom'd  without,  or  too  much  rais'd  within. 
Now  find,  that  even  the  lightest  Things, 
As  the  minuter  parts  of  Air, 
When  Number  to  their  Weight  addition  brings, 
Can,  like  the  small,  but  numerous  Insects  Stings, 
Can,  like  th'  assembl'd  Winds,  urge  Ruin  and  Despair. 

Thus  You've  obey'd,  you  Winds,  that  must  fulfill 

The  Great  disposer's  Righteous  Will: 
Thus  did  your  Breath  a  strict  Enquiry  make. 
Thus  did  you  our  most  secret  Sins  awake,  190 

And  thus  chastis'd  their  111. 

Whilst  vainly  Those,  of  a  rapacious  Mind, 

Fields  to  other  Fields  had  laid, 
By  Force,  or  by  injurious  Bargains  join'd, 
With  Fences  for  their  Guard  impenetrable  made ; 

The  juster  Tempest  mocks  the  wrong, 

And  sweeps,  in  its  directed  Flight, 

Th'  Inclosures  of  another's  Right, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  259 

Driving  at  once  the  Bounds,  and  licensed  Herds  along. 
The  Earth  agen  one  general  Scene  appears;  200 

No  regular  distinction  now, 
Betwixt  the  Grounds  for  Pasture,  or  the  Plough, 

The  Face  of  Nature  wears. 

Free  as  the  Men,  who  wild  Confusion  love. 

And  lawless  Liberty  approve, 

Their  Fellow-Brutes  pursue  their  way, 
To  their  own  Loss,  and  disadvantage  stray. 
As  wretched  in  their  Choice,  as  unadvis'd  as  They. 
The  tim'rous  Deer,  whilst  he  forsakes  the  Park, 
And  wanders  on,  in  the  misguiding  Dark,  210 

Believes,  a  Foe  from  ev'ry  unknown  Bush 

Will  on  his  trembling  Body  rush. 
Taking  the  Winds,  that  vary  in  their  Notes, 
For  hot  pursuing  Hounds  with  deeply  bellowing  Throats. 
Th'  awaken'd  Birds,  shook  from  their  nightly  Seats, 

Their  unavailing  Pinions  ply, 

Repuls'd,  as  they  attempt  to  fly 
Li  hopes  they  might  attain  to  more  secure  Retreats. 
But,  Where  ye  wilder'd  Fowls  wou'd  You  repair? 

When  this  your  happy  Portion  given,  220 

Your  upward  Lot,  your  Firmament  of  Heaven, 
Your  unentail'd,  your  undivided  Air, 
Where  no  Proprietor  was  ever  known. 
Where  no  litigious  Suits  have  ever  grown. 
Whilst  none  from  Star  to  Star  cou'd  call  the  space  his  Own ; 
When  this  no  more  your  middle  Flights  can  bear. 
But  some  rough  Blast  too  far  above  conveighs. 
Or  to  unquitted  Earth  confines  your  weak  Essays. 
Nor  You,  nor  wiser  Man  cou'd  find  Repose, 

Nor  cou'd  our  Industry  produce  230 

Expedients  of  the  smallest  Use, 


260  The  Poems  of  Anne 

To  ward  our  greater  Cares,  or  mitigate  your  Woes. 
Ye  Clouds!  that  pity'd  our  Distress, 

And  by  your  pacifying  Showers 
(The  soft  and  usual  methods  of  Success) 
Kindly  assayed  to  make  this  Tempest  less; 
Vainly  your  Aid  was  now  alas!  employ'd, 
In  vain  you  wept  o'er  those  destructive  Hours, 
In  which  the  Winds  full  Tyranny  enjoy' d. 

Nor  wou'd  allow  you  to  prevail,  240 

But  drove  your  scom'd,  and  scatter'd  Tears  to  wail 
The  Land  that  lay  destroyed. 

Whilst  You  obey'd,  you  Winds!  that  must  fulfill 

The  just  Disposer's  Righteous  Will ; 
Whilst  not  the  Earth  alone,  you  disarray. 
But  to  more  ruin'd  Seas  wing'd  your  impetuous  Way. 

Which  to  foreshew,  the  still  portentous  Sun 
Beamless,  and  pale  of  late,  his  Race  begun, 
Quenching  the  Rays,  he  had  no  Joy  to  keep. 
In  the  obscure,  and  sadly  threaten'd  Deep.  250 

Farther  than  we,  that  Eye  of  Heaven  discerns. 
And  nearer  plac'd  to  our  malignant  Stars, 
Our  brooding  Tempests,  and  approaching  Wars 
Anticipating  learns. 

When  now,  too  soon  the  dark  Event 

Shews  what  that  faded  Planet  meant ; 
Whilst  more  the  liquid  Empire  undergoes, 
More  she  resigns  of  her  entrusted  Stores, 
The  Wealth,  the  Strength,  the  Pride  of  difP'rent  Shores 
In  one  Devoted,  one  Recorded  Night,  260 

Than  Years  had  known  destroy'd  by  generous  Fight, 
Or  Privateering  Foes. 

All  Rules  of  Conduct  laid  aside, 

No  more  the  baffl'd  Pilot  steers, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  261 

Or  knows  an  Art,  when  it  each  moment  veers, 
To  vary  with  the  Winds,  or  stem  th^unusual  Tide. 
Dispersed  and  loose,  the  shattered  Vessels  stray. 

Some  perish  within  sight  of  Shore, 
Some,  happier  thought,  obtain  a  wider  Sea, 
But  never  to  return,  or  cast  an  Anchor  more!  270 

Some  on  the  Northern  Coasts  are  thrown. 
And  by  congealing  Surges  compassed  round, 
To  fixt  and  certain  Ruin  bound. 
Immoveable  are  grown: 
The  fatal  Ooodwin  swallows  All  that  come 
Within  the  Limits  of  that  dangerous  Sand, 
Amphibious  in  its  kind,  nor  Sea  nor  Land; 
Tet  kin  to  both,  a  false  and  faithless  Strand, 
Known  only  to  our  Cost  for  a  devouring  Tomb. 

Nor  seemed  the  Hubbioane  content,  280 

Whilst  only  Ships  were  wreckt,  and  Tackle  rent; 

The  Sailors  too  must  fall  a  Prey, 
Those  that  Command,  with  those  that  did  Obey ; 
The  best  Supporters  of  thy  pompous  Stile, 
Thou  far  Renown'd,  thou  pow'rful  Bbitish  Isle! 
Foremost  in  Naval  Strength,  and  Sovereign  of  the  Sea! 
These  from  thy  Aid  that  wrathful  Night  divides, 
Plung'd  in  those  Waves,  o'er  which  this  Title  rides. 
What  art  Thou,  envy'd  Ghreatness^  at  the  best. 

In  thy  deluding  Splendors  drest?  290 

What  are  thy  glorious  Titles,  and  thy  Forms? 
Which  cannot  give  Security,  or  Rest 
To  favour'd  Men,  or  Kingdoms  that  contest 
With  Popular  Assaults,  or  Providential  Storms! 

Whilst  on  th'Omnipotent  our  Fate  depends. 
And  They  are  only  safe,  whom  He  alone  defends. 
Then  let  to  Heaven  our  general  Praise  be  sent, 
Which  did  our  farther  Loss,  our  total  Wreck  prevent. 


262  The  Pobms  of  Anne 

And  as  our  Aspirations  do  ascend, 
Let  every  Thing  be  summon'd  to  attend ;  300 

And  let  the  Poet  after  OodPs  own  Heart 
Direct  our  Skill  in  that  sublimer  part, 
And  our  weak  Numbers  mend! 

THE  HYMN 

To  the  Almighty  on  his  radiant  Throne, 

Let  endless  Hallelujas  rise! 
Praise  Him,  ye  wondrous  Heights  to  us  unknown, 
Praise  Him,  ye  Heavens  unreached  by  mortal  Eyes, 
Praise  Him,  in  your  degree,  ye  sublunary  Skies! 

Praise  Him,  you  Angels  that  before  him  bow. 

You  Creatures  of  Celestial  frame, 
Our  Guests  of  old,  our  wakeful  Guardians  now. 
Praise  Him,  and  with  like  Zeal  our  Hearts  enflame. 
Transporting  then  our  Praise  to  Seats  from  whence  you 
came! 

Praise  Him,  thou  Sun  in  thy  Meridian  Force; 

Exalt  Him,  all  ye  Stars  and  Light! 
Praise  Him,  thou  Moon  in  thy  revolving  Course, 
Praise  Him,  thou  gentler  Guide  of  silent  Night, 
Which  do's  to  solemn  Praise,  and  serious  Thoughts  invite. 

Praise  Him,  ye  humid  Vapours,  which  remain 

Unfrozen  by  the  sharper  Air; 
Praise  Him,  as  you  return  in  Show'rs  again, 
To  bless  the  Earth  and  make  her  Pastures  fair: 
Praise    Him,   ye   climbing  Fires,   the    Emblems   of   our 
Pray'r. 

Praise  Him,  ye  Waters  petrify'd  above, 
Ye  shredded  Clouds  that  fall  in  Snow, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  263 

Praise  Him,  for  that  you  so  divided  move ; 
Ye  Hailstones,  that  you  do  no  larger  grow, 
Nor,  in  one  solid  Mass,  oppress  the  World  below. 

Praise  Him,  ye  soaring  Fowls,  still  as  you  fly, 

And  on  gay  Plumes  your  Bodies  raise; 
You  Insecta  which  in  dark  Kecesses  lie, 
Altho'  th'  extremest  Distances  you  try. 
Be  reconcil'd  in  This,  to  oflfer  mutual  Praise. 

Praise  Him,  thou  Earth,  with  thy  unbounded  Store; 

Ye  Depths  which  to  the  Center  tend: 
Praise  Him  ye  Beasts  which  in  the  Forests  roar; 
Praise  Him  ye  Serpents,  tho'  you  downwards  bend. 
Who  made  your  bruised  Head  our  Ladder  to  ascend. 

Praise  Him,  ye  Men  whom  youthful  Vigour  warms; 

Ye  Children,  hastening  to  your  Prime; 
Praise  Him,  ye  Virgins  of  unsullied  Charms, 
With  beauteous  Lips  becoming  sacred  Rhime: 
You  Aged,  give  Him  Praise  for  your  encrease  of  Time. 

Praise  Him,  ye  Monarchs  in  supreme  Command, 

By  Anthems,  like  the  Hebrew  Kings; 
Then  with  enlarged  Zeal  throughout  the  Land 
Reform  the  Numbers,  and  reclaim  the  Strings, 
Converting  to  His  Praise,  the  most  Harmonious  Things. 

Ye  Senators  presiding  by  our  Choice, 

And  You  Hereditary  Peers! 
Praise  Him  by  Union,  both  in  Heart  and  Voice; 
Praise  Him,  who  your  agreeing  Council  steers, 
Producing  sweeter  Sounds  than  the  according  Spherea 

Praise  Him,  ye  native  Altars  of  the  Earth ! 
Ye  Mountains  of  stupendious  size! 


264  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

Praise  Him,  ye  Trees  and  Fruits  which  there  have  birth. 
Praise  Him,  ye  Flames  that  from  their  Bowels  rise, 
All  fitted  for  the  use  of  grateful  Sacrifice. 

He  spake  the  Word;  and  from  the  Chaos  rose 

The  Forms  and  Species  of  each  Kind: 
He  spake  the  Word,  which  did  their  Law  compose, 
And  all,  with  never  ceasing  Order  join'd. 
Till  ruffl'd  for  our  Sins  by  his  chastising  Wind. 

But  now,  you  Storms,  that  have  your  Fury  spent, 

As  you  his  Dictates  did  obey. 
Let  now  your  loud  and  threatning  Notes  relent, 
Tune  all  your  Murmurs  to  a  softer  Key, 
And  bless  that  Gracious  Hand,  that  did  your  Progress  stay. 

From  my  contemn'd  Retreat,  obscure  and  low. 
As  Grots  from  whence  the  Winds  disperse, 
May  this  His  Praise  as  far  extended  flow; 
And  if  that  future  Times  shall  read  my  Verse, 
Tho'  worthless  in  it  self,  let  them  his  Praise  rehearse. 

TO  THE  ECCHO 
In  a  clear  night  upon  Aatrop  walks 

Say  lovely  Nymph,  where  dost  thou  dwell? 

Where  is  that  secret  Sylvan  seat. 

That  melancholy,  sweet  retreat. 

From  whence,  thou  doest  these  notes  repell. 

And  moving  Syllables  repeat? 

Oh  lovely  Nymph,  our  joys  to  swell. 

Thy  hollow,  leafy  mantion  tell. 

Or  if  thou  only  charm'st  the  ear. 

And  never  wilt  to  sight,  appear. 

But  doest  alone  in  voyce  excell,  10 

Still  with  itt,  fix  us  here. 


Countess  op  Winchilsba  265 

Where  Cynthia,  lends  her  gentle  light, 

Whilst  the  appeas'd,  expanded  air, 

A  passage  for  thee,  does  prepare, 

And  Strephon^s  tunefuU  voyce,  invite, 

Thine,  a  soft  part  with  him  to  bear. 

Oh  pleasure!  when  thou'dst  take  a  flight, 

Beyond  thy  comon,  mortal  height. 

When  to  thy  sphere  above,  thon'dst  presse, 

And  men,  like  Angels,  thou  woud'st  blesse,         20 

Thy  season,  be  like  this,  fair  Night, 

And  Harmony  thy  dresse. 

THE  BHID 

Elind  bird,  thy  praises  I  design, 

Thy  praises,  like  thy  plumes,  should  shine; 

Thy  praises,  shou'd  thy  life  outlive, 

Cou'd  I  the  fame  I  wish  thee,  give. 

Thou,  my  domestick  musick  art, 

And  dearest  trifle  of  my  heart. 

Soft,  in  thy  notes,  and  in  thy  dresse, 

Softer,  then  numbers  can  expresse. 

Softer  then  love,  softer  then  light 

When  just  escaping  from  the  night,  10 

When  first  she  rises,  unaray'd. 

And  steals  a  passage  through  the  shade. 

Softer  then  air,  or  flying  clouds 

Which  Phoebus  glory,  thinly  shrouds. 

Gay  as  the  spring,  gay  as  the  flowers. 

When  lightly  strew'd  with  pearly  showers, 

Ne'r  to  the  woods  shalt  thou  return. 

Nor  thy  wild  freedom,  shalt  thou  mourn, 

Thou,  to  my  bosome  shalt  repair. 

And  find  a  safer  shelter  there ;  20 

There  shalt  thou  watch,  and  shou'd  I  sleep. 


266  The  Poems  op  Anne 

My  heart,  thy  charge,  securely  keep. 

Love,  who  a  stranger  is  to  me, 

Must  by  thy  wings  be  kin  to  thee; 

So  painted  o're,  so  seeming  fair. 

So  soft,  his  first  adresses  are. 

Thy  guard,  he  n'er  can  passe,  unseen ; 

Thou,  surely  thou  hast  often  been. 

Whilst  yett  a  wand'rer  in  the  grove, 

A  false  accomplice,  with  this  Love;  30 

In  the  same  shade,  hast  thou  not  sate. 

And  seen  him  work  some  wretches  fate? 

Hast  thou  not  soothed  him  in  the  wrong ; 

And  graced  the  mischeif,  with  a  song. 

Tuning  thy  loud  conspiring  voyce, 

O're  falling  lovers,  to  rejoyce  ? 

If  so,  thy  wicked  faults  redeem. 

In  league  with  me,  no  truce  with  him 

Do  thou  admitt,  but  warn  my  heart, 

And  all  his  sly  designs  impart,  40 

Least  to  that  breast,  by  craft  he  gett, 

Which  has  defy'd  and  brav'd  him  yett. 

THE  TREE 

Fair  Tree!  for  thy  delightful  Shade 

'Tis  just  that  some  Return  be  made ; 

Sure,  some  Return  is  due  from  me 

To  thy  cool  Shadows,  and  to  thee. 

When  thou  to  Birds  do'st  Shelter  give, 

Thou  Musick  do'st  from  them  receive ; 

If  Travellers  beneath  thee  stay, 

Till  Storms  have  worn  themselves  away, 

That  Time  in  praising  thee  they  spend, 

And  thy  protecting  Pow'r  commend:  10 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  267. 

The  Shepherd  here,  from  Scorching  freed, 

Tunes  to  thy  dancing  Leaves  his  Reed; 

Whilst  his  lov'd  Nymph,  in  Thanks,  bestows 

Her  flow'ry  Chaplets  on  thy  Boughs. 

Shall  I  then  only  Silent  be. 

And  no  Return  be  made  by  me? 

No;  let  this  Wish  upon  thee  wait, 

And  still  to  flourish  be  thy  Pate, 

To  friture  Ages  may'st  thou  stand 

Untouch'd  by  the  rash  Workman's  hand;  20 

'Till  that  large  Stock  of  Sap  is  spent, 

Which  gives  thy  Summer's  Ornament ; 

'Till  the  fierce  Winds,  that  vainly  strive 

To  shock  thy  Greatness  whilst  alive. 

Shall  on  thy  lifeless  Hour  attend. 

Prevent  the  Axe,  and  grace  thy  End ; 

Their  scatter'd  Strength  together  call. 

And  to  the  Clouds  proclaim  thy  Pall ; 

Who  then  their  Ev'ning-Dews  may  spare. 

When  thou  no  longer  art  their  Care ;  30 

But  shalt,  like  ancient  Heroes,  bum. 

And  some  bright  Hearth  be  made  thy  Urn. 

TO  THE  NIGHTINGALE 

Exert  thy  Voice,  sweet  Harbinger  of  Spring! 

This  Moment  is  thy  Time  to  sing. 

This  Moment  I  attend  to  Praise, 
And  set  my  Numbers  to  thy  Layes. 

Free  as  thine  shall  be  my  Song; 

As  thy  Musick,  short,  or  long. 
Poets,  wild  as  thee,  were  bom, 

Pleasing  best  when  unconfin'd. 

When  to  Please  is  least  design'd. 
Soothing  but  their  Cares  to  rest;  10 


.268  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Cares  do  still  their  Thoughts  molest, 

And  still  th'  unhappy  Poet's  Breast, 
Like  thine,  when  best  he  sings,  is  placed  against  a  Thorn. 
She  begins.  Let  all  be  still ! 

Muse,  thy  Promise  now  fulfill! 
Sweet,  oh !  sweet,  still  sweeter  yet 
Can  thy  Words  such  Accents  fit, 
Canst  thou  Syllables  refine, 
Melt  a  Sense  that  shall  retain 

Still  some  Spirit  of  the  Brain,  20 

Till  with  Sounds  like  these  it  join. 

'Twill  not  be!  then  change  thy  Note; 

Let  division  shake  thy  Throat. 
Hark!  Division  now  she  tries; 
Yet  as  far  the  Muse  outfliea 

Cease  then,  prithee,  cease  thy  Tune; 

Trifler,  wilt  thou  sing  till  June? 
Till  thy  Bus'ness  all  lies  waste, 
And  the  Time  of  Building's  past! 

Thus  we  Poets  that  have  Speech,  30 

Unlike  what  thy  Forests  teach. 

If  a  fluent  Vein  be  shown 

That's  transcendent  to  our  own, 
Criticize,  reform,  or  preach, 
Or  censure  what  we  cannot  reach. 

A  NOCTUKNAL  REVERIE 

In  such  a  Night,  when  every  louder  Wind 

Is  to  its  distant  Cavern  safe  confin'd; 

And  only  gentle  Zephyr  fans  his  Wings, 

And  lonely  Philomely  still  waking,  sings; 

Or  from  some  Tree,  fam'd  for  the  Owrs  delight, 

She,  hollowing  clear,  directs  the  Wand'rer  right : 

In  such  a  Night,  when  passing  Clouds  give  place, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  269 

Or  thinly  vail  the  Heav'ns  myBterions  Face ; 

When  in  some  River,  overhung  with  Green, 

The  waving  Moon  and  trembling  Leaves  are  seen ;      10 

When  freshen'd  Grass  now  bears  it  self  upright, 

And  makes  cool  Banks  to  pleasing  Best  invite, 

Whence  springs  the  Woodbind,  and  the  Bramble-Ro&e, 

And  where  the  sleepy  Cowslip  shelter'd  grows; 

Whilst  now  a  paler  Hue  the  Foxglove  takes, 

Yet  checquers  still  with  Red  the  dnsky  brakes 

When  scatter'd  Olow-worms,  but  in  Twilight  fine, 

Shew  trivial  Beauties  watch  their  Hour  to  shine; 

Whilst  Salisbury  stands  the  Test  of  every  Light, 

In  perfect  Charms,  and  perfect  Virtue  bright:  20 

When  Odours,  which  declinM  repelling  Day, 

Thro'  temp'rate  Air  uninterrupted  stray ; 

When  darken'd  Groves  their  softest  Shadows  wear, 

And  falling  Waters  we  distinctly  hear; 

When  thro'  the  Gloom  more  venerable  shows 

Some  ancient  Fabrick,  awfid  in  Repose, 

While  Sunburnt  Hills  their  swarthy  Looks  conceal. 

And  swelling  Haycocks  thicken  up  the  Vale: 

When  the  loos'd  Horse  now,  as  his  Pasture  leads, 

Comes  slowly  grazing  thro'  th'  adjoining  Meads,        30 

Whose  stealing  Pace,  and  lengthen'd  Shade  we  fear, 

Till  torn  up  Forage  in  his  Teeth  we  hear: 

When  nibbling  Sheep  at  large  pursue  their  Food, 

And  unmolested  Kine  rechew  the  Cud; 

When  Curlews  cry  beneath  the  Village-walls, 

And  to  her  straggling  Brood  the  Partridge  calls ; 

Their  shortliv'd  Jubilee  the  Creatures  keep. 

Which  but  endures,  whilst  Tyrant -Jf an  do's  sleep; 

When  a  sedate  Content  the  Spirit  feels. 

And  no  fierce  Light  disturb,  whilst  it  reveals;  40 

But  silent  Musings  urge  the  Mind  to  seek 


270  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Something,  too  high  for  Syllables  to  speak ; 

Till  the  free  Soul  to  a  compos'dness  charm'd. 

Finding  the  Elements  of  Kage  disarm'd, 

O'er  all  below  a  solemn  Quiet  grown, 

Joys  in  th'  inferiour  World,  and  thinks  it  like  her  Own: 

In  such  a  Night  let  Me  abroad  remain. 

Till  Morning  breaks,  and  All's  confus'd  again ; 

Our  Cares,  our  Toils,  our  Clamours  are  renew'd, 

Or  Pleasures,  seldom  reach'd,  again  pursu'd.  50 


TO  DEATH » 

O  King  of  Terrors,  whose  unbounded  Sway 

All  that  have  Life,  must  certainly  Obey ; 

The  King,  the  Priest,  the  Prophet,  all  are  Thine, 

Nor  wou*d  ev'n  Ood  (in  Flesh)  thy  Stroke  decline. 

My  Name  is  on  thy  Roll,  and  sure  I  must 

Encrease  thy  gloomy  Kingdom  in  the  Dust. 

My  soul  at  this  no  Apprehension  feels. 

But  trembles  at  thy  Swords,  thy  Racks,  thy  Wheels; 

Thy  scorching  Fevers,  which  distract  the  Sense, 

And  snatch  us  raving,  unprepar'd  from  hence ; 

At  thy  contagious  Darts,  that  wound  the  Heads 

Of  weeping  Friends,  who  wait  at  dying  Beds. 

Spare  these,  and  let  thy  Time  be  when  it  will; 

My  Bus'ness  is  to  Dye,  and  Thine  to  Kill. 

Gently  thy  fatal  Sceptre  on  me  lay, 

And  take  to  thy  cold  Arms,  insensibly,  thy  Prey. 

1  This  poem  was  accidentally  misplaced.    It  belongs  with  the  groap  of  religious 
poems  beginning  on  p.  214. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  271 

THE  TRIVMPHS  OF  LOVE  AND  INNOCENCE 
A  TRAGECOMEDY 

AN  ADVERTISEMENT 

Having  seen  (out  of  the  love  of  novelty)  many  Plays  brought 
upon  the  stage,  wh*"^  have  been  as  indifferent  as  these  two  of 
mine,  and  not  being  able,  longer  then  my  own  life,  to  protect  either 
of  them,  from  the  same  fate,  of  being  expos'd,  censured,  and  con- 
demn'd,  I  prefix  these  few  lines,  which  will  accompany  them 
as  long  as  they  are  to  have  a  being,  to  assiu^  all  that  shall  peruse 
them,  that  a  more  terrible  injury  cannot  be  offer'd  me,  then  to 
occasion,  or  permitt  them  ever  to  be  represented.  I  have  both 
private,  as  well  as  declar'd  reasons  for  this,  and  did  I  not  hope  by 
my  entreaty,  to  be  secure  of  prevailing  in  this  particular,  I  wou'd 
assiu^  myself  of  itt,  by  a  total  suppression,  of  what  I  have  suffered 
to  be  coppy'd,  only  for  the  entertainment  of  some  particular  per- 
sons; but  since  they  are  to  passe  (if  they  live  till  hereafter)  only  throo' 
the  hands  of  Relations,  and  such  as  have  professt  some  esteem  for 
me,  I  will  not  disquiett  myself,  with  any  fears,  or  distrusts  of  the 
honour  or  generosity  of  them,  who  can  in  nothing  so  much  oblige 
me,  as  in  being  strict  (against  any  importimitys  whatsoever)  to  the 
observation  of  this  earnest  request  of  ...  .  Abdklia. 

THE  NAMES  AND  CARACTERS  OF  THE  PERSONS 

THE    MEN 

Aubuasorij  Great  Master  of  Rhodes. 

LauredaUy  General  of  Cyprus  for  the  reigning  queen  Catherine 

Comare,  and  Ambassadoin*  from  the  State  of  Venice. 
Blanforty  A  yong  French  nobleman,  nephew  to  Aubusson,  in 

love  with  the  true  Queen  of  Cyprus,  formerly  contracted  to 

Marina. 
RivaltOy        ) 

Villmariny  >  Knights  of  Rhodes,  and  factious  against  Aubusson. 
Linnian,       ) 

RicciOy  A  Cyprian  Lord,  Counselloiu*  to  the  exil'd  queen. 
CapricciOy  A  merry  drinking  Captain  of  the  Guards,  something 

exceptions. 
Monthaleon,  An  honest  knight  of  Rhodes,  friend  to  Aubusson,  and 

Blanfort. 


272  The  Poems  op  Anne 

THE   WOMEN 

Queen  of  Cypress,  Expell'd  and  come  to  Rhodes  for  refuge. 
Marina,  Contracted  to  and  forsaken  by  Blanfort,  now  disgtiis'd, 

and  under  the  name  of  Carino,  serves  as  page  to  Aubusson. 
Clarilla,  Favorite,  and  confident  to  the  Queen. 

Guards  and  Attendants  on  the  Great  Master,  and  on  the  Generall, 
and  Women  and  Attendants  on  the  Queen. 

The  General  Scene  is  the  Great  Masters  Pallace  in  the  Isle  of 
Rhodes. 

THE  FIRST  ACTT:    THE  FIRST  SCENE 

The  Queen^s  Apartment 

At  the  dravoing  up  of  the  Curtain,  a  sound  of  Hautbois,  Trum- 
petts,  and  other  naval  musick  is  heard  as  from  the  Sea 

Enter  Riccio  and  Clarilla. 

Ric.  Clarilla,  where's  the  Queen? 
Knows  she  the  news,  that  Lauredan  is  landing? 

Clar.  Who  is  alive  in  Rhodes,  and  does  not  know  itt? 
So  loud  his  trumpetts  eccho  round  the  Shoar, 
And  usher  in  the  pomp,  with  which  he  sails; 
The  sound,  to  all  that  love  the  Queen,  is  hatefuU, 
Since  to  his  arm  alone,  she  owes  her  mine, 
Who  fix'd  the  bold  Vsurper  on  her  throne, 
And  now  maintains  his  Widdowe  in  that  wrong, 
The  proud  Comara,  whom  he  serves  with  passion.  10 

Ric,  Nay !  more  Clarilla,  all  his  businesse  here 
Is  to  remove  our  Queen,  from  this  retreat. 
And  at  the  best,  confine  her  close  for  ever. 

Clar.  He  cant  be  cruel  sure  to  that  degree. 
Fame  gives  itt  out,  he  has  some  noble  thoughts. 
And  pitty  too  (as  I  have  been  inform'd) 
For  our  great  Mistresse,  in  her  change  of  fortune; 
Which  cannot,  sure,  consist  with  such  harsh  usage. 

Ric,  Compassion,  oh !  'tis  deaf,  when  intrest  moves. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  273 

Did  itt  not  plead,  d'yon  think,  with  all  itts  arts  20 

To  Agamemnon,  for  his  Daughter's  life? 

Did  itt  not  tell  him,  she  was  fair,  and  Yong, 

Gniltlesse,  as  Nymphs  that  hannt  the  fountains  side 

Far  from  th'  infected  air  of  Towns,  and  Courts? 

Did  not  soft  pitty,  whisper  to  his  soul 

That  'twas  himself,  that  he  must  wound  in  her, 

And  the  dear  mother's  part,  which  more  he  pris'd? 

Yet,  ouer  all  these  tender  boimds  he  passt 

And  sees  her  to  the  Temple  brought,  at  last. 

The  People  groan,  and  he  himself  appears  30 

Like  a  full  cloud,  just  breaking  into  tears. 

The  Priest  too  wept,  but  int'rest  had  decreed 

Int'rest  the  god  of  all,  that  she  shou'd  bleed; 

For  int'rest,  now  she's  on  the  altar  laid, 

And  but  a  pow'r  devine  cou'd  save  the  maid. 

Clar.  Qood  Riccio,  speak  no  more  such  moving  things; 
Our  present  ills,  have  made  my  heart  so  apt 
For  sad  impressions  — 
That  I  can  weep,  at  hearing  but  a  fable. 
And  tell  me  then,  if  pitty  cannot  do  itt,  40 

What  may  be  thought  on,  to  preserve  the  Queen? 

Ric.  We  sail,  indeed,  amid'st  a  world  of  dangers. 
Some  Ports  we  haue,  but  many  winds  against  us. 
Venice,that  bred  Comara  in  her  bosome, 
Wou'd  still  maintain  her,  in  the  height  she's  grown  to, 
And  'tis  from  them,  the  Genral's  now  commission'd 
To  make  the  attempt  I  told  you,  on  our  freedom. 
Bivalto's  Suttle,  and  the  Master's  foe. 
And  link'd  in  that,  with  Villmarin  and  Linian, 
Who  still  oppose  the  interests  of  our  Queen.  50 

These  shou'd  be  soothed  and  flatter'd  into  freindship; 
But  Blanfort's  love,  oh!  thats  our  Southern  gale. 
Which  if  improv'd,  we  shou'd  not  want  a  harbour. 


274  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

These  things  yon  may  insinnate  to  the  Qneen, 
Who  has  no  hopes,  bnt  in  the  help  of  freinds. 

Clar.  Oh!  name  not  freindship,  'tis  a  weak  supporter; 
And  in  this  base  and  most  degenerat  age, 
Fitt  only  to  erect  a  Somer  bower,  , 

And  bear  the  curling  top  of  some  light  vine ; 
But  if  a  torn,  and  tempest  beaten  oak,  60 

Falling,  should  lean  upon  itts  boasted  aid, 
Twou'd  faintly  shrink  from  the  stupendious  weight, 
And  leave  itt  to  embrace  the  humble  dust. 
Nor  can  she  flatter,  she,  who  is  the  Sun 
To  which  those  earthy  vapours  shou'd  ascend. 
Will  n'ere  decline  her  beams,  to  court  the  foggs. 
For  Blanfort's  love,  she  shuns  itt  with  such  care. 
That  yett,  't  has  ne're  been  told  her,  but  by  blushea 
But  'tis  the  Prince,  'tis  Aubusson,  the  just 
That  must  protect  us,  to  preserve  that  title.  70 

Ric.  So  may  itt  prove,  and  since  the  Queen  is  private 

I  will  return,  and  listen  to  the  news. 

Do  you  attend  her  still,  and  chear  her  spiritts, 

Perhaps,  our  fears  present  our  dangers  double, 

There  is  no  Hydra,  like  uncertain  trouble. 

[Exeunt  severally 

The  Scene  changes  to  a  Room  of  State, 

Florish, 

Enter  at  one  door  Aubusson,  Blanfort  Carino,  Monthaleon,  Capric- 
cio,  &c.,  at  the  other^  Lauredan,  Rivalto,  Villmarin,  Linnian, 
and  Lauredan's  traine. 

Aub.  Brave  Lauredan,  the  Isle  of  Rhodes  salutes  you. 
And  hauing  told  you,  in  her  warlike  voyce 
Of  drums  and  trumpetts,  and  the  Canon's  thunder 
That  you  are  welcome  to  her  crouded  shoares, 
Does  now  by  me,  her  father  and  her  freind, 
In  the  soft  sounds  of  peace,  again  confirm  itt ; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  275 

And  from  the  State  of  Venice,  what  you  bring, 
We  stand  prepar'd,  with  these  our  Knights  to  hear. 

Laur.  Then,  from  that  Citty,  thus  I'm  bid  to  say, 
To  Aubusson,  the  Prince  of  conq'uring  Rhodes,  10 

The  Christians  Bullwork,  and  the  Turks  confusion. 
That  much  she  seeks  the  freindship  of  that  State 
Whose  piety,  and  strictnesse  to  their  vows. 
Can  bring  down  Heav'n  to  blesse  their  brave  attempts, 
And  send  their  Fame,  to  be  recorded  there. 
All  love  she  offers,  and  all  kind  accesse. 
Succours  in  war,  and  trade  in  fertile  peace, 
With  what  shall  farther  be  by  you  required 
To  knitt  the  bands,  of  this  most  wish'd  for  league. 

Aub.  Proceed  my  lord,  to  tell  us  her  demands,  20 

For,  if  they  are  as  gentle,  as  these  proffers, 
Beleive  me,  Rhodes  and  Venice,  shall  be  twinns, 
So  much  her  wisdom ;  and  her  love  we  valine. 

Laur.  Oh!  they  are  gentler  far,  and  of  no  tryal. 
No  charge,  or  weighty  burthen  to  the  Isle, 
No  nice  requests,  that  ask  a  long  debate 
And  keep  the  sever' d  Councill  in  suspence; 
This  is  the  whole,  that  you  resign  to  me 
To  be  conducted,  where  they  have  decree'd 
The  person  of  the  refug'd  Cyprian  Queen.  30 

A  confused  murm'ring  of  approbation  arises  among  the  faction^ 
then  Rivalto  speaks. 

Riv.  It  is  most  fitt. 

Lin.  We  cannot  buy  it  cheaper. 

Vil.  He  is  no  friend  to  Rhodes,  that  likes  not  this. 

Aub.  My  lord,  you  call'd  her  refug'd  in  you  fr]  speech, 
Sure  you  did  ill  to  mix  that  sacred  word 
With  those,  that  urge  to  violate  the  trust. 
Indeed,  she  came  into  our  arms,  for  safety, 
And  stak'd  her  royal  life,  upon  our  truth. 


276  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Here  too,  sh^  has  slept  without  her  train  of  fears. 

Only  because  we  said  she  might  dismisse  them  40 

And  when  she  talked  of  seizing  and  confinement. 

We  bid  her  think  herself  as  free  as  air; 

And  shall  we  now,  to  that,  convert  our  words, 

Making  them  lighter  then  the  chaff  itt  plays  with 

Oh  no!  my  Lord,  she  is,  she  shall  be  free. 

Laur.  She  shall,  and  cursM  be  he  that  wou'd  opose  itt, 
She  shall  be  free,  on  me  repose  that  trust. 

Auh.  'Tis  lodg'd  in  us,  and  when  we  give  itt  up. 
Our  honour,  at  that  moment  we  resign. 
And  think  my  Lord,  what  we  have  done  for  honour,  50 

Who  when  th'  Imperial  Turk  came  proudly  on. 
Followed  by  numbers,  countlesse  as  the  stars, 
T^  exact  a  shamefull  tribute  worse  then  death. 
With  handfulls,  in  that  cause,  repulsed  the  Tyrant 
And  struck  him,  in  his  Tent,  with  such  dispair, 
As  made  his  Soul,  a  sacrafice  to  peace. 
That  long  had  trembl'd,  underneath  his  fury. 
Oh!  Lauredan,  lett  Venice  still  remember 
'Twas  honour,  made  us  stem  that  high  wrought  tide. 
And  force  an  ebb  on  that  prodigious  Sea.  60 

And  since  'tis  in  this  cause  as  much  engag'd, 
Tell  'em,  that  with  like  vigour  wee'U  maintain  it. 

Laur.  Mj  Lord  I've  done,  but  cou'd  me  thinks  have  wisht. 
That  ere  you'd  urg'd  so  fully  your  refusall. 
The  reasons  might  have  been  at  large  discuss' d. 
On  which  the  Senate  built  this  fair  request. 

[ToAub 

Vil.  The  reasons,  ought  to  have  been  heard,  my  Lord. 

Lin,  We're  all  concern' d,  and  tis  no  private  cause. 

Rivalt  'Tis  fitt,  that  Venice  who  bestows  that  Crown, 
Shou'd  in  her  pow'r,  haue  all  that  are  pretenders;  70 

We  are  not  to  decide  whose  right  itt  is. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  277 

Blanf.  Nor  are  you  call'd  Rivalto  to  that  task, 
What  oar  Great  Master  has  return^  in  answer, 
Will  please  the  good,  the  gen'rous,  and  the  just. 
And  I  so  fully  joyn  in  that  decree, 
That  this,  and  life  shall  leave  me  e're  'tis  changed. 

[Laying  his  hand  on  his  sword 

Laur.  So  yong!  so  handsome!  and  so  much  concem'd? 
It  strikes  me  deeper  then  my  last  dessign. 
For  sure  in  that,  ther's  something  more  then  honour. 

Aub.  Blanfort,  as  neerest  me  in  blood  and  duty,  [Aside,  80 
I  first  command  you  silence,  and  respect; 
Next,  know  Rivalto,  Yilmarin,  and  Linian, 
That  you  shall  thrive  no  better,  in  this  strife. 
Then  when  ye  poorly  from  the  Town  retir'd. 
And  drew  your  troops  from  oflf  the  Citty's  guard, 
Because  your  clamorous  councill  to  resign  itt 
Was  over  rul'd,  by  all  the  freinds  to  honour. 
That,  I  forgave,  but  will  not  still  be  cross'd. 
Nor  yeild  my  pow'r,  and  place,  to  bold  intruders, 
Capriccio,  see  your  guards  perform  their  duty,  90 

And  silence  all  that  dare  to  interrupt  us. 

[Linian  offers  to  speak,  Rivalto  speaks  to  him  aside 

Riv.  No  more.  His  not  a  time  to  urge  him  farther. 
Leave  itt  to  me,  to  fell  this  soaring  pride. 
When  things  are  ripen'd,  which  I  have  in  working. 

Aub.  Think  not  my  Lord,  because  you  hear  dissension 
That  His  my  arbitrary  will  prevails 
But  know,  that  ere  your  vessel  loos'd  from  Venice, 
Fame,  with  her  thousand  tongues,  had  told  your  purpose. 
And  Hwas  the  states,  th'  assembPd  states  decree. 
That  it  shou'd  instantly  be  thus  rejected  100 

Least,  that  a  secret,  and  obscure  debate 


278  The  Poems  of  Asse 

Might  make  itt  thooght,  we  were  dispoe'd  to  yeild. 

And  only  held  onr  honoor  at  a  price 

Above,  what  yonr  commission  was  to  offer. 

Therefore  mj  Lord,  here  end  this  vain  request. 

Whilst  thos  again,  I  take  jon  to  mj  arms. 

[Embracing  him. 

And  to  our  love,  repeat  yon  are  most  welcome. 

Laur.  To  charm  the  person,  whilst  yon  blast  his  hopes, 
Is  sure  my  Lord,  particular  to  yon. 

Tett  grant  me  this  att  least,  to  see  the  Queen.  110 

In  private  bnt  to  see,  and  to  discourse  her, 
My  last  demand,  I  fix  upon  this  point; 
Which  if  obtained,  shall  still  my  discontents. 
And  make  me  think  myself  not  unsuccesfulL 

Aub.  If  she  consents  my  lord  itt  shall  be  so. 

There  let  itt  rest. 

Whilst  Rhodes  shall  tryumph  that  within  her  walls 

She  lodges  such  a  Souldier  as  your  self. 

Lead  on  before,  and  lett  our  trumpetts  tell 

How  much  we  glory  in  our  warlike  guest  120 

[Exeunt  Aub.  with  Laur.  follou/d  by  all  but  Rivalto,  wfio  stays 
and  lays  fiold  on  Carino,  who  seems  to  endeavour  to  get  from 
him.] 

Riv.  Why,  strive  you  to  avoid  me  thus  Marina, 
Am  I  become  of  late,  so  dreadf uU  to  you  ? 

Car.  Oh!  good  Rivalto,  lett  the  voyce  be  low 
That  speaks  a  name,  which  I  must  own  with  blushes 
You  only  know,  I  am  not  what  I  seem, 
And  when  you  wrought  me  to  assume  this  shape. 
Upon  your  Order,  solemnly  you  swore, 
No're  to  reveal,  without  my  free  consent, 
That  itt  conceard  a  poor,  unhappy  woman. 

Riv.  Nor  have  I,  though  your  frequent  scorns  have  urg'd 
itt  130 


Countess  of  Winohilsba  279 

Beyond  the  patience  of  all  hearts,  but  mine. 
O!  yett  relent,  fair,  charming  Maid  relent, 
And  pleasure,  with  her  best  supporter,  wealth, 
Shall  still  be  handmaids,  to  your  matchlesse  beauty. 

Car.  Name  'em  no  more,  to  her  that's  lost  to  both, 
Wealth  I  abandoned,  when  I  left  my  father. 
And  fled  his  house,  a  vagabond  for  love. 
And  as  for  pleasure,  oh!  Rivalto,  know, 
Tis  so  confin'd,  with  all  its  sweet  attractions. 
To  the  dear  person,  of  my  faithlesse  Blanfort,  140 

That  since  he's  false,  tis  not  in  Fortune's  pow'r 
To  tempt  my  soul,  with  the  deluding  proffer. 

JBii;.  Do  all  your  joys,  depend  then  on  his  truth. 

Car.  Yes,  were  he  mine,  as  holy  vows  oblige  him, 
And  lay  unmindfull  of  the  fleeting  hours, 
Stretch'd  at  my  feet,  'till  Phoebus  left  the  skye. 
Breathing  out  sighs,  soft  as  the  southern  winds, 
And  printing  on  my  hands,  a  thousand  kisses. 
Then,  cou'd  I  tell  my  soul  in  full  delight, 
That  this  was  pleasure,  fitt  for  the  immortals.  150 

But  oh !  they're  past,  those  eager  joys  are  past. 
And  all  extreams,  to  their  own  mine  haste. 

Riv,  No  more!  Marina,  I  will  hear  no  more. 
By  all  the  stars,  that  crosse  my  hopes,  I  will  not. 
Why,  shou'd  you  speak  such  fond,  and  moving  things. 
And  not  for  me,  who  know  I  best  deserve  them? 
Weigh  but  my  services,  against  his  youth. 
And  when  the  beauty  of  his  form  persuades. 
Be  just,  and  sett  the  dangers  I  have  run 
To  bring  you  here,  from  all  your  pow'rfuU  freinds  160 

Against  that  gaudy  trifle  of  an  hour. 

Car,  Vrge  not  those  dangers,  which  you  fondly  sought 
To  gratify  your  own,  and  not  my  passion. 
Oh!  had  I  known  in  Rome,  your  true  dessign, 


280  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Ne'ere  had  I  listen'd  to  those  fair  pretences. 

Which  drew  me  thence,  to  misery,  and  Rhodes. 

To  see  my  Lord,  doat  on  another  face. 

Whilst  not  one  feature  here,  he  doth  suspect 

To  be  the  same  he  lov'd  in  poor  Marina. 

Oh  why  Rivalto,  why,  would  you  deceive  me,  170 

Why  wou'd  you  work  all  this,  why  wou'd  you  love? 

-Kit?.  Why,  wou'd  you  lett  me  know  that  you  cou'd  love 
And  talk,  above  the  rate  of  other  women  ? 
Why  wou'd  you  rob  me  of  a  safe  belief 
(The  only  guard  against  enticing  beauty,) 
That  all  your  sex,  were  foolish,  vain,  inconstant, 
Form'd  of  a  rib,  beneath  the  heart  of  man. 
The  seat  of  noble,  and  exalted  passions. 
And  only  made  pertakers  of  his  spleen. 
By  which  they  laugh,  and  weep,  and  love,  and  hate,         180 
And  steer  the  course  of  their  uncertain  souls. 
Why  did  you  let  me  see,  to  my  undoing. 
You  was  not  thus,  and  charm  me  from  my  refuge  ? 

Car.  Think  on  your  order  and  your  vow  Rivalto, 
Oh!  think  of  that,  and  leave  to  urge  me  more. 
For  what,  you  shou'd  not  take,  if  itt  were  granted 

Riv.  When  itt  was  made,  war  was  my  soverain  passion. 
And  Faith,  I  swore,  to  that  my  native  cheif , 
But  love  prevailing  ore  my  alter'd  heart. 
Tells  me  to  love,  I  only  owe  obedience ;  190 

Therfore  to  you,  the  Pow'r  that  sways  my  soul. 
Upon  my  knees,  again  I  will  repeat  them. 
And  on  this  altar,  white  as  Parian  marble, 
Seal  and  confirm,  th'  irrevocable  oath. 

[Offers  to  take  her  hand. 

Car.     Oh !  hear  me  first,  what  I  intend  to  swear, 

[Shee  kneels, 
Tis  now  my  turn,  you've  done  itt  once  already. 

By  all  the  hearts,  that  bleed  without  return. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  281 

By  all  the  Virgins,  that  in  secret  mourn, 

By  all  the  tender  and  aluring  things, 

Writt  by  soft  pens,  drawn  from  yong  Cupids  wings,    200 

By  love  himself,  and  by  his  mothers  smiles. 

By  ev'ry  thing,  that  flatters  and  beguiles 

I  swear  to  man,  I  n'ere  will  listen  more  — 

[She  pauses  and  sighs. 

Unlesse  to  him,  who  broak  all  vows  before. 

Riv.  Ten  thousand  curses,  tear  him  from  the  earth, 
And  furies  (such  as  prey  upon  my  soul) 
Be  still  th'  attendants  of  his  anxious  hours. 
And  as  for  you,  Marina  — 
Cruel,  ungratefull,  obstinate  Marina, 

Enow,  that  I  will  not  whine,  and  be  despised,  210 

Nor  dye  dispairing,  and  yett  blesse  the  cause. 

No,  from  this  hour,  itt  is  resolv'd,  your  charms 

Shall  be  embraced,  or  crushed  between  these  arms. 

[She  goes  <mt  att  one  door,  he  going  meets  at  the  other  door,  Vil- 
marin  and  Linnian,  and  returns  with  them,] 

Vil.  You're  tame  Rivalto,  and  have  made  us  so; 
Restrained  the  genVous  heat,  we  should  have  shewn, 
Before  the  Great,  and  strict  observing  General, 
Who  may  report  itt,  that  he  saw  us  baffled. 
Rated  like  boys,  and  slandered  with  reproach 
Of  base  dessigns,  to  haue  betray'd  our  Country. 

Riv.  It  was  no  slander  that,  we  wou^d  have  done  itt  220 
And  tho  his  pow'r  o'recame,  and  made  us  yeild, 
Yett,  were  itt  to  be  try'd  again  I'de  tempt  itt: 
And  to  the  Turk,  the  Tartar,  or  the  Fiend 
Give  up  my  Country,  Kinsmen,  Laws,  Religion, 
Rather  then  see  them  bow  beneath  the  sway 
Of  this  adoar'd,  insulting  Aubusson. 

Lin,  Why  did  you  stop  me  then,  when  I  was  fir'd, 


282  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

And  would  have  urg'd  it,  loudly  to  the  croud, 
That  his  proceedings  were  tyrannical 

Riv.  Yes,  to  have  bred  their  sport  —  230 

When  Captain  puff,  had  stopt  your  tongue. 
And  haled  ye  to  confinement. 
No,  no,  revenge  shall  take  a  surer  course. 
And  when  my  thunder  darts,  with  full  comission, 
It  shall  not  leave,  to  this  aspiring  Cedar, 
One  lofty  branch,  to  kisse  the  passe  [sic]  clouds, 
Or  tell  the  world  that  once  itt  rul'd  the  grove. 

Vil.  If  'tis  his  life  you  mean,  when  thus  you  threaten, 
Th'  attempting  that,  perhaps  may  cost  our  own. 

Riv.  It  might  indeed. —  240 

Think  therefore,  how  t'would  please  ye,  to  destroy 
What  more  then  life,  he  euer  has  esteem'd. 
And  yett  be  safe,  to  see,  and  to  rejoyce  in  't 

Lin.  How  itt  wou'd  please,  is  sure,  not  to  be  told; 
But  he's  so  fenc'd  about  with  fame,  and  freinds. 
With  fortune,  and  the  fawning  of  the  world. 
That,  to  my  eye,  no  part  appears  unguarded, 
Where  we  may  fix  a  wound  that  wou'd  be  fatal. 

Riv,  To  shew  you  that,  must  be  my  part,  my  freinds, 
But  this  is  not  a  time,  or  place  for  secrets.  250 

Only  thus  much,  think  how  'twill  feed  revenge, 
To  see  this  Saint,  this  praying  fighting  Saint, 
This  child  of  Fame,  this  cloud  of  holy  Incence, 
Expos'd  a  profligate,  and  secret  sinner. 
And  like  an  orespent  taper,  stink,  and  vanish. 

im.  Oh!  'twill  be  rare,  but  tell  me,  is  he  thus? 
For  though  I  wish  itt,  I  can  scarce  beleive  itt. 

Riv,  You  shall  beleive,  and  both  be  actors  in  itt, 
For  shou'd  I  undertake  the  task  alone, 

It  might  appeare,  season' d  with  too  much  malice,  260 

For,  since  he  from  the  Treasury,  thrust  me  out, 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  288 

With  publick  scandal  of  abuses  there, 
The  world's  too  well  acquainted  how  I  hate  him; 
Anon  we^ll  meet,  at  his,  or  at  your  lodgings, 
And  all  shall  be  reveal' d,  till  when,  farewell. 
Lin.  I  long  to  hear  itt,  till  that  time  we'll  part. 
Vil.  The  lesse  we're  seen  together,  'tis  the  better. 

[EoceurU. 
Enter  Blanfort  and  Monthaleon. 

Blan,  'Tis  true,  the  very  mention  of  itt,  shook  me, 
And  call'd  up  all  the  anger  of  my  soul. 
Oh!  think  how  Rhodes  wou'd  look  if  she  were  absent,     270 
How  dull,  how  solitary,  'twoud  appear, 
Did  not  her  smiles,  that  tryumph  o're  her  sorrows, 
Chear,  and  enliven,  all  the  glad  beholders. 

Month.  My  Lord,  you  speak  as  if  we  all  were  lovers, 
To  you  indeed,  I  grant  it  may  be  so. 

Blan.  To  me  indeed,  I  do  confesse  Monthaleon 
The  Sun  n'ere  rises,  but  with  new  delight 
I  think  'twill  bring  again,  some  happy  hour 
When  I  may  gaze  upon  a  brighter  beauty. 
And  folded  in,  by  night's  returning  shades,  280 

I  blesse  'em  not,  for  silence,  or  for  rest. 
But  for  the  softer  slumbers,  that  present 
The  lovely  Queen,  in  all  her  charms  of  wonder. 

Month.  As  honour'd  with  the  title  of  you[r]  freind, 
I  shou'd  be  greiv'd  to  hear  this  mighty  passion. 
Did  I  not  hope,  your  most  indulgent  kinsman 
Wou'd  both  allow,  and  urge  itt  with  the  Queen; 
Who,  may  for  shelter,  from  the  present  storm. 
Be  glad  to  find  a  haven  in  your  arms. 
And  so,  be  more  secure,  of  our  protection.  290 

Blan.  The  proposition,  warms  me  into  raptures, 
But  oh!  I  wou'd  not  owe  itt  to  her  fears. 
My  passion  is  too  nice  (tho'  ne'r  so  famist) 


284  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

To  feed  on  ought,  but  what's  prepared  by  love; 

Therefore,  I'll  tell  her  first,  how  I  adore  her, 

And  hope  to  be  more  blest  in  my  endeavours, 

To  find  a  time,  when  I  may  own  my  flame. 

Then  heitherto,  my  fortune  has  affoarded. 

Since  first  I  languish't  in  this  soft  desire ; 

Till  that  is  done,  forbear  to  urge  the  Master.  300 

Month.  May  you  succeed,  and  when  you  shall  comand 
me, 
ni  do  my  part,  pray  loose  no  time  my  lord. 

Blan.  Oh!  fear  me  not,  this  moment  Til  about  itt. 

To  urge  me  on  to  haste,  as  vain  wou'd  prove. 

As  to  give  speed  to  time,  or  wings  to  love. 

[EaoeutU. 
Enter  Siccio  alone. 

Rice.  To  see  and  to  discourse  with  her  in  private 
That's  his  request,  and  Aubusson  allows  itt 
Perhaps,  the  Queen  will  give  itt  her  permission. 
If  not  deterr'd  by  my  severer  council. 

Which  shall  be  urg'd  most  strongly,  to  prevent  itt,  310 

Nor,  will  I  stick  to  aggravate  his  speech. 
And  put  such  harshnesse  on  his  late  demands 
As  shall  create  a  new  displeasure  for  him. 
His  hate  to  me,  I  hear  he  has  profess'd. 
For  that,  I  won  my  Queen,  to  fly  from  Cyprus, 
And  not  to  trust  the  false  and  flatt'ring  speeches, 
With  which,  he  subtly  strove  to  have  detain'd  her 
Wherefore,  I  must  be  ware  of  his  revenge, 
And  not  allow,  (tho'  twou'd  restore  her  Crown) 
That  he  shou'd  'ere  conferr  with  her,  in  private,  320 

Least  something  might  be  urg'd,  to  work  my  mine. 
For  yet  the  World  has  n'ere  that  Statesman  known, 
Who  for  his  Princes  interest,  wav'd  his  own.  [Exit. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  285 

ACT  II    SCENE  I 

A  Room  of  State 

Enter  the  Queen,  talking  with  Riodo 

Queen.  Is  he  so  earnest  then,  to  urge  my  fetters, 
And  seems  his  barb'rous  tryumph  nncompleat, 
Unlesse,  a  Princesse  grace  itt,  with  her  presence. 
The  meanest  wretch,  to  liberty  is  bom, 
And  'tis  a  tyrant's  work,  to  force  'em  from  it 
The  forest  claims  itt,  for  her  savage  traine; 
And  chearfnll  birds,  that  feel  itt  in  the  air. 
Sing  to  that  happy  state,  their  softest  carolls. 
And,  wou'd  he  rob  me,  of  this  comon  blessing? 
Oh!  'tis  most  cmel,  most  inhuman  Riccio,  10 

Did  none  reply,  and  tell  him  'twas  inhuman? 
Or  was  he  sooth'd  with  flatt'ry  of  the  croud. 
Who  still  believe,  the  last  heard  tale,  is  best? 

Rice.  It  prov'd  so  here  indeed,  the  faction  murmur'd. 
And  call'd  his  bold  request,  a  just  demand; 
Cheifly,  Rivalto  seconded  his  speech. 
Till  yong  Lord  Blanfort,  like  another  Perseus 
In  the  fair  cause  of  Innocence  opresst, 
Rush'd  on  the  Monster,  with  such  gen'rous  fury, 
As  struck  him  into  silent  rage,  and  blushes,  20 

At  which  the  haughty  Gten'ral,  sternly  frown'd. 
And  utter'd  something,  lost  to  me  by  distance. 

Queen.  I  much  disire  to  know,  by  what  comission, 
He  undertakes,  to  be  my  publick  Champion? 
On  his  great  kinsman,  I  repose  my  fortunes. 
Nor  will  a  weaker  Atlas,  'ere  support  'em. 
But  Riccio,  go,  and  give  the  Prince  of  Rhodes, 
That  answer  to  his  message,  I  deliver'd. 
For  by  your  reasons,  urg'd  to  me  within, 
I  am  determin'd  not  to  see  the  General.  30 


286  Thb  Poems  of  Anne 

Rice.  Your  ¥rise  comands,  FU  instantly  obey, 
And  soon  return,  to  lett  you  know  th'  event. 

Queen.  Do  so,  I  with  impatience,  shall  expect  itt. 

[EqcU  Rice. 
Will  loue  be  caught,  with  gazing  but  an  hour. 
If  so,  itt  is  not  safe  to  look  abroad. 
And  women's  eyes,  by  flatt'rers  calFd  so  dreadfuU, 
Will  only  prove  of  danger  to  themselves? 
I  ne'er  beheld  this  Lauredan,  but  once. 
And  'twas  that  fatal  day,  which  crush'd  my  fortunes, 
Yett,  is  his  form,  still  present  to  my  sight,  40 

And  such  methinks,  as  I  cou'd  wish  the  mans 
Whom  fate  wou'd  chuse,  to  give  me  back  my  Crown. 
And  that  he's  brave,  I  know,  by  having  lost  itt. 
Nor  did  he  seem  to  me  so  rudely  feirce. 
So  full  of  terrour,  as  they  now  describe  him ; 
His  speech  was  gentle  and  his  looks  were  sad, 
My  sighs  he  eccho'd,  and  to  stop  my  tears, 
Told  me,  if  that  I  left  not  yett  the  shore, 
He  wou'd  retreive  the  fortune  of  the  day, 
And  give  me  back  my  Kingdom  for  a  smile ;  50 

But  Riccio  sais,  he  loves  my  Throne's  possessour, 
And  now  to  fix  her,  urges  my  confinement, 
Else,  all  his  wrongs,  I  cou'd  methinks  forgive, 
That  hours  soft  treatment,  pleads  so  strongly  for  him. 

[A8  slie  walks  upon  the  stagey  enter  Blanfort,  and  talks  to  himself ^ 
whilest  her  face  is  from  hivii] 

Blan.  I've  sent  Capriccio,  to  engage  her  women, 
Carino  too,  that  us'd  to  interrupt  me 
As  certainly  as  if  he  had  design' d  itt, 
Is  playing  out  a  game,  which  I  begun, 
And  cannot  rob  me  of  this  happy  moment. 

Queen.  He  has  surpris'd  me,  which  I  still  avoided,  60 

[^Aside  seeing  him. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  287 

And  once  Clarilla,  has  forgot  my  orders, 
I  must  not  lett  him  manage  the  discourse. 

If  I  may  guesse,  my  Lord,  what  brings  you  here; 
To  seek  me  out,  before  the  publick  hour, 
Tis  to  describe  some  splendid  entertainment, 
Some  Mask  designed,  or  musick,  to  devert 
The  stranger,  lately  landed  on  your  shoars. 

Blan.  Had  you  but  guest  more  right,  or  durst  I  speak  itt. 
Then,  Madam,  wou^d  the  cause  that  brings  me  here. 
Appear  as  much  above  those  comon  trifles,  70 

As,  you  excell  all  others,  in  perfection. 

Queen.  It  'tis  my  Lord  so  dang'rous  to  be  told. 
Still  to  conceal  itt,  is  the  way  to  safety. 

Blan.  Oh!  rather  say  to  death,  and  to  dispair; 
So  long,  allready,  have  I  trod  the  path, 
The  solitary  path  of  silent  wishes, 
That  rather  than  I  still  will  wander  there, 
I'll  boldly  leap  the  precipice  before  me, 
And  perish  in  attempting  to  be  free. 

See !  Madam,  at  your  feet,  to  rise  no  more,      [He  kneels.    80 
If  you  deny  his  suit,  the  wretched'st  slave 
That  ere  submitted  to  the  pow'r  of 

[Seeing  Carino  enter  the  Queen  interrupts  Blan. 

Queen.  My  Lord  you  are  observ'd,  but  if  to  me. 
You've  anything  of  moment  to  impart, 
Riccio,  my  wise,  and  faithfull  Councellour, 
Will  best  receive,  and  bring  itt  to  my  knowledge. 
His  coming,  just  to  stop  the  word,  I  fear'd, 

[Aside  as  she  uxilks  from  him. 
Was  as  I  cou'd  have  wish'd  itt. 

Blan.  Who  sins  in  love  in  love  shall  still  be  curs'd, 

[Aside. 


288  The  Poems  of  Annb 

Else,  sure  this  boy,  cou'd  n'er  have  crosst  me  now.  90 

How  is  itt,  thou  hast  left  the  play,  Carino,  [To  Car. 

I  trusted  thee  to  manage,  in  my  absence. 

Car.  Indeed,  my  Lord,  since  I  have  been  in  Rhodes, 
I^m  seized  sometimes,  with  such  a  sudden  passion, 
Such  quick  disordered  beatings  at  my  heart. 
As  nothing  but  the  air  and  motion  cures. 
Forgive  me,  that  when  now  I  felt  itt  coming 
I  left  with  Linnian,  what  you  gave  to  me. 
And  know,  he  better  will  perform  the  task. 

Blan.  I  do  forgive  thee,  but  I  must  be  plain,  100 

And  tell  thee,  I  wou^d  entertain  the  Queen 
Without  a  witnesse,  therefore  now  retire. 
Before  she  turns,  and  may  perhaps  detain  thee. 

Car.  My  Lord,  I'll  passe  that  way,  and  find  her  women. 
[Pointing  to  y*  door  where  the  Queen  stands. 

Blan.  Thou't  be  observ'd. 

Car.  I'll  steal  so  gently  by, 
I  must  retire,  since  he  so  plainly  bids  itt,  [Asidf. 

But  I've  one  strattagem.  Love  make  it  prosper. 

[Seems  to  steal  by  y*  Queen,  pulling  a  handerchief  out  of  her 
pockett,  a  paper  falls  out  in  sight  of  the  Queen. 

Queen.  What  paper's  this,  comes  itt  from  you,  Carino  ? 
Blan.  The  trifler  has  undone  my  dear  dessign.  110 

[Aside. 
And  robb'd  me,  of  this  long  sought  hour  of  blisse. 
Car.  Forgive  me,  Madam,  that  my  carelesse  action 

[Taking  up  the  paper. 
Has  made  it  fall,  so  neer  your  royal  feet 

Queen.     Is't  not  a  song,  confesse  the  truth  Carino, 
Come  I  will  see  itt,  or  be  much  displeas'd 
Who  waits?  call  in  Phelinda,  she  shall  sing  itt. 

[Enter  Phelinda.] 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  289 

THE   SONG 

All  your  sighs,  to  air  are  turning, 

All  your  vows,  will  soon  be  lost, 
Quench'd  those  flames,  which  ne're  left  burning, 

'Till  they  had  my  freedom  cost  120 

Yett,  remember  whilst  denying. 

How  you  strove  to  change  my  mind, 

Men  are  lost,  but  by  complying, 
Women  lou'd  but  'till  they're  kind. 

Queen.  Indeed  'tis  well,  extreamly  well  Carino. 
But  this  complaint,  shou'd  not  be  made  by  you. 

Enter  Riccio 

Blan.  More  interruption,  then  'tis  vain  to  hope,  [Aside, 
And  opertunity's  as  coy  as  beauty. 

Queen.  With  the  great  Master  Riccio  have  you  been? 

Blan.  I  find  he  comes  with  buisnesse,  to  the  Queen  130 
And  must  retire 

But  oh  I  'tis  death  to  goe, 
And  not  the  fortune  of  my  passion  knowe. 

[Exit,  followed  by  Carino. 

Rice.  Great  Aubusson,  entreats  your  Royal  presence. 
Who  waits  with  some  selected  from  the  Council, 
For  conference  with  you,  on  this  great  occasion. 
But  Madam,  for  the  reasons  lately  urg'd 
I  wou'd  advise,  that  still  you  shou'd  resolve 
To  stand  unmov'd,  in  what  I  now  have  told  you. 

Queen.  Fear  not  my  Lord,  that  I  will  see  the  Generall, 

[Going  out 
Who  pleads  for  nothing,  but  my  certain  mine.  140 

[Exeunt. 


290  The  Poems  of  Akne 

The  Scene  changes  to  an  auhtard  roam  in  the  Queen's  apartment^ 
Blanf ort  passing  through  it  with  Garino 

Blan.  Then  knowst  I  loye,  and  cannot  chide  thee  long; 
But  prithee,  be  more  carefoll  for  the  fntnre. 
Not  to  prevent,  my  conference  with  the  Qneen, 
Since  I  have  told  thee,  that  my  life  depends  on  't 

As  they  are  going  off  Capriocio  peeps  out  att  the  contrary  dooTy 
and  in  a  low  tx>yce  calls  to  Blanfort. 

Cap.  My  Lord,  my  Lord,  may  I  not  be  releasH, 
I've  done  an  hour's  hard  doty  here,  to  serve  you. 
Another  such,  wou'd  wear  me  to  a  shaddow? 

Blan.  Well,  take  thy  liberty,  itt  is  enough. 

[Oapriodo  enters. 
Prythee,  what  is't  has  made  thee  so  impatient. 
Their  conversation,  cou'd  not  tire  thee,  sure.  10 

Cap.  Their  prating  did,  I  know  not  what  you  call  itt. 

Blan.  Well,  their  discourse,  how  did  they  entertain  thee? 

Cap.  Why,  alltogether,  and  ev'ry  one,   as  much  as  she 
cou'd. 
Sing  us  a  song,  good  Captain,  says  one. 

[Imitating  their  voyces. 
No,  no,  says  another,  tell  us  a  story  of  the  Turks ; 
Oh !  but  was  you  never  in  love,  says  a  third. 
Yes,  yes,  says  I,  most  inhumanely, 

And  then  I  looked  leeringly  thus,  upon  my  Lady  Clarilla, 
That  she  might  think  itt  was  with  her. 

But  was  you  never  drunk,  says  another,  20 

A  notable  pert  wench,  that. 
And  came  home  to  me,  i'  faith ; 
But  says  I,  what  in  my  face  betrays  itt  ? 
Nay,  nothing  says  she, 

For  a  red  nose,  may  be  caught  with  standing 
Too  long  in  the  sun,  and  at  that. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  291 

They  all  B©tt  up  a  laugh,  tee,  hee,  ha,  ha,  a, 

Which  lasted  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour, 

Without  any  interruption ;  but  I  was  glad  of  that. 

For  itt  gave  me  time  to  study  an  answer.  30 

Car.  And  'twas  a  good  one,  sure,  lett's  hear  itt  Captain? 

Cap.  Why,  I  told  em,  so  many  tongues 
Was  too  much  for  one  pair  of  ears, 
And  that,  if  itt  was  not  for  somebody's  sake. 
More  then  their  own,  they  shou'd  have  talk'd 
To  themselves  for  me. 

And  that  a  man  was  a  man,  and  a  nose  was  a  nose, 
Lett  it  look  of  what  colour  it  wou'd. 

BlatL  'Twas  smart  indeed. 
But  you  did  ill,  to  let  them  anger  you,  40 

Twas  that,  which  bred  their  mirth. 
No  more  of  this,  for  our  great  Master  comes. 

Enter  as  from  Council  with  the  Queen,  Aubusson,  Monthaleon, 
Vilmarin,  Linian,  &c. 

Aub.  Not,  that  I  fear  a  war  with  the  Venetians, 
Or  to  have  bought  their  freindship,  with  dishonour, 
Did  I  endeavour  to  persuade  the  Queen 
To  some  complyance  with  the  Qen'ralls  wishes; 
But  in  that  Prince,  there  lives  a  soul  so  noble. 
So  great,  so  gen'rous,  and  so  truly  valiant. 
That  much  it  greives  me,  he  shou'd  part  from  Rhodes 
(Which  boasts  herself  the  nurse  of  all  these  vertues)  50 

With  such  a  hard  repulse  as  here  he  meets. 

Month.  Indeed,   my   lord,    I   think   t'    have   given   him 
audience. 
Had  been  an  act  of  prudence,  in  the  Queen, 
Nor  were  the  reasons  Riccio  urg'd  against  itt. 
Of  weight  enough,  to  give  him  satisfaction, 
And  'tis  most  sure,  we've  drawn  a  war  upon  us. 


292  The  Poems  of  Anns 

Blan,  Why,  let  itt  come,  we  have  no  other  bnisnesse, 
Tis  the  foundation  of  our  sacred  order. 
And  though  Hwas  cheifly  meant  against  the  Turks, 
Yett  he  that  asks  us,  what  we  should  not  grant,  60 

By  that,  becomes  as  much  our  Country's  foe. 
The  war,  the  war,  I'm  for  the  war,  and  scorn  the  proposition. 

Aub.  Carino  says  not  so,  the  mention  of  itt 
Has  chang'd  the  colour,  from  his  youthfull  cheeks. 

Car.  I  hope  I  should  not  shun  itt,  out  of  fear. 

Aub.  What  then  Carino,  care  to  keep  thy  beauty? 

[Laying  his  hand  on  her  head  and  stroaking  her  face. 
Thou  art  indeed,  too  handsome  for  the  field. 
And  'twas  such  features,  cross'd  great  Pompey's  fortune, 
Loosing  him  at  Pharsalia,  half  the  world. 
Which  till  that  time,  he  held  in  spite  of  CsBsar.  70 

Vil.  So,  so,  soft  and  gentle,  a  lovely  woman  truly, 

[Aside  to  Lin. 
What  fools  were  we,  not  to  perceive  it  sooner. 

Blanf.  Was  then  my  lord,  that  battle  lost  by  beauty 

Aub.  O!  yes  itt  was. 
For  Juluis,  marking  how  their  troops  came  on, 
(Repelling  with  their  beams,  the  sun's  bright  lustre, 
A  golden  army,  and  a  feather'd  war. 
Where  ev'ry  youth,  to  his  complexion,  match'd 
Colours,  that  best  adorn'd  and  set  it  off) 
Call'd  to  his  Vetterans,  deform'd  with  scarrs,  80 

And  bid  'em  mark  those  faces,  like  their  own; 
The  stern  command,  as  roughly  was  obey'd ; 
And  now,  assaulted  in  that  seat  of  charms. 
Sooner  they  chose,  to  show  the  foe  their  backs. 
Then  not  before  their  Mistresse  [s],  appear 
With  those  sweet  looks,  that  drew  their  parting  tears. 
But  we  loose  time, 
Follow  me  Blanfort,  and  Monthaleon  too, 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  293 

That  we  may  think,  what  terms  will  best  become, 

And  soften,  what  the  Gen  Vail  must  be  told.  90 

Blan.  Whereshalllmeet  with  thee  again,  Carino?  [Aside. 

Car.  m  waite  you  in  the  Grove,  that  fronts  the  Pallaoe, 
A  Lute,  and  voyce,  shall  tell  the  place  directly. 

Exeunt  Aub:  Month:  Blan:  Car. 

Lin.  Lett's  seek  Rivalto, 
Since  what  we've  mark'd  our  selves, 
I  long  for  more  discourse,  upon  the  subject  [Exeunt. 

Enter  Rivalto 

Riv.  They're  now  engag'd,  both  in  my  dark  contrivance; 
What  I  have  next  to  doe; 
Will  be  to  fleece  'em  of  the  wealth  I  want: 
And  then  lett  Fortune,  as  they're  fools,  befreind  'em.       100 
The  rest  of  my  dessigns,  come  bravely  on. 
Already,  has  the  General  been  treated 
Just  as  I  meant  he  shou'd,  when  by  forg'd  letters 
I  wrought  on  Riccio,  to  oppose  his  purpose, 
Which,  may,  provoke  the  State,  he  stands  concem'd  for 
And  breed  new  troubles,  to  our  haughty  Master. 
For  Blanf ort  too,  something  I  must  contrive, 
Which  may,  without  my  hand,  cut  off  a  Rival 
And  when  I  have  expos'd  Marina's  fame, 
Making  that  use  on't,  my  revenge  exacts,  110 

I'll  take  her,  humbl'd  by  the  world's  contempt. 
And  flying  to  some  far,  some  sweet  retreat, 
Shake  off  these  Vows,  that  manacle  my  Soul, 
And  taste  the  joys,  of  liberty,  and  Love. 

Tis  luxury,  not  honour,  I  desire. 

The  real  warmth,  and  not  the  painted  fire ; 

To  all  my  senses,  their  full  pleasures  give 

I  care  not  how  reproach'd  or  scom'd  I  live. 


294  The  Poems  of  Anne 

[Enter  to  him  a  Gentlemany  with  a  letter^ 

Oent  Receive  this,  Sir,  sent  to  you  from  the  General, 
Who  with  itt,  bids  me  tell  you,  on  his  honour,  120 

Noe  harm  shall  reach  you,  if  itt  meets  complyance. 
Since  all  his  ends  are  fair,  as  time  shall  prove  them. 
And  that  he  chose  this  way,  to  shun  suspition. 
Which  might  have  risen  from  a  private  conference. 

Riv.  I'm  proud,  in  anything  to  be  commanded 
By  that  great  man,  whom  here  we  treat  so  slightly,     . 
Oh!  we  are  bravely  govem'd,  but  no  more. 

Nay,  then,  if  fates  as  \sic\  work,  as  fast  as  I     [Beada  aside. 

It  must  go  well. 
Sir,  tell  the  Gten'ral,  what  he  here  desires  130 

Falls  in  the  compasse  of  my  pow'r  and  will. 
And,  when  the  proper  hour  of  night,  arrives, 
I'll  wait  upon  him  and  secure  his  purpose 
This  and  all  honour  to  him.  [Exeunt. 

[The  scene  changes  to  a  Qrove^  Carino  aUme.l 

Car.  I  am  resolv'd,  at  last,  to  tempt  my  fortune, 
And  by  some  tender  policy,  renew 
The  dear  remembrance  of  his  once  fond  passion ; 
And  if  one  spark  of  all  that  fire  remains, 

I'll  own  myself,  and  try  to  urge  itt  higher. 

Or  else  in  silence,  and  diopair,  expire. 

[Enter  one  unth  a  Lute. 
Oh!  here's  the  tuneful!  guide,  I  said,  shou'd  lead  him, 
Tis  well  you're  come,  pray  sing  the  song  I  sent  you, 
And,  lett  your  musick  soften,  what's  too  harsh. 

A    SONG 

Love,  give  thy  traine  of  slaves  away,  10 

To  those  whose  Pleasure  is  their  pride. 

To  me,  a  gentle  sigh  convey, 

Unheard  by  all  the  world  beside. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  295 

A  soft  and  secret  falling  tear, 

A  tender  thought  but  half  expresst, 

Whilst  am'rous  looks,  allay'd  with  fear, 
And  glowing  bliishes,  speak  the  rest 

Oh!  still  to  me,  addresse  such  fires, 
As  were  beneath  the  Mirtles  known, 

E're  men  had  leam'd  to  feign  desires,  20 

Or  Women,  proud,  or  false,  were  grown. 

For  since  to  Courts,  and  Cittys  come, 
Wealth,  thy  declining  pow'r  invades. 

And  Vanity  usurps  thy  room, 

Unknown  to  Innocence  and  shadea 

Car.     See,  itt  has  brought  him  [Aside, 

Now  you  may  retire.  [Exit  musician. 

Enter  Blanfort 

Blan.  I  come,  Carino,  drawn  by  thy  sweet  notes. 
Which  through  the  grove,  take  their  harmonious  way, 
Whilst  hov'ring  Cupids  hang  upon  the  air,  30 

And  catch  the  feathered  sounds,  to  wing  their  arrows. 
But  tell  me.  Youth,  why  doest  thou  seek  retirement? 
The  dark,  and  gloomy  comers  of  the  world, 
Were  only  made,  for  sad,  and  sighing  lovers. 
Of  these,  thou  art  not  one,  I  hope  thou  art  not. 
For  in  that  name,  all  misery's  comprised.  [He  sighs. 

Car.  Alas!  my  lord,  I  greive  to  hear  you  sigh. 
For  one,  that  does  the  precious  breath  dispise. 
And  thinks  her  shrine,  too  glorious  for  such  incense. 
But,  did  you  never  Love,  my  Lord,  till  now,  40 

Nor  taste  the  pleasing  part,  of  that  sweet  passion? 
Methinks,  this  place  to  confidence  invites. 
And  I  cou'd  here  unfold  my  secrett  thoughts, 
Were  but  your  bosome,  willing  to  receive  them. 


296  The  Poems  of  Asse 

AnH  I  might  hope  a  salable  retnm; 
Shall  I  begin  m  j  lord,  or  ask  joor  pardon 
For  haying  thns  presumed,  to  seek  an  honour. 
Which  Toa  maj  think  me  too  unworthy  fsL 

Blan.  Xo,  I  dare  tmst  thee. 
And  if  thj  tale  be  lore,  mine  shall  be  soe;  50 

Do  thon  begin,  and  then  I  will  unfold 
Who  won  my  heart,  before  I  saw  the  Queen; 
Here  we'll  Ije  down,  and  on  this  bank  of  flowers 
Discourse  of  loye,  and  all  itt^s  pleasing  powers. 

[They  sett  down  leaning  agaynst  y^  hank. 

Car.  Keep  off  intruders.  Fortune,  for  this  moment. 
And  all  mj  life,  shall  be  at  th j  dispose.  [Aside. 

Blan.  Why  doest  thou  pause,  if  loye   'ere  toutchM  thy 
breast. 
Begin,  and  tell  the  time. 
With  ey^ry  circumstance,  that  bred  thy  paasicmf 

Car.  The  time,  my  lord,  when  I  began  to  love,  60 

And  yielded,  to  this  Tyrant  of  my  peace. 
Was  that,  which  brought  your  last  deceased  Master 
With  all  his  traine,  of  warlike  knights  to  Rome, 
To  clear  himself,  before  the  holy  chair 
Of  foul  aspersions,  cast  upon  his  honour; 
Sure  you  was  there  my  Lord ;  I  think  you  was. 
Do  you  remember  nothing  of  that  time? 

Blan.  O!  yes  I  doe,  and  if  that  was  the  season, 
Ther's  something,  sure,  of  Sympathy  betwixt  us. 
Go  on,  and  make  me  know  as  well  the  place.  70 

Car,  The  place,  oh!  'twas  most  fitt  for  the  occasion. 
Secret,  and  blooming,  with  the  verdant  spring; 
A  Grove  of  mirtles,  compass'd  itt  about, 
Which  gave  no  more  admittance  to  the  Sun 
Then  serv'd  to  chear  the  new  appearing  flowers, 
And  tell  the  birds,  itt  was  their  time  to  sing 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  297 

A  cristal  spring,  stole  through  the  tufted  grasse, 

Hasting,  to  reach  a  fountain,  which  itt  fed, 

And  murmur'd  still,  when  'ere  itt  found  a  stop. 

[She  pauses. 

Blan.  As  I  shall  do,  if  thon  doest  not  proceed,  80 

What  then  Oarino? 

Car.  I  must  be  vain,  and  now  describe  myself 
As  he,  then  told  me,  I  appeared  to  him.  [Aaide. 

'Twas  here,  my  lord,  neer  to  this  fountains  side 
I  saw  the  Maid,  the  soft,  the  charming  Maid, 
That  seemed  to  give  the  sweetnesse  to  the  place, 
And  in  her  self,  posesst  all  I've  described. 
The  season's  youth,  and  freshnesse  of  the  flow'rs, 
The  harmony  of  all  the  tunefull  birds, 
And  cleamesse  of  the  Spring,  on  which  she  gaz'd.  90 

Blan.  'Tis  wond'rous  sweet. 
What  doest  thou  call  this  Paradice  pf  pleasure? 

Car.  The  Gardens,  to  the  Duke  of  Mantua's  Pallace. 

Blan.  Ha!  tis  yett  more  strange,  but  hast'n  to  the  rest, 
For  night,  I  think  begins  to  steal  upon  us 

Car.  At  my  approach,  she  left  her  mossy  seat, 
And  from  her  arm,  a  scarfe,  an  azure  scarfe 
Fell  to  the  ground,  which  hastily  I  seiz'd  on, 
And  by  that  pledge,  stopt  her  intended  flight, 
She  stood  endeav'ring  to  regain  the  favour,  100 

And  I,  transported,  gazing  on  her  charms. 
Blessing  the  chance,  but  what  I  said  I  know  not; 
Yett,  sure  if  words  are  coppy'd  from  the  heart, 
^was  something,  that  expresst  a  sweet  amaze, 
A  mighty  rapture,  and  a  new  bom  passion. 
My  Lord,  you  seem  as  if  you  markt  me  not, 
A  thoughtfull  air,  has  disposess'd  the  smiles 
With  which  you  bid  me  to  repeat  my  passion. 

Blan.  Tell  meCarino,  where  thou  hadst  this  story? 

[Rising  in  disorder 


298  The  Poems  op  Anne 

By  my  past  love,  and  future  hopes  'tis  mine;  110 

The  time,  the  place,  all  circumstances  mine ; 

The  very  scarfe,  which  thus  thou  hast  describ'd, 

Is  now  within  my  Oabinett  lockt  up. 

Unfold  this  riddle,  for  I  will  be  told 

If  she,  whom  once  I  trusted  with  my  soul, 

And  all  the  infant  foUys,  of  my  love 

Has  lightly,  made  itt  a  discourse,  for  boys? 

[He  coming  up  to  her,  looks  earnestly  on  her,  then  turns  aside 
and  speaks. 

Oh !  I  have  found  a  secret  that  distracts  me. 
Dull  as  I  was,  'ere  this  not  to  perceive  itt. 

Car.  I  dare  not  speak,  nor  turn  my  eyes  that  way,  [Aside. 
I  know  I've  but  too  well  explain'd  myself,  121 

And  have  procur'd  instead  of  what  I  hop'd  for. 
Only  his  hate,  which  this  last  transport  shews  me. 

[Enter  Capriccio  throwing  up  his  cap  and  singing. 
Capr.  Tell  not  me  of  the  killing, 
The  wild,  and  the  willing 
In  faith,  I  shou'd  chuse  the  much  rather, 
I'll  have  one  that  shall  come, 
At  the  beat  of  my  Drum, 
Or  the  tossing  up  of  my  feather. 
Such  Chios!  such  Cypresse!  such  daring,  dancing,  delicate 
liquors!  130 

Such  ragouts!    to  quicken  the  pallate;   such  mirth!    such 

madnesse! 
Such  firing!  such  hurra's!  such  healths! 

Blan.  Hey,  where's  all  this. 
Such  hungry,  thirsty  raptures,  I  never  heard  of. 
Capr.  No,  nor  never  will,  if  you  lye  whining, 
And  sighing,  and  singing,  under  an  old  rotten  tree. 
Till  the  Caterpillars  breed  nosts,  in  your  dainty  locks. 
But  come  away  to  your  great  Vnkle 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  299 

That  sends  for  you,  who  makes  to-night 

For  the  renowned  General,  a  most  magnificent  sapper,     140 

A  supper!  such  a  supper  1  butt  I'll  say  no  more  on't 

Till  I  see  itt 

My  Lord,  he  told  me  he  was  in  haste. 

Therefore  if  you'll  come,  you'll  come. 

If  you  won't,  tell  him  so  your  self. 

I'll  lose  no  time,  the  table  fills  apace, 

And  the  glad  Preist,  has  huddl'd  o're  his  grace.        [Exit. 

Blan.  Half  drunk  already,  thou'lt  be  dead  e're  midnight. 
Carino,  oh  Carino,  be  discreet. 

Else  what  thou'st  told,  may  prove  a  fatal  story.  150 

I  cannot  stay,  to  reason  with  thee  farther. 
But  know  that  Death,  and  nothing  else  shall  part  me 
From  the  persuit  of  the  fair  Oypprian  Queen.  [Exit 

Car.  I  will  not  Hinder  itt,  I  will  not  Blanfort, 
Too  well  alas!  Marina  loves  thee  still, 
Perjur'd,  ungrateful!,  cruel  as  thou  art, 
To  hang  upon  thy  soft,  and  chearfuU  soul, 
Her  load  of  greifs,  and  break  thy  growing  pleasures; 
Nor,  will  I  longer  struggle  with  my  fate, 
But  casting  off  this  most  unlucky  garb,  160 

And  putting  on  to-night,  my  virgin  dresse, 

I'll  to  some  holy,  secret  Cell  remove, 

And  sigh  and  Pray,  till  I've  outweary'd  Love ; 

Then  to  the  Grave,  this  hated  body  give, 

And  dye  contented,  that  he  so  may  live.  [EocU. 

ACT  III    SCENE  18T 

A  Room  of  StaUy  the  Queen  and  Clarilla  appear  in  a  balcony  that 
looks  down  into  itt 

Clar.  This  curtain,  safely  will  conceal  you  Madam, 
Yett  being  made  transparent,  does  allow 
That  you  may  see,  and  hear  them  as  you  please; 


800  The  Pobms  op  Anne 

Nor  will  itt  now  be  long  'ere  they  arrive, 
For  I  was  told  they're  risen  from  the  table. 

Queen.     Then  goe,  Clarilla,  and  secure  the  door, 
That  none  surprise  me  'till  I  find  thee  there.  [Exit  Clar. 

I  wou'd  be  free,  to  hate  him  as  I  ought, 
His  comon  theam,  as  Riccio  has  inform'd  me. 
Is  on  my  Rival,  and  her  labour'd  praises,  10 

The  better,  to  insinnuate  to  the  world 
Things,  less'ning  to  my  person,  and  my  title. 
Oh!  may  he  urge  itt  now,  and  work  my  cure; 
For  still  in  spite  of  all  the  wrongs  I  bear, 
Ther's  something  in  my  soul,  too  partial  tow'rds  him. 
But  here  they  come,  resentment,  help  me  now. 

Enter  as  from  supper^  Aubusson,  Lauredan,  Blanfort,  Monthaleon 
Rivalto,  Vilmarin,  Linnian,  Capriccio,  etc, 

Aub.  With  you,  my  Lord,  we  must  divide  that  honour, 
For  whil'st  by  Land,  we  gained  the  prize  we  fought  for, 
Your  winged  Vessels,  flew  before  the  wind, 
And  oretook  Conquest  on  the  watry  world.  20 

But  now,  of  War  no  more  —  bring  in  some  wine, 
A  Lady's  health,  shall  soften  the  rough  sound, 
Conclude  the  night,  and  give  us  peacefuU  slumbers. 

[Wine  brought  in,  Aub.  drinks. 
Health  to  the  Queen  of  Cyprus, 
I  know,  my  Lord,  you  are  too  much  a  Courtier 
To  take  offence,  at  this  our  civil  custome, 
Tho'  you,  and  she  are  not  the  f reinds  I  wish  yee. 

[Laur.  takes  the  glass  and  kneels, 

Laur.  A  Royal  health,  methinks,  comands  the  knee. 

Blan.  A  health  like  this,  my  Lord,  comands  the  heart. 

Laur.  Then  with  my  heart,  health  to  the  lovely  Queen,   30 
The  peace  of  Angells,  and  the  pow'r  of  Kings, 
The  joys  of  Love,  and  wealth  of  both  the  Indies, 
Still  crown  her  life,  and  wait  upon  her  fortunes. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  301 

Cap.  A  rare  smooth  health,  how  itt  skim'd  over  the  glasse, 
Like  a  duck  and  a  drake  over  a  smiling  river 
Twill  come  at  last  to  me,  I  have  itt  right.  [Aaide. 

Blan.  Dissembler  1  vile  dissembler! 

[Aside  whilst  Laur.  drinks. 
I'll  grate  his  sonl  through  with  a  wish  lesse  soimding. 
Health  to  the  Queen,  and  may  she  rule  in  Cyprus. 

Ric.  My  Lord,  this  complement  exacts  our  thanks.        40 
[To  Laur.  while  the  health  goes  round. 

Laur.  Away,  I  did  not  do't  to  gain  thy  favour.  [Scornfully. 

Ric.  So  scornful  still,  ohl  I  have  acted  wisely.        [Aside. 

[Capr.,  the  health  being  come  to  him,  falls  down  on  both  knees. 

Capr.  Health  to  the  Queen  of  Cyprus, 
May  she  be  still  in  peace  with  all  the  angels. 
In  love  with  Kings,  and  sent  to  both  the  Indie& 

[They  laugh,  he  rises  in  a  rage  and  breaks  the  glasse. 
Hang  your  new  coined  healths,  that  if  a  man  misse  but  a 
word,  setts  you  all  a  laughing  at  him  thus.  I  know  well 
enough,  I  shou'd  have  brought  in  wealth  if  I  cou'd,  but 
what  has  a  soldier  tq  do  with  money.  If  I  live  till  to-mor- 
row, some  shall  hear  'ont;  Kings,  and  Powers  and  Angels, 
and  the  Devil  and  all;  keep  'em  to  your  selves  gentlemen 
for  me,  I'll,  I'll  e'en  go  sleep,  and  think  on't. 

[Eocit  very  drunk. 

Aub.  My  Lord  forgive  him,  he  is  truly  honest. 
But  has  this  mighty  fault,  that  he  will  drink, 
And  then  be  most  exceptions  as  you  see. 
But  long,  I  will  not  lett  him  keep  this  custome. 
The  night  grows  late,  kind  sleep  my  lord  attend  you. 

Laur.  My  Lord  good  night,  good  night  to  all, 
No  ceremony,  pray. 

Aub.  Permitt  'em  to  attend  you  'tis  their  duty.  60 

[Exeunt  on  one  side,  Aub:  Blan:  Month:  on  the  other  Laur  Riv: 
Vil:Lm: 


S02  The  Poems  of  Ahve 

[Re  enter  a»  from  uniting  on  the  General  BIt:  Vil:  A  Lm. 

lAn.  A  woman!  and  so  near  his  holy  person. 
Oh!  hypocrite,  not  to  be  matched  in  story. 
Bnt  we  already  have  in  part  nnmask'd  him, 
By  secret  whispers,  scatter^  round  the  conrt. 
Had  yon  but  seen  the  fondnesse  of  this  day. 
Oh!  such  sweet  words,  and  looks,  such  nautious  praises. 
Of  her  youth  and  features,  and  amorous  strokings 
Of  her  wanton  cheeks,  you  wou^d  I  think  have  blushed, 
Tho'  joy'd  to  see. — 

Riv.  Alas!  I've  seen  much  more  my  friends,  70 

Dotage,  beyond  expression, 

Huch  fondnesse,  that  I  think  his  heart  must  break. 
In  that  last  pang,  that  shall  devide  her  from  him. 

Vil.  Oh !  Fate  give  wings  to  that  perplexing  moment, 
When  I  shall  see  him  stand  confused  and  sad, 
Blushing  for  shame,  for  what's  already  past, 
Yett,  madly  raving,  'cause  'twill  last  no  longer. 
Oh!  devil,  devil,  with  an  Angel's  semblance, 
How  riggidly  still  has  he  check'd  our  pleasures, 
And  punish 'd  ev'ry  fault  that  lookt  tow'rds  woman.  80 

Oh  I  I'm  impatient  for  the  full  discovery. 

Riv.  Lett  us  about  it  then; 
You  know  to-night  'tis  I  that  keep  the  watch 
And  if  in  walking  of  the  midnight  round, 
I  can  find  out  deeds,  as  dark,  and  close  as  that. 
Bo  nc^cr  att  hand,  to  hunt  the  game  I  spring  yee, 
Till  Hum  farwell. 

Lin:  Wo  will  not  fayle,  and  so  good  night  dear  mischeif. 

[Exeunt  Lin:  &  Vil: 

Riv,  Farowoll  dear  fools,  whom  I  but  trust  by  halves, 
Yot  i  make  such  use  of,  as  occasion  calls  for.  90 

Tlu^y  niuHt  not  know,  how  far  my  self 
And  Blanfort  are  concerned. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  303 

Least  if  they  found  itt  had  a  false  foundation, 

They  shon'd  not  urge  the  plott  on  Aubusson. 

Nor  will  she  in  the  midst  of  her  disgrace 

Declare  the  truth, 

For  fear  her  lover,  shouM  yett  more  detest  her. 

Tho'  if  she  shou'd,  'twere  easy  to  posesse 

The  censuring  world,  that  'twas  contrived  still 

To  secure  the  Master,  his  nephew  only  100 

Took  itt  to  himself. — 

And  to  keep  off  all  proofs  of  former  love, 

I've  stole  the  contract,  and  all  other  pledges 

Which  they  might  have  produc'd  to  gain  beleif. 

But  'tis  the  time  that  Lauredan  expects  me. 

Whose  harmlesse  purpose  too,  shall  serve  my  ends. 

And  may  the  projects  of  this  fatal  night, 

On  those  I  hate,  in  blood,  &  ruine  light  lExit 

The  scene  changes  to  the  Queen's  dressirig-Room,  a  toilett  spread, 
Enter  the  Queen  and  Clarilla 

Queen.  The  hour  is  come  in  which  I  us'd  to  rest. 
But  rest  is  not  so  forward  as  the  hour. 
Leave  me  awhile  to  think  away  my  sorrows. 
And  when  that's  done,  I  will  again  recall  thee.       [Exit  Clar. 
He  wish'd  me  peace. 

But  to  posesse  itt,  I  must  n'er  have  seen  him. 
He  wish'd  me  pow'r,  yett  knew  not  at  that  moment. 
But  I  might  have  employ'd  itt  to  his  ruine. 
He  nam'd  the  joys,  the  mighty  joys  of  love, 
And  oh!  me  thought,  that  word  so  well  became  him,  10 

I  cou'd  have  stood  to  hear  him  speak  itt  ever. 
Why,  did  I  fondly  wish  again  to  see  him, 
And  hope  a  cure,  from  what  first  bred  my  pain? 
Oh!  I  have  done,  as  hasty  gamesters  use, 
Who  having  lost  part  of  their  shining  store. 
Sett  all  the  rest,  on  one  adventurous  cast, 


804  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  leap  into  the  mine,  they  wou'd  fly  from. 
Ha!  What  noyse  is  that?  [She  hears  a  noyse. 

The  night's  far  spent,  and  ev'ry  sound  breeds  horrour. 
Again!  20 

[Tvx)  men  appear  att  the  door  in  diaguiae,  one  apeaka  to  the  other^ 
<&  then  retiree. 

First.  I'll  keep  'em  from  their  posts  till  you  return. 
Come  boldly  back,  and  fear  no  opposition. 

[He  goea  off  dt  the  other  cornea  just  within  the  door. 

Queen.  Protect  me  heav'n,  from  farther  acts  of  treason, 
My  life  alone,  is  all  the  past  have  left  me. 

[Aa  ahe  ia  going  to  the  contrary  door^  he  kneela  dt  apeaka. 

Second.  Oh!  fly  not  madam,  fly  not  from  your  safety. 
Prom  him,  who  wears  his  life  but  to  preserve  you; 
Can  there  be  terrour,  in  this  humble  posture, 
These  arms  thus  folded,  and  this  awfull  distance? 
Lett  reason  tell  you,  that  if  I  were  wicked. 
And  dark  intents,  had  brought  me  on  thus  far,  80 

Your  inmost  room,  your  Closset  cou'd  not  save  you, 
But  prove  a  fitter  scene,  for  acts  of  mischeif . 

Queen.  'Tis  true,  who  'ere  he  is,  I'm  in  his  pow'r. 

[Asidey  atopping  at  the  extremity  of  the  atage. 
Therefore,  had  better  humour  this  respect, 
Till  I  can  search  into  his  secret  purpose 
Which  may  not  be  so  bad,  as  fear  presents  itt. 
Keep  then  that  distance  still,  and  I  will  stay,  [To  him. 

And  trust,  so  much,  to  what  you  have  deliver'd. 
As  to  demand  the  cause,  for  which  you  came? 

Second.  To  putt  into  your  hands,  your  beauteous  hands,  40 
Your  people's  homage,  and  your  Rival's  fate, 
The  Gen'rall's  life,  that  once  oppos'd  your  right. 
And  all  the  Royal  dignity  you've  lost. 

Qvsen.  The  Gen'rall's  life,  oh!  then  I  must  discover, 

[Aside. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  805 

And  prevent  him. 

Such  sounds  as  these,  indeed  comand  attention,  [To him. 

And  tho*,  they  like  the  Syrens,  led  to  mine, 

Yett,  wou^d  I  listen  to  the  soft  enchantment. 

[She  comes  totvarde  him. 
And  thus  discarding  all  my  woman^s  fears. 
Will  boldly  ask,  in  whom  the  power  is  lodg'd  50 

To  work  these  miracles,  yorr  have  declared. 

[He  discovers  himself  to  be  Lamiedan. 

Laur.  'Tis  all  in  Lauredan,  and  he  in  yours. 

Queen.  Ha!  Lauredan,  nay  then  again  I  fear.    [She  starts. 

Laur.     So,  starts  the  passenger,  who  in  his  way 
Meets  a  yong  Lyon,  arm'd  with  pow'r  to  kill, 
And  in  that  moment  of  his  fear,  forgetts. 
That  nature,  bids  the  royal  savage  tremble 
Before  the  awfuU  form,  of  GK>dlike  man. 
As  I  do  now  in  presence  of  your  charms. 
Oh!  do  not  wrong  them,  Madam,  by  distrust,  60 

Or  think  your  self  lesse  safe,  thus  arm^d  in  beauty. 
Then  the  yong  Grecian,  with  his  phalanx  bound. 
Who  stood  unmoved,  the  shock  of  all  the  persians. 

Queen.  This  flattery  my  lord,  breeds  more  suspicion, 

But  curiosity,  our  sexes  frailty 

Will  yett  prevail,  to  make  me  hear  you  farther. 

If  you  will  rise,  if  not,  I  must  retire. 

[He  risesj  she  goes  on. 

Pray  rise  my  lord,  why  shouM  you  kneel  to  me, 

Alasl  you  best  can  tell  I  am  no  Queen? 

Think  on  that  day  my  Lord,  I  ever  shall,  70 

When  all  the  room  I  cou'd  comand  in  Cyprus, 

Where  I  had  liv'd  in  peace,  and  rul'd  in  love. 

And  been  my  self,  the  Genious  of  the  place. 

Was  but  one  poor  appartment  in  my  pallace. 

Which  had  its  deep  foundations  in  the  sea; 


306  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Some  few  attendants  my  ill  fate  had  left, 

Who  told  with  me,  each  shout  the  people  gave, 

As  their  new  Lord,  passed  throo'  the  crowded  streets, 

And  now,  so  neer,  the  horrid  tumult  came. 

That  in  dispair,  leaning  on  Riccio^s  arm,  80 

I  bid  him  lead  me,  to  my  last  dominion, 

A  poor  frail  bark,  that  danc'd  upon  the  waves. 

And  yett  me  thought,  was  steddyer  then  my  Island, 

When  you  my  Lord  came  in. 

Laur.  When  I  came  in! 
And  saw  more  beauty  breaking  throo'  your  tears. 
Then  rose  with  Venus,  when  she  left  the  deep; 
When  I  came  in! 

A  wretched  Conqu'rer,  in  the  Tyrant's  cause. 
Which  then,  I  did  beleive  to  have  been  just,  90 

But  oh!  your  eyes  soon  punish'd  the  mistake. 
And  cast  such  lightning,  as  destroyed  my  laurells, 
D'you  bid  me  Madam,  think  upon  that  day. 
In  all  th'  account  of  time,  I  know  no  other: 
The  part  of  life  I  spent,  ere  that  arriv'd. 
Like  a  dull,  empty  scene,  is  all  discard'd: 
And  since  'tis  past,  my  thoughts  have  had  no  buisnesse. 
But  to  preserve,  and  represent  itt  to  me. 
And,  madam,  since  so  nicely  you  recount  itt, 
Oh !  Lett  me  speak,  what  I  endur'd  that  day,  100 

I  saw,  ador'd,  and  dy'd  for  you  that  day, 
And  yett,  that  fatal  day,  provoked  and  lost  you. 

Queen.  My  lord,  you  take  occasion  from  my  fortunes 
To  speak  such  things,  as  else  you  wou'd  not  offer. 
Yett,  make  them  true,  oh  Love,  and  I'll  adore  thee.     [Aside. 

Laur.  Be  witnesse  Love,  and  all  thy  gentle  pow'rs, 
If  one  presumptuous  thought,  inhabitts  here. 

[Pointing  to  his  breast. 

Yett  I  do  love,  beyond  what  words  can  utter ; 


OOUNTBSS   OP   WiNOHILSBA  807 

Fortune  be  witnesse,  and  the  Crown  I  part  with, 

If  Lauredan  grows  giddy  with  successe.  110 

Hear  Madam!  what  your  subjects  have  decreed, 

And  what  is  too,  confirmed  by  the  Venetians, 

Whose  pow'rs  expell'd  and  keep  you  from  the  throne. 

First,  that  Comara,  whom  att  last  they  find 

Too  weak  to  hold  itt,  quitt  the  Sov'rain  sway. 

Then  that  the  Crown  shall  be  confirmed  on  me. 

And  all  my  race,  to  wear  itt  by  succession. 

Some  lessening  offers  to  your  self  they  make. 

Not  fitt  for  you  to  hear,  or  me  to  mention. 

Queen.  D'you  come  my  Lord,  for  my  consent  to  this?    120 

Laur.  Oh !  hear  me  out,  another  frown  like  that 
Wou'd  strike  me  speechlesse. 
Hear  'ere  it  kills,  what  Love  and  I  decree, 
What  Heaven  decrees. 
Who  has  inspired  my  army  with  one  soul. 
And  made  that  plyant,  only  to  my  wishes. 
You  are  their  Queen,  and  mine. 
Again  we  will  replace  you  on  the  throne. 
And  bound  the  uttmost  height  of  our  ambition. 
To  be  the  guard,  still  of  your  crown,  and  Person.  130 

Queen.  'Tis  highly  generous  this,  I  must  acknowledge; 
Yett  let  me  ask,  why  with  this  fair  dessign. 
You  here  have  made  such  rough,  such  harsh  demands, 
As  aimed  more  to  confine  then  reinthrone  me. 

Laur.  Lideed  th'  occasion  forc'd  me  to  be  secret, 
And  keep  my  real  purpose  unreveal'd, 
The  power  of  Venice  is  att  sea  so  mighty. 
That  I  cou'd  ne'er  have  seen  you  safe  att  Cyprus, 
Had  I  not  won  them  with  a  fein'd  pretence, 
That  'twould  more  firmly  fix  me  in  the  throne,  140 

If  in  my  pow'r,  I  held  the  true  pretender. 
And  so,  procur'd  them,  'ere  I  was  declar'd, 


308  The  Poems  op  Anne 

To  give  me  means,  to  compasse  my  dessign. 
Yett,  lett  me  kneel,  for  seeming  to  offend, 
And  breaking  thus,  upon  your  private  hours. 
Which  I  had  shunn'd,  but  that  deny'd  your  presence, 
I  cou'd  not  serve  you,  but  by  this  intrusion. 

Queen,  I'm  satisfy'd,  my  Lord,  pray  kneel  no  more. 

Laur.  No,  lett  me  kneel. 
And  if  there  were  a  posture  more  submissive,  150 

Low  as  the  grave,  and  humble  as  my  hopes, 
Twoud  now  become,  what  I  must  speak  or  perish. 

Queen,  Proceed  my  Lord, 
And  think,  you  cannot  easily  ofend  me. 

Laur,  Then,  lett  me  ask,  since  'tis  my  heart's  concern, 
When  I  have  compass'd,  what  my  life  has  toyl'd  for. 
And  plac'd  you  uncontrol'd  in  sov'raine  pow'r. 
If  Blanfort,  shall  not  enter  on  my  labours, 
And  reap  the  dear  rewards,  I  dare  not  think  of. 

Queers  My  Lord,  you  wrong  me  much,  if  you  suppose  itt, 
Lett  that  suffice,  and  urge  your  fears  no  farther.  161 

All  you  have  said,  this  night,  I  will  reflect  on. 
And  in  the  morning,  give  you  private  notice 
How  I  shall  act  in  such  a  great  concern. 
Pray  rise  my  lord.  [He  rises. 

Laur.  Oh!  Give  not  all  the  night  to  thoughts  of  buisnesse. 
If  I  had  n'er  admitted  softer  cares, 
You'd  now  had  no  occasion  for  them,  Madam. 

Queen.  My  Lord,  good  night,  I  wish  you  safe  retir'd 

Laur.  Permitt  this  honour  first,  that  I'll  take  care  of.  170 

[Leading  her  within  the  scene. 
Enter  at  the  other  end  of  the  stage  Blanfort 

Blan.  A  letter  thrown  just  now  in  at  my  window 
Tells  me,  that  one  alone,  and  in  disguise 
Enter'd  a  while  agoe,  the  Queen's  apartment 

[Laur.  returns  from  the  Queen. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  809 

Tis  true  indeed,  and  Lauredan's  the  man. 

Laur.  So  late,  and  Blanfort  here,  amazment  strikes  me. 

lAside. 
Blan.  My  Lord,  this  visit  being  out  of  season. 

In  the  great  Masters  name,  I  must  demand 
For  what  occasion,  at  this  hour  you  gave  itt. 

Laur.  I  wou'd  not  fight  in  hearing  of  the  Queen.    [Aside. 
Come  you  from  him  my  lord  with  this  commission,  180 

If  so,  to-morrow  I'll  inform  him  of  itt. 
If  not,  give  way,  I  own  no  other  power. 

Blan.  No,  stay  my  Lord,  His  from  myself  I  ask  itt. 
And  will  be  bold,  or  this  shall  force  an  answer.  [Dratm. 

Laur.  Take  then  the  best  reply,  that  this  can  make  you. 

[They  fight,  and  Blanfort /aZto. 
Enter  the  Queen,  Clar.  iSb  Ric,  who  supports  Blan. 

Queen.  Oh  dire  misfortune,  call  more  help  Clarilla, 
Look  up  my  Lord,  oh !  speak  and  say  you  live. 
He's  dead  he's  dead,  else  wou'd  my  voyce 
Have  wak'd  him  — 

I  know  att  least,  itt  wou'd  have  forc'd  one  sigh,  190 

If  he  had  breath  enough  to  have  supply'd  itt. 

[Laur.  observes  the  Queen  all  this  while. 

Laur.  Oh !  mortal  sound,  wou'd  I  were  in  his  place. 
Yett  hear  me  Madam,  hear  me,  but  a  moment. 

[She  weeps  by  Blan, 

Qu^en.  Twas  hearing  you  my  Lord,  drew  on  this  mine. 
Oh !  do  not  urge  itt  now,  but  leave  the  place, 
This  fatal  place,  and  'ere  the  morning  passe, 
I'll  yett  send  to  you. 

Laur.  I  know  not  how  to  understand  this  rightly, 
But  will  have  patience,  till  I  hear  her  answer.       [Exit  Laur. 

[Enter  Servants  and  Chirurgeon. 

Qusen.  Oh !  Aubusson,  when  thou  shalt  hear  of  this,     200 
How  will  it  greive  thee,  to  have  harbour'd  me. 


310  The  Poems  op  Anne 

That  (though  unwilling)  is  the  wretched  cause 
Of  his  sad  fate,  and  thy  perpettual  mourning. 

Surg.  Madam,  he  breathes,  we'll  bear  him  to  his  lodgings, 
I  think  the  wound  is  in  no  mortal  part. 
Take  him  up  gently,  and  convey  him  hence. 

lEx.  Surg,  with  Blan.,  etc. 

Queen.  You  stand  amazed,  and  seem  to  wonder  Riccio, 
The  General  and  I  have  had  this  meeting. 
But  his  intentions  are  not  what  you  think  'em. 
Come  in  with  me,  for  I  have  much  to  tell  you,  210 

And  ne'r  I  think,  have  wanted  more  your  councill. 
Oh!  Blanfort  live,  that  greif  sitts  here  so  heavy. 
Twill  not  affoard  room  for  one  pleasing  thought, 
Tho'  that  remov'd,  I've  all  I'd  ask  of  fortune. 

[Ex.  Queen,  Clar.  &  Bic. 
Enter  Kivalto 

Riv.  The  letter,  which  I  threw  in  att  his  window, 
Had  the  desir'd  effect,  I  saw  'em  fight. 
And  Blanfort  sure  is  kill'd. 
Marina  too,  as  I  cou'd  have  contriv'd  itt. 
Is  weeping  by  a  taper  in  her  Chamber, 
Dresstin  her  female  garb,  Ho!  Vilmarin  Linian,  220 

I'll  make  'em  go  that  way,  to  call  the  Master, 
And  tell  him  of  these  accidents  have  happen'd, 
Who  when  he  hears  the  noyse,  will  be  drawn  theither. 
And  being  caught  by  them,  with  her  alone, 
Will  seem  to  all,  as  guilty  as  I've  made  him. 
They  come  not,  yett  I  bid  'em  be  att  hand 
Curse  on  their  neglegence,  all  may  be  lost  by  't 

Butt  I  must  go  find  em [Exitt. 

The  scene  changes  to  Aub^  ante  chamber.    He  in  his  night- 
gown^ talking  with  Monthaleon. 

Auh.  I  will  correct  itt,  I  will  indeed  Monthaleon, 
And  tho'  the  war,  as  'tis  itts  baneful!  custom, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  311 

Has  sown  amongst  us,  the  fool  seeds  of  vice, 

They  shall  not  thrive,  or  bear  their  fruits  in  Rhodes. 

Month.  My  lord,  you  take  the  best,  and  surest  method, 
By  setting  such  a  pattern  as  your  conduct. 
Who  lead,  before  your  forty  'th  year's  arriv'd, 
A  life,  that  aged  Hermitts  cannot  reach  to. 

Aub.  I  wou'd  do  so,  but  speak  of  that  no  more. 
This  night,  I  talk'd  to  Vilmarin  and  Linian,  10 

And  f reindly  counsail'd  them,  to  leave  their  vices, 
At  which*  they  smil'd  and  said  they'd  be  more  secret 
My  Confessour  too,  'ere  he  left  my  Olossett, 
Pour'd  out  a  flood  of  tears,  and  cry'd  beware, 
Beware  hypocrisy,  that  sin  of  Devills. 
It  something  troubles  me  to  know  the  meaning. 
But  I  have  trespass'd  on  thy  rest  too  long. 
Only  remember  this,  to  tell  Capriccio, 
When  next  he's  drunk,  I'll  have  him  sleep 
Without  his  Souldiers  office.  20 

Good-night  Monthaleon. 

Mont  Good-night   my    Lord,   and   rest    compose   your 
thoughts.  [Exeunt  severally. 

ACT  IV    SCENE  I 

Marina's  Chamber.    She  appears  dreet  in  her  Woman^a  habbitt 

Mar.  I've  wept  enough,  and  now  farwell,  for  ever, 
Parwell  my  good,  my  great,  my  gen'rous  Master 
Farwell  these  walls,  where  I  have  felt  more  sorrow 
Than  all  the  stones  can  count,  that  make  the  pile. 
Parwell  Rivalto,  Anther  of  my  mine ; 
The  world  farwell,  and,  all  itts  vain  delusions. 
Yett,  there's  one  farwell  more,  cou'd  I  but  speak  itt. 
But  oh!  'twere  vain,  to  say  farwell  false  Blanfort, 
Since  in  my  heart,  I  bear  him  with  me  still. 


812  The  Poems  of  Anne 

But  I  must  go,  before  the  day  appears,  10 

Kind  night  conceal  my  blushes,  and  my  fears. 

[She  goes  ivith  a  key  in  her  hand,  to  the  door.    A  violent  calling 
and  knocking  is  heard  from  the  other  aide  of  itt. 

Vil.  Ho!  Carino,  open  the  door,  Carino, 
We  must  immediately  speak  with  the  great  Master; 
Ho!  Carino. 

Mar.  Oh!  I  am  ruin'd,  whether  shall  I  run, 
How  'scape  their  sight,  how  answer  them 
How  stay  them? 

Lin.  Ho!  rise  Carino,  rise  and  lett  us  throjigh. 

Mar.  I  must  speak  to  'em,  why  d'ye  call  thus  loud. 
Your  haste  and  noyse,  has  made  me  loose  the  key  P  20 

I  cannot,  lett  ye  in,  why  come  ye  this  way, 
The  other's  free,  I  cannot  lett  ye  in. 

Lin.  No,  Vilmarin  was  there,  and  'tis  barr'd  up. 
Break  down  the  door. 

Mar.  What  shall  I  do,  that's  the  great  Master's  chamber. 

[Pointing  to  the  other  door. 
Yett  in  this  danger  I  must  try  to  'scape 
By  stealing  down  that  way,  to  gain  the  street. 

[She  going  to  that  door.    Enter  Aub:  in  hifi  night  goum,  his  sword 

in  his  hand, 

Aub.  There's  sure  some  mutiny  they  call  so  loud, 

[Seeing  her. 
Ha!  What  art  thou,  thou  dreadful!  apparition. 

[She  covers  her  face  with  her  handkercheif. 

Mar.  Oh !  I  am  nothing,  nothing  but  confusion.  30 

[They  heat  down  the  other  door.    Enter  Mont:  Riv.  Vil:  Lin:  Capr. 

Month.  What  do  I  see! 
My  sight  sure  plays  me  false, 
And  night  has  rais'd  a  Vision  to  distract  me. 

[Aub.  stands  amazd  saying  nothing. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  313 

Vil.  Your  arms  my  Lord  are  needlesse,  we'll  retire, 
Nor  did  we  mean  to  interrupt  your  pleasures. 

Riv.  Indeed  I  wou'd  have  led  them  t'other  way, 
Knowing  this  was  your  scene  of  private  joys. 

Lin.  Be  not  concem'd  my  lord  we'll  keep  the  secret, 
Alas!  you  know,  this  way,  we've  all  our  failings. 

[Aub.  leans  upon  Month,  seeming  weak  and  dispirited, 

Aub.  Come  heither  freind,  if  yett  thou'lt  own  that  title,  40 
I  did  not  ask  to  be  supported  thus. 
When  with  one  bold  Hungarian  by  my  side, 
I  fac'd  the  Turks,  and  bore  against  their  army, 
Till  ours  that  fled,  retum'd  to  fame  and  conquest. 

[Throum  auxjty  his  svoord. 
Lye  there  my  sword,  for  I  am  yett  a  Christian, 
Else  wou'd  I  put  thee  to  a  braver  use, 
And  wash  this  stain  from  my  polluted  honour. 
With  blood  as  noble,  as  an  ancient  Romans. 
Ohl  that  I  cou'd  convince  thee  my  Monthaleon; 
Yett,  when  thy  Master's  lay'd  in  humble  dust,  50 

Try  to  persuade  the  world,  I  was  not  wicked, 
Not  that  vile  wretch. 
Which  this  foul  chance,  wou'd  speak  me. 

p^arma  all  this  time  weeping  and  leaning  against  the  scene. 

Mont.  My  lord,  I've  kept  my  eyes  still  on  the  Maid. 
And  'tis  your  Boy,  Carino  in  disguise. 
Be  comforted,  'tis  nothing  but  a  Trick, 
I  know  itt  is  a  trick,  and  we'll  revenge  itt. 

[Lm.  pulls  aside  her  garment  and  discovers  her  neck. 

Lin.  This  neck,  methinks  is  counterfitted  well. 
And  breasts  like  these,  do  much  disguise  a  boy. 

Mont.  Itt  is  Carino,  but  itt  is  a  woman,  [Aside 

I  know  not  what  to  think,  and  stand  confounded.  61 

Aub.  Oh  I  take  her  hence,  remove  her  from  my  sight, 


814  The  Poems  op  Anne 

I  care  not  who  she  is,  nor  why  she  came. 
All  leave  the  room,  all,  but  Monthaleon  leave  me, 
Nor  will  I  bribe  your  foul  and  blister'd  tongues. 
To  hide  this  scandal,  from  the  babling  world. 
'Tis  Heavn's  concern,  that  Innocence  like  mine 
Shou'd  stand  upright,  without  such  vile  supportera 

Lin.  Shall  we  not  tell  him  of  his  nephew^s  hurt 

[Aside  to  Monthal. 

Mont  Not  for  your  life,  he  bears  too  much  already.       70 

Riv.  Be  still  secure,  and  happy  if  you  please. 

[Aside  to  Mar.  offering  to  lead  her. 

Mar,  Stand  off  base  wretch,  stand  off,  and  do  not  touch  me, 

I'll  put  myself  into  Capriccio's  hands. 

And  fly  from  thee,  and  from  thy  brace  of  furies. 

Capr.  The  Master's  Mistresse,  under  my  custody, 

[Aside. 
See  how  preferment  comes  sometimes  unlookt  for. 

Give  me  your  hand  Lady,  and  this  shall  still  protect  you. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Aub.  and  Month. 

Month.  My  lord,  I  beg  you  wou'd  again  retire, 
And  seek  to  rest  — 

Leaving  itt  to  your  f reinds,  and  cheifly  me,  80 

To  sound  the  depth,  of  this  most  vile  contrivance. 

Aub.  Oh!  They  have  strook  me  in  the  tend'rest  part 
The  subtle  villains,  exquisite  in  mischeif, 
Knew  this  would  wound  me,  deeper  then  their  daggers; 
My  life,  I  cou'd  have  yielded  them,  Monthaleon, 
Wou'd  they  had  taken't,  when  my  fame  was  clear. 
Then  had  I  sett,  like  the  declining  Sun, 
With  all  my  glorigus  beams,  about  my  head, 
And  left  the  world,  repining  at  my  fall. 
But  oh!  to  horrid  darknesse,  now  I  goe,  90 

Wrapt  in  those  deeds,  that  seemingly  are  soe. 

[Ex :  leaning  on  Month. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  816 

The  Scene  changes  to  the  Queen's  Apartment,  Bioc:  aUme 
Bic.  It  was  my  master  peice,  and  hard  I  wrought  itt, 
How  I  was  forc'd  to  swear  that  to  my  knowledge 
Those  proffers,  were  but  baits,  to  catch  her  freedom ; 
That  all  his  army,  was  dispersed  and  broken, 
His  interest  quite  declined  with  both  the  states, 
And  that  he  had  no  me€ms  again  to  raise  itt. 
But  by  obliging  'em,  with  her  full  mine. 
Yett  all  prevail'd  not,  till  at  last  I  urg'd 
That  still  he  languished  for  the  proud  Usurper, 
And  sent  from  hence,  as  I  assuredly  knew,  10 

Expresses  to  her,  charged  with  love,  and  duty ; 
This  stirr'd  that  passion  in  her  I  desir'd. 
And  so,  procured  a  message  to  my  wishes. 
Which  lost  not  of  itt's  force,  by  my  delivery. 
But  he's  by  this  time  gone, 

And  all  my  fears,  and  cares,  are  vanished  with  him. 
Better  be  here,  depending  still  a[t]  Rhodes, 
Then  under  his  dominion,  though  in  Cyprus. 

Enter  Clarilla 
Ric.  Clarilla,  is  the  Queen  yett  to  be  spoke  with  ? 
Clar.  She  is  not  Riccio,  but  has  sent  her  orders  20 

That  you  shou'd  lett  me  know  the  Gen'ralPs  answer, 
Or  send  it  written,  if  he  so  commanded. 

Ric.  I  thought  to  have  conceaPd  the  papers  from  her, 

[Aside, 
But  if  she  shou'd  hereafter  come  to  know  itt, 

That,  yett  may  prove  of  greater  danger  to  me. 

Besides  he's  gone,  and  I'm  resolv'd  to  venture. 

Then  tell  her,  that  I  found  him  all  alone. 

Expecting  as  he  told  me,  her  comands. 

And  from  my  lipps,  no  sooner  were  they  fall'n. 

But  he  retir'd,  and  wrote  in  haste  this  letter,  80 

Which  sure,  I  think,  encloses  more  within  itt. 


316  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Then  callM  an  Officer,  that  waited  neer, 
And  bid  his  Anchors  instantly  be  weigh'd, 
For  that  he  wou'd  immediatly  on  board. 
The  other,  vainly  urg'd  a  storm  was  risen 
Which  might  endanger  him,  and  all  the  fleet. 
For  he  persisted  still,  to  have  itt  done. 
Then  gave  me  this,  and  flung  out  of  my  presence. 
I  know  no  more  —  But  how  the  Queen  resents  itt, 
And  what's  contained,  in  all  this  pacquett  here,  40 

Shall  hope  to  hear  from  you. —  [la  going  but  returns. 

I  had  allmost  forgot,  tell  her 
That  Blanfort's  wound  is  of  no  danger. 
Nor  such,  as  to  confine  him  to  his  bed. 
Th'  expence  of  spirits,  in  his  mighty  passion 
Being  the  cheif  cause,  that  sence,  and  motion  left  him. 
As  I  came  back,  I  mett  this  information.     [Exeunt  severally. 
Enter  Capriocio  drunk 
Cap.  'Tis  a  rare  world,  a  brave  world, 
A  ranting,  flanting,  shining  world ; 

Not  a  tavern  in  the  town  but's  in  a  blaze,  50 

Not  a  pretended  sister,  cosen,  or  other  civil  Relation, 
That  is  not  publickly  own'd, 
For  an  errant,  tory  rory  strumpett. 
iiinnian  leads  up  a  couple,  Vilmarin  a  couple  more, 
Only  that  rogue  Rivalto, 

Has  the  impudence,  to  sin  in  secret,  now  'tis  out  of  fassion. 
But  I'll  discover  his  haunts. 
Or  beat  him  till  he  owns  'em, 

Never  such  a  time  in  Rhodes,  never  such  an  example. 
Every  one  quoting  the  Great  Master,  60 

And  trooping  on  to  sin,  under  his  banner, 
As  if  they  were  beating  up  Volonteers  for  the  Devil. 
I'll  ee'n  away,  and  be  drunk  with  the  best  of  'em 
And  then,  as  an  honest  man  shou'd, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  817 

Go  soberly  home,  and  look  to  my  charge, 
A  rare  time,  there's  not  one  now — 

But  will  come, 
At  the  beat  of  my  drum. 
Or  the  tossing  up  of  my  feather. 

\_Exit  singing. 

The  Scene  drawny  discovers  Blanfort  lying  upon  a  couchj  Month: 
sitting  by  him 

Blan.  It  is  indeed  a  melancholy  story. 
But  will  he  leave  us,  does  he  say  MonthaleonP 

Man.  He  does  my  Lord, 
For  having  heard  the  riots  of  the  Town, 
And  how  they  ground  em  all  on  his  example, 
It  strikes  him  so,  together  with  the  thoughts 
That  he  must  n'er  attempt  to  stop  itts  fury. 
And  that  His  now  their  interest  to  maintain 
His  seeming  Vice,  to  guild  their  own  the  better, 
That  he  resolves,  some  more  successful  arm,  10 

Shall  take  that  task,  and  bear  the  publick  sway, 
Whilst  he  retires,  to  secrecy,  and  prayers. 
Blan.  Oh  I  thou  art  wretched  Blanfort,  [Aside 

What  said  the  Maid, 
For  such  I  sure  beleive  her. 

Month,  No  word  she  uttered,  yet  her  silence  spoke, 
Att  least  to  me,  that  so  did  understand  it. 
And  said,  that  she  was  wrong'd,  was  wrong'd,  and  guiltlesse. 
And  more  I  must  observe  to  clear  her  farther. 
That  since  she  as  a  youth,  has  served  the  Master,  20 

Not  all  his  gentle  chidings,  cou'd  prevail 
To  make  her  once  attend  him  in  his  chamber. 

Blan.  How  look'd  she  freind,  in  such  a  sad  surprise? 

Month.  Modest,  and  lovely  Blanfort, 
As  looks  the  fair,  and  gentle  rising  morning, 
When  watry  vapours,  half  conceal  her  blushes. 


818  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Blan,  Tis  I  that  ought  to  blush,  poor,  poor  Marina.  lAside. 
Has  she  since  nothing  told  of  who  she  is, 
Or  what  induced  her  to  assume  this  shape. 

Month.  Nothing,  but  only  sais  she  is  a  wretch,  30 

And  urges  to  be  sent  into  a  Convent, 
Which  is  deferr'd,  in  hopes  of  some  discovery. 

Blan,  Oh!  gen'rous  Maid,  what  does  she  not  deserve? 
I'll  try  to  find  her  out,  that  we  may  meet. 
And  weep  att  least,  over  our  mutual  sorrowa  [Aside. 

Where  is  she  lodg'd,  who  has  her  now  in  charge? 

Month.  Cappriccio  has  disposed  her  neer  this  place, 
Her  lodging  joyns  close  to  the  Pallace  wall, 
And  has  a  door,  that  us'd  to  lett  into  itt 

Blan.  No  more  of  this,  40 

To  Lauredan,  what's  happen'd  since  our  quarrel. 

Month.  He's  gone  on  board,  and  toss'd  with  such  a  storm, 
Tis  thought  he'll  perish  'ere  he  leaves  the  Port. 
But  certain  'tis,  the  Queen  of  Cyprus  loves  him. 
Her  present  fears,  have  told  itt  to  her  women, 
And  they  (as  women  use)  to  all  the  world. 

Bkin.  This  does  not  move  me,  as  I  should  have  thought, 
My  guilt,  has  fiU'd  my  mind,  with  so  much  horrour.   [Aside. 
I  will  go  rest  upon  my  bed  Monthaleon, 
This  posture  to  my  wound  is  most  uneasy,  50 

And  oh !  to  my  afflicted  kinsman,  say 
That  I  would  dye,  to  sett  his  fame  as  clear 
As  in  th'  all  seeing  eye  of  Heav'n,  itt  stands. 

[Exeunty  he  leaning  on  Month. 
[Enter  Rivalto,  Vilmarin  and  Linnian 

I/in.  To  search  our  houses,  for  the  state's  lost  jewels, 
I  ne'r  yett  knew  of  any  of  them  missing, 
They're  so  remarkable,  'twere  vain  to  steal  them. 
'Tis  but  a  trick — 
To  give  us  some  disturbance,  in  revenge. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  319 

Riv.  It  may  be  so,  but  still  ye  have  done  well 
To  send  in  all  your  wealth,  that  that  may  'scape  them.       60 
I've  lodg'd  it  safely,  safely  as  my  own, 
And  when  this  search  is  past,  you'll  call  it  back. 

ViL  Oh !  yes,  itt  shall  but  trouble  you  till  then. 

Riv.  To  serve  my  freinds,  I  n'er  yett  thought  a  trouble. 
But  since  I  stand  the  foremost  in  their  hate, 
And  I  am  sure,  they  mean  the  search  I  tell  ye. 
Not  knowing,  but  they  may  extend  it  farther. 
And  under  that  pretence,  secure  my  person, 
I  am  resolv'd,  that  I'll  awhile  withdraw. 
What  think  ye  of  itt,  will  itt  not  do  well.  70 

Lin.  Do  as  you  will,  when  shall  we  hear  of  you. 

Riv.  Before  three  days  are  past,  assure  your  selves, 
Therefore,  'till  then  make  no  enquiry  for  me. 
Another  thing,  I  had  almost  forgott. 
The  Master  sends  this  night  a  private  Convoy 
To  bear  his  Damzell  to  a  distant  Convent, 
And  when  she's  gone,  what'ere  reports  ye  hear. 
Know  that's  the  truth,  now  lett  us  part, 
For  we're  suspected,  if  but  seen  together. 

Vil.  But  for  three  days,  you  say,  you  shall  be  absent,    80 

Riv.  Not  an  hour  more. 

Lin.  Then  till  that  time,  farwell.  [Exeunt  Vil  and  Lin. 

Riv.  Thus  far  'tis  right,  I've  all  their  wealth  on  board. 
And  now  tis  mine,  in  spite  of  all  our  freindship. 

For  he,  whose  aim  at  mighty  mischeif  tends. 

Must  own  no  gratitude,  nor  know  no  freinds.  [Exit 

The  Scene  changes  to  the  Queen's  antichamber. 
Riocio  alone. 
Ric.  Blow  on  ye  winds,  and  swell  the  seas  so  high 
That  ore  his  fleet,  your  proud  insulting  waves. 
May  ride  in  tryumph,  sinking  all  beneath  ye. 
I  long  to  hear  the  temper  of  the  Queen, 


820  The  Poems  op  Anne 

But  here  Clarilla  comes,  in  time  to  tell  me. 

[Enter  Clar. 

How  fares  it  with  our  great,  and  Royal  Mistresse? 

Clar.  Oh!  Riccio,  I  want  words  to  let  you  know  itt, 
But  fear  the  fatal  papers  which  you  brought, 
Will  finish,  what  the  tempest  has  ^begun, 
And  rob  us  of  her  most  unhappy  life.  10 

Rtc.  Explain  your  self,  what  saw  she  in  those  papers? 

Clar.  That  she  has  lost  the  most  auspitious  moment 
That  'ere  was  influenc'd,  by  a  gentle  planett. 
Two  writings  sign'd. 

By  all  the  Lords  of  Cyprus,  and  of  Venice 
Declare  the  General  King,  with  one  consent, 
And  that  our  Queen,  but  by  espousing  him. 
Must  ne'r  again,  expect  to  rule  in  Cyprus. 
But  ohl  his  letter,  calls  this,  such  presumption, 
As  he  wou'd  ne'r  have  oflfer'd  to  her  sight,  20 

Were  itt  not  to  convince  her,  e're  his  death, 
That  itt  was  love,  not  int'rest  urg'd  him  on 
To  seek  her  here,  and  oflFer  at  her  feet 
That  Crown,  he  might  have  worn  without  her  favour. 
Then  makes  itt  plain,  what  he  albeady  proffer'd. 
That  'twas  his  full  intention  to  restore  her 
By  his  own  power,  'ere  this  had  reach'd  her  knowledge. 
And  to  herself  have  left  it,  to  dispose 
Of  him,  and  all  his  fortunes,  at  her  pleasure. 

Rtc.  You  much  surprise  me,  was  there  nothing  more,    30 
Pool  that  I  was  to  lett  her  see  those  papers.  [Aside, 

Clar.  Nothing,  but  sad  complaints,  and  soft  expressions 
Jealous  mistakes,  that  'twas  her  love  to  Blanfort 

That  repuls'd  him. 

And  how  he  greiv'd,  his  sword  had  peirct  his  bosome. 

Since  she  had  in  itt,  treasur'd  up  her  heart, 

But  that  itt  shou'd  procure  her  speedy  vengeance, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  321 

By  bringing  on  that  death,  he  went  to  seek  for. 

But  whilst  I'm  here,  all  this  repeating  to  you, 

Dispair  may  seize  too  deeply  on  her  soul,  40 

Go  in  my  Lord,  and  try  to  bring  her  comfort. 

Ric.  I  go  Clarilla,  follow,  and  assist  me. 
How  neer  was  I  to  see  him  in  the  throne, 
Had  not  his  foolish  modesty  and  love, 

Prevented  itt,  and  so  secur'd  my  safety.  [Aside. 

I  must  now  meet,  and  try  to  lay  this  passion. 
Her  greifs  are  easyer  calm'd  then  his  revenge  [Exit. 

Clar.  I  must  stay  here,  to  free  my  tears  awhile 
Which  in  her  presence,  I  wou'd  fain  keep  back. 
Oh !  would  this  tempest  yett  but  be  appeas'd,  50 

We  might  again  see  happynesse,  and  Cyprus. 
But  here  she  comes,  alas,  who  can  behold  her, 

So  Dido  saw  the  Trojan  navy  part, 

With  looks  so  wild,  and  such  a  breaking  heart. 

[Enter  Queen,  disordered,  in  all  the  transports  of  a  violent  pas- 
sion, Riccio  follows  endeavouring  to  speak  to  her. 

Queen.  Preach  to   the   winds,   thou   dull,   thou  doating 
statesman, 
Go  to  that  storm,  that  plays  with  all  my  hopes. 
And  try  if  thou  can'st  calm  itt  with  a  speech. 
Tell  itt  of  inter' est,  politicks,  and  caution. 
And  if  for  these,  'twill  bate  one  angry  billow. 
Then  may'st  thou  hope  to  talk  me  into  patience.  60 

Fool  that  I  was,  to  list'n  to  thy  counsell, 
To  knitt  my  brow,  when  love  and  fortune  smil'd 
Because  thy  coward  fears,  cry'd  out  be  carefuU. 

Ric.  Yett,  hear  me  Madam. 

Queen.  Away,  away,  and  leave  me  to  my  self 
To  this  soft  counseller,  that  breaks  with  greif, 

[Pointing  to  her  breast. 
Because  it  was  not  harken'd  to  in  season.  [Exit  Bic. 


322  The  Poems  op  Anne 

A  noyae  as  of  a  ahip^  striking  against  the  ahoar  follovfd  by 
repeated  crya  from  within  of  many  voycea. 

From  ib^Hn.  The  Admirars  splitt,  send  ont  more  boats. 

[The  Queen  ainka  into  Clarilla's  arms. 

Queen.  Take  me  Clarilla,  take  me  to  thy  bosome, 
And  tell  those  freinds,  which  fortune  yett  has  left  me.       70 
The  Gen'rals  too  (if  they  vouchsafe  to  hear  thee) 
Tell  'em,  that  I  forgave  him  all  my  wrongs, 
Tell  'em  Clarilla,  that  I  moum'd  his  fall. 
Nay  tell  'em  (since  in  death,  there's  no  dissembling) 
I  loved  him,  more,  then  liberty  or  Empire. 

Clar.  Talk  not  of  dying,  since  he  still  may  live. 
And  'tis  but  prudence  to  support  this  greif. 
At  least,  till  we  can  hear  our  fears  are  certain. 

Queen.  Wou'dst  thou  then  have  me  stand  upon  the  shoar. 
And  wait,  like  sad  Alcyone  of  old,  80 

'Till  some  huge  billow,  cast  him  at  my  feet, 
A  breathlesse  trunk,  a  pale,  and  livid  corse. 
Oh!  no,  it  is  too  much,  too  much  to  think  itt; 
And  'ere  the  angry  sea,  returns  his  body, 
I'll  meet  his  soul  in  the  blest  seats  above, 
And  free  my  self,  from  that  new  scene  of  sorrow.  [She  faints. 

Clar.  Oh!  help,  the  Queen  expires,  she  dyes,  she  dyes. 

[Enter  the  reat  of  her  vxmien^  whilst  they  are  buay  about  her 
entera  Lauredan,  hia  dagger  in  hia  hand  and  apeaka  entering, 

Laiir.  I'll  do  itt  in  her  sight,  the  storm  was  kind 
To  spare  my  life,  for  had  I  perished  there, 
My  eyes  cou'd  not  have  told  my  curious  soul  90 

How  she  received  the  ofifring,  fate  had  made  her. 

[He  aeea  her  fainted. 
Ha! 

Yett  hold  my  heart,  Clarilla  how  came  this? 
Is  Blanfort  dead,  else  what  cou'd  kill  the  Queen? 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  323 

[He  ptda  the  dagger  within  his  cloathes  and  kneels  doum  by  the 

Queen. 

Rest  here  awhile,  thon  sure,  thou  active  Cordial, 

That  I  may  pray,  as  sacraficers  use, 

Before  I  strike  to  earth,  the  ready  victime. 

O!  lovely  ruine,  beautyfull  destruction,  [Takes  her  hand. 

To  touch  this  hand  whilst  life  had  lent  it  warmth. 

Had  been  to  mine,  thats  so,  transporting  pleasure  100 

Perhaps  'twill  be  the  same,  when  both  are  cold. 

Therefore  I'll  haste,  th'  experiment  to  try 

'Tis  death  to  live,  and  why  not  life  to  dye. 

[Going  to  stab  himself  with  his  other  hand. 

Clar.  Hold,  hold  my  lord,  she  breaths  again,  she  breaths, 
Oh!  hold  and  rather  help  us  to  support  her. 

[He  throws  away  his  dagger^  and  helps. 

Laur.  More  gladly,  then  I'd  prop  the  sinking  world, 
If  fate,  had  left  that  task,  to  my  sole  arm. 

[She  comes  a  little  to  herself. 

Queen.  Where  have  I  been,  sure  itt  was  Neptune's  court. 

For  Lauredan  was  newly  there  arriv'd, 

And  held  a  Trydent,  for  his  staff  of  battel  110 

I  heard  his  voyce,  but  oh  I  his  looks  were  chang'd 

And  still  methought,  he  told  the  list'ning  Nymphs 

That  'twas  the  Queen  of  Cyprus,  sent  him  theither. 

[S?ie  struggles. 
But  I  will  follow  him,  I  will,  I  will, 

Love  that  could  drive  Leander  o're  the  deep, 

Shall  dive  with  me,  throo'  all  the  silver  waves, 

Till  I  can  find,  and  tell  him  I  repent. 

But  Riccio  shall  not  go,  he  shall  not  goe. 

Least  he  should  urge  me  still  to  scorn  him  there. 

And  force  him  to  attempt  some  unknown  ruine.  120 

Laur.  Oh!  harmony,  beyond  the  Thracian  Lyre 

No  words  e're  fell  so  soft,  or  peirc'd  so  deep. 


324:  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Clar.  My  Lord,  I  must  entreat  you  to  retire, 
My  fear  and  care,  made  me  forgett  my  duty. 
And  prudence  tells  me  now,  you  must  retire. 

[He  holds  the  Q.  still  in  his  arms. 

Laur.  Talk  not  of  prudence,  in  this  happy  season. 
It  must  not,  nay  itt  shall  not  here  intrude ; 
When  in  the  feild,  I'll  make  itt  rule  o're  thousands. 
And  in  the  Counsell,  pleading  for  my  Queen, 
Permitt  itt  to  direct  each  word,  and  gesture,  130 

But  Love,  that  only  waits  to  catch  those  hours. 
Those  few  soft  Hours,  that  fall  in  her  wish'd  absence. 
Must  not  be  forced  to  quit  the  hard  gained  treasure. 

[The  Q.  looking  ama^dly  round. 

Queen.  Why  am  I  thus,  and  tell  me  who  are  these? 
My  heart,  and  thoughts,  are  full  of  wild  disorder, 
Heav'n  grant  no  word  has  'scap'd  my  troubl'd  tongue, 
To  make  me  wish,  I  ne'r  had  known  itts  use. 

Clar.  Pray  be  not  seen,  my  lord,  'twill  much  disturb  her. 
You've  learnt  already  that  which  most  concerns  you. 
And  for  the  future,  trust  to  be  inform'd  140 

Of  what  may  make  you  still  become  more  happy. 

[He  gives  the  Queen  into  her  arms. 

Laur.  So,  quitts  the  dying  Miser,  that  rich  store 
Which  cruell  fate,  will  lett  him  grasp  no  more, 
Promis'd,  alike  from  present  joys  we  move. 
To  be  in  future  paid  our  wealth,  and  Love, 
But  'tis  necessity,  not  choice,  prevails. 
And  hopes  n'er  please,  but  when  possession  fails.  [Exit. 

Clar.  Now  gently  raise,  and  lead  her  to  her  bed» 
'Tis  rest  alone,  that  must  restore  her  spirits. 

[They  convey  her  out. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  325 


ACT  V    SCENE  I 

The  Scene  drawn  discovers  Marina  upon  a  ctmch,  with  a  book  in 

her  hand. 

Mar.  I've  try'd  by  reading  to  appease  my  greifs 
Till  my  sad  eyes,  grown  heavy  as  my  heart, 
Will  serve  no  longer  to  pursue  the  story, 
I'll  seek  to  rest, 

— Kind  sleep  afoard  thy  charms, 
To  her  that  knows  no  peace,  but  in  thy  arms. 

[She  falls  asleep. 

[Blanfort  brought  in  a  chair  to  the  door^  turns  and  speaks  to 
them  that  brought  him^  then  leaning  on  his  sword  comes 
weakly  on. 

Blan.  Wait  there,  till  I  return  —  [He  sees  her  asleep. 

She  sleeps,  poor  injured  innocence,  she  sleeps. 
And  in  this  balmy  slumber,  looks  so  lovely. 
That  now  the  Queen  of  Cypress,  seems  not  fairer. 
Nor  wears  the  Goddesse  of  that  place  more  sweetnesse      10 
Why  tore  I  from  my  heart,  these  fruitfuU  charms, 

[He  kneels  by  her. 
To  give  itt  up  to  others,  most  ungratfuU? 

But  I  againe  will  plant  them  deeper  there. 

Though  misery,  is  all  they  now  can  grow  to. 

And  oh!  methinks,  I  sighing  hear  her  say 

When  I  have  told  her  we  must  meet  no  more, 

That  Blanfort  (tho'  repenting)  was  her  ruine.         [She  wakes. 

Mar.  Oh!  who  names  Blanfort,  who  upbraids  my  love, 
Who  says  'twas  he  that  ruin'd  poor  Marina 
Who  says  alas,  that  we  must  meet  no  more.  20 

Blan.  'Tis  base  Rivalto,  with  his  vile  confederates. 
Who  o're  thy  virgin  fame  have  drawn  a  cloud 
So  dark,  'twould  loose  us  both,  if  there  encount'ring. 
Else,  when  my  sighs,  had  blown  away  my  faults 


326  The  Poems  op  Anne 

And,  kneeling  thus,  I'd  woo  thee  to  a  pardon. 
Our  time  to  come  shou'd  all  have  passt  in  love, 
And  joys  as  soft,  and  melting  as  this  bosome, 
Marina,  oh  Marina,  must  we  part? 
By  this  embrace,  and  this,  I  swear  we  will  not 

[She  strives  and  he  quitts  his  hold. 
Again  thy  charms,  o'recome  my  ravish 'd  sence,  30 

And  empty  honour  shall  not  take  thee  hence. 

[Ooing  to  embrace  her. 

Mar.  Forbear,  my  lord,  forbear,  this  must  not  bee, 
And  if  again  such  libertys  you  take, 
I  shall  beleive,  you  think  me  what  they  say, 
Pray  rise — 
Alas,  you're  weak,  you  stagger,  lett  me  help  you. 

[He  rises  and  sits  down  by  her. 
Now  lett  us  talk  awhile,  before  we  sever. 
For  they  have  much  to  say  who  part  for  ever. 
Since  first  I  listen'd  to  your  vows,  my  lord. 
How  I  have  lov'd  you,  lett  my  ruine  speak,  40 

That  but  for  you,  I  priz'd  my  blooming  Youth, 
And  what  your  passion  call'd  some  share  of  beauty, 
Lett  my  concealing  itt  from  all  the  world 
When  once  you  slighted  itt,  bear  witnesse  for  me. 
That  now  I  love  you,  more  then  Misers  wealth. 
Then  women  courtship,  or  then  Tyrant's  pow'r, 
Lett  this  persuade,  this  last,  this  tend'rest  proof. 
That  I  will  leave  you,  to  secure  your  fame. 
Though  woo'd  to  stay,  by  all  your  moving  arts. 
And  death  must  waite  upon  the  seperation.  50 

Blan,  If  we  must  seperate,  to  dye  is  best, 
But  lett  me  know  Marina  thy  retreat. 
That  fame,  when  charg'd  with  tidings  of  my  fate. 
May  not  mistake  y*  way,  and  misse  thy  mantion. 

Mar,  Oh !  n'ere  believe  that  she  will  stoop  so  low 


OOUNTBSS   OP   WiNOHILSEA  327 

To  seek  those  shades,  where  I  intend  to  goe, 
For  tho'  employed,  still  in  adorning  Tombs, 
Within  the  Grave,  her  splendour  never  comes, 
There  Love  and  Fame,  their  pains  and  pleasures  cease, 
And  nothing  will  remain  with  us,  but  peace.  60 

[A  noise  within, 
I  hear  some  steps,  and  fear  a  new  surprize, 
Lett  me  but  take  this  look,  for  His  my  last, 
Farewell,  my  lord,  this  night  devides  us  ever. 
Now  lett  my  eyes  begin  their  work  assigned,  [She  weeps. 

Till  death  shall  close,  or  tears  shall  weep  them  blind 

Blan,  Will  thou  forsake  me  then,  to-night  my  love, 
This  fatal  night,  oh!  stay  but  till  to-morrow, 
Stay  but  untill  she's  wearing  towards  the  dawn 
And  lett  me  make  thee  yett  one  visit  more 
In  that  soft  hour,  of  secrecy,  and  love.  70 

I  have  not  told  thee  half  what  I've  to  say. 
Not  on  these  hands,  enough  renew'd  my  vows, 
Nor  warm'd  'em,  with  my  dear  repenting  tears, 
I  must  return,  I  must  return,  Marina, 
And  then  again,  we'll  thus,  and  thus,  take  leave. 

[Eagerly  kissing  her  hand;  Capriccio  calls  from  within. 

Cap.  Charge,  charge,  where  are  you, 
Come  let  me  take  care  of  you  quickly, 
Or  I  shall  fall  asleep. 

Mar,  Away  my  lord,  that  noysy  fellow's  coming. 
Like  the  loud  roar  of  some  o're  swelling  flood,  80 

To  break  the  gentle  murmurs  of  our  parting, 
Farwell  to  all  thats  dear — a  long  and  last  farwelL 

[She  goes  slowly  off,  he  looking  after  till  she's  out  of  sight, 

Blan.  Oh!  do  not  speak  itt,  nor  so  swiftly  move 
But  take  by  such  degrees,  that  object  from  me, 
That  till  tis  past,  I  scarce  may  feel  my  mine, 


328  The  Poems  of  Anne 

So  gazes  on  the  low  descending  Siin, 

The  traveller,  whose  journeys  yett  not  done, 

Follows  the  latest  beam,  with  eager  sight, 

That  gone,  persue's  his  way,  sad,  as  prevailing  night 

\  Exit  J  the  scene  shutia. 
Lauredan,  enter  to  him  Clarilla 

Zfaur.  Oh!  you  are  come  most  happily  Clarilla, 
For  grown  impatient  of  a  longer  stay 
My  love  had  urg^d  me  to  some  new  attempt, 
Again  to  seek  the  presence  of  my  Queen. 
Tell  me,  had  I  offended  in  my  zeal. 
For  ore  our  strongest  hopes,  still  fears  will  rise. 
And  claim  their  turn,  to  sway  the  Lover's  bosome. 
Clar.  I  think  my  lord  'twas  better  you  forbore, 
And  still,  you  must  support  a  longer  absence, 

Laur.  Oh !  say  not  so,  repeat  itt  not  Clarilla.  10 

Is  this,  the  promis'd  happynesse,  you  bring. 
For  which  I  gave  up  pleasures  in  possession, 
Dearer  then  life,  and  high,  as  Love  cou'd  make  them. 
Or  was  itt  but  a  dream,  and  now  awak'd. 
The  Queen,  the  lovely  Queen,  recalls  those  hopes. 
And  says,  that  reason  did  not  guide  her  speeches. 

Clar.  Nothing  of  this,  she's  still  the  same  my  Lord, 
And  sure  to  tell  you  more  then  that  were  needlesse 
But  'ere  she  will  determin  in  your  favour, 
Or  readmitt  you  to  her  wish'd  for  presence,  20 

Resolves  the  Prince  of  Rhodes,  her  friend,  her  refuge. 
Her  better  father,  as  she  justly  stiles  him, 
Shall  be  acquainted  with  the  whole  design, 
And  she,  and  that,  submitted  to  his  liking. 

Laur,  I  fly  Clarilla,  to  obtain  his  aid 
And  whilst  these  hours  of  form,  passe  slowly  by. 
Oh  Lett  my  love,  still  dwell  upon  thy  tongue. 
And  plead  in  gentle  terms,  for  my  recalling. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  829 

Clar.  TA.J  lord,  be  sure  of  all  my  pow'r  to  serve  you. 

[Exeunt, 
The  Scene  dravm  discovers  a  Bedchamber^  and  Marina  alone. 
Mar.  I  heard  his  voyce,  when  in  the  outward  room, 

And  in  that  closett,  when  I  calPd  Capriccio 

Me  thoughts  from  hence  again  he  answered  me. 

But  here  he  is  not,  and  I  want  his  aid, 

T^assist  me  in  my  most  unhappy  flight. 

For  now  tis  death  to  go,  since  Blanfort's  true 

And  bid  to  him,  and  love  a  last  adiew. 

Enter  Rivalto  who  locks  the  door,  then  overtakes  her  endeavor- 
ing to  gain  the  other,  he  locks  thai  also  and  puts  the  keys  in 
his  pockeit. 

Mar.  Oh!  I  am  ruin'd,  ruin'd  past  redemption, 
Who  can  asist  me  now,  or  hear  my  crys? 

Riv.  No  one  alive,  therefore  no  more  repeat  them.         10 
Hear  me,  for  I'll  be  short,  tho'  sure  as  fate. 
How  I  have  lov'd  you,  need  not  be  repeated, 
But  that  I  will  posesse  you,  is  as  certain. 
And  if  your  mine,  which  I  therefore  wrought, 
As  well  as  to  revenge  me  on  the  Master, 
Has  made  you  wise  enough  to  yield  to  this, 
We  may  be  happy  both,  beyond  expression. 
To  night,  I  leave  this  hated  place  for  ever, 
A  vessel  waits  me  at  the  haven's  mouth. 
Laden  with  wealth,  enough  to  feed  our  riots,  20 

Take  part  with  me,  retire,  and  be  my  wife, 
Or,  if  that  name,  beares  to  much  of  constraint, 
Be  free,  and  lett  our  pleasures  be  so  too, 
Give  me  your  answer,  positive  and  speedy. 

Mar.  Then  take  itt  thus,  I'll  dye  within  these  walls, 
Before  I'll  yeild,  to  live  with  such  a  monster. 

Riv.  If  your  in  earnest,  here's  the  way  to  do  itt, 

[Dratving  a  dagger. 


330  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Nor  can  you  hope  but  by  consent  t'  avoid  itt, 

No,  when  I  told  you  of  my  wealth,  and  purpose, 

'Twas  not  to  lett  you  'scape,  and  so  prevent  me,  30 

Therefore  once  more,  I  sett  the  choice  before  you. 

[She  we^8  and  trembles. 

Mar,  Then  I  will  go,  leave  me  an  hour  but  to  prepare  my 
self, 
And  I  will  go,  when  you  return  again. 

Riv.  Oh!  fine  request,  no,  I  have  laid  things  better, 
A  private  door  behind  that  loose  hung  arras, 
Leads  down  a  pare  of  stairs  into  the  sea, 
A  cover'd  boat,  now  waits  there  to  receive  us. 
Give  me  your  hand,  without  one  farther  thought, 
Else  here  I'll  leave  you  dead,  and  'scape  that  way  myself. 
Your  hand  Marina. —  40 

Mar.  I'll  dye  e're  give  my  hand  to  such  a  villain. 
Thou  canst  not,  darest  not,  wilt  not  be  so  wicked. 

\He  going  to  stab  her,  she  runs  towards  the  bed. 

Riv.  Then  take  that  just  revenge  of  all  thy  pride, 
I've  sworn  to  reach  thy  heart,  and  now  I'll  do  itt. 

Mar.  Oh !  murther,  murther, 
Some  unseen  pow'r,  protect  me  from  this  murther. 

[Capriccio  starting  from  the  bed,  lays  hold  on  Rivalto's  dagger 
hand.  Whilst  they  strive  the  key  falls  out  of  Rivalto's  2X)ck' 
ett,  she  takes  itt  and  i*uns  out  crying  murther. 

Cap.  That  pow'r  am  I,  oh !  rogue,  assault  a  woman, 

Mar.  Oh !  help,  some  help  to  catch  a  villain.  [Exit. 

Capr.  I  have  itt  now,  but  twas  a  plaguy  tugg 

[Cap.  gets  y^  dagger. 
Ha!  what  more  work,  50 

[Rivalto  gets  out  his  sword  and  endeavours  to  passe  by  him  he 

draws. 

Then  this  must  stop  your  course. 

[Enter  Blan:  leaning  upon  his  sword. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  331 

Blan.  It  was  Marina's  voyce,  and  I'll  obey  itt, 
I  cannot  sure,  want  strength,  when  she's  in  danger. 
But  see,  Capriccio  has  disarmed  Rivalto, 
What  is  itt,  Gentlemen,  has  bred  your  quarrel. 

[Capr.  unth  both  swords  stands  between  Riv.  and  the  door. 

Cap.  Nay  ask  him,  how  he,  and  my  charge  came  to  fall 
out 
I  was  quietly  asleep,  'till  she  cry'd  murther. 
And  then  up  I  got,  and  have  done  as  you  see. 

Riv.  Curse  on  my  fortune, 
Give  me  butt  my  dagger,  and  I'll  secure  ye  60 

From  further  trouble. 

[Enter  Month:  and  guards  with  Vil:  and  Lm:  seized. 

Month.  Oh !  see  'tis  true,  and  he's  disarm'd  and  taken. 
These  two  were  well  secured,  till  time  shall  show. 
How  far  they  stand  concem'd  in  all  his  plotts. 
Bring  'em  away,  all  to  the  Queens  apartment, 
Theither  the  rescu'd  trembling  Virgin  fled. 
And  has  declared,  that  'tis  by  him  confess'd, 
He  cast  the  scandal  on  our  worthy  Master, 
To  compasse  his  revenge,  att  once  and  Love. 
That  Princesse,  therefore  makes  itt  her  request  70 

That  all  may  be  examin'd,  in  her  presence 
And  she  may  be  partaker  of  his  joy. 
You'll  go  my  lord 

Blan.  Yes,  with  your  help  I  will, 
Tis  my  concern,  more  then  you  yett  immagin. 

[The  Prisoners  are  carry*d  out,  by  the  guards.    Blanf.  follows 
leaning  on  Month. 

The  Scene  changes  to  the  Queen's  Apartment.     The  Queen,  Aub: 
Laur:  Marin:  Clar:  Rice: 

Aub.  If  I  have  serv'd  you  Madam,  with  such  zeal, 

[To  the  Queen. 


332  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

As  now  to  do  me  honour,  you  acknowledge, 
Permitt  me  to  compleat,  and  urge  it  farther. 
By  ofiF'ring  to  your  Love,  this  generous  man, 
By  Birth  a  Prince,  a  sou'dier  by  profession, 
To  fight  your  battels,  and  support  your  Crown. 
And  bear  the  weight,  whilst  you  but  know  the  lustre. 

Queen.  My  lord,  I  still  have  prospered  by  your  councills, 
And  lett  my  gratitude  prevent  my  blushes, 
If  to  your  much  deserving  friend,  I  own  10 

I  n'er  comply'd  more  willingly  then  now. 

[Laur.  kneels  and  kisses  her  hand, 

Lau.  Oh!  thou  hast  paid  me  love,  for  all  my  sorrows. 
Prepaid  'em  all,  by  this  transporting  moment, 
And  when  I  seek  a  Crown,  but  at  these  feet, 
May'st  thou  forsake,  and  make  me  great,  and  wretched. 

[Enter  Blan.  supported  by  Month.  Capr.  guard  d  prisoners. 

Aub.  I  have  not  seen  you  Nephew,  since  your  hurt, 
Welcome  to  life  and  mee. 

Laur.  Can  you  forgive  the  wound,  your  self  occasion'd? 

Blan.  My  Lord,  I  ask  your  pardon,  and  the  Queens, 
For  that  rude  combat,  thus  end  all  our  quarrels.  20 

[Embracing  him. 

Aub.  Now,  lett  my  Joys  return,  my  fame  be  cleared. 
And  virtue  sink  no  more  beneath  my  scandall, 
Before  this  Royal  presence,  speak  Kivalto 
All  that  thou  know'st, 
Relating  to  this  lady,  and  my  self. 

Riv.  Shall  I  be  free,  be  favoured  and  rewarded. 
Without  all  these,  I  ask  not  to  be  pardon' d, 
If  I  do  speak,  and  answer  your  desires. 

Aub,  I  tell  thee  no, 
If  what  thou  say'st  exposes  thee  a  Villain,  30 

Nor  will  I  flatter  Vice,  for  vertue's  service. 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  333 

Riv.  Then  lett  the  world  beleive  as  now  they  do. 
I  will  not  speak,  tho'  you  cou'd  take  my  life. 

Aub.  Oh!  harden'd  impudence, — search  him  for  papers. 

Riv.  Forbear  but  that,  and  I  will  speak  the  truth. 

Aub.  Nay  then  it  is  of  weight,  proceed  Capriccio. 

[Riccio  seems  all  the  while  speaking  to  Laur* 

Laur.  I  do  not  ask,  what  urg'd  you  to  oppose  me, 
But  I  will  make  itt  now,  so  much  your  interest, 
N'er  more  to  do  itt,  that  I  will  beleive  you. 

Capr.  Here  are  my  lord,  two  papers  nothing  more.        40 

Aub.  What's  this,  come  heither  Blanfort, 

[Looking  on  one  of  y^  papers. 
Know  you  this  caracter — 

Blan.    'Tis    mine   my  lord,  and  when   some   points   are 
clear'd, 
I  shall  be  both  ashamed,  and  proud  to  own  itt. 

Aub.  That  nothing  here  may  seem  to  passe  in  private, 
Behold  a  contract,  sign'd  cmd  seal'd  by  Blcmfort, 
Unto  the  Duke  of  Mantua's,  yongest  Daughter. 
How  did  this  fall  into  your  hands,  Rivalto? 

Riv.  Prom  her,  herself,  whom  there  you  see,  I  stole  itt. 
Spare  yett  the  other,  and  I'll  tell  you  more.  50 

Aub.  The  superscription's  odd — 

"  If  in  three  days,  I'm  not  again  in  Rhodes, 
Deliver  this  to  Vilmarin  or  Linain." 
The  boatman  I  suppose,  that  bore  him  off. 
Was  to  be  charg'd  with  this  at  parting  from  him, 
Bead  itt  Monthaleon.  [He  reads. 

It  is  not  fitt  that  freinds  shou'd  part  without  some 
remembrance,  and  that  I  may  keep  you  two  ever  in  my  mind, 
I  have  taken  w^**  me,  never  to  return,  the  wealth  which  you 
putt  into  my  hands,  to  secure ;  but  that  I  may  not  be  alto- 
gether ungratef uU,  I  must  putt  you  upon  a  right  foundation, 
either  to  persue  the  Plott,  or  come  of  from  itt  as  you  think 


334  The  Poems  of  Anne 

best.  Know  then,  that  the  Great  Master  is  wholy  innocent 
of  what's  supposed,  and  never  knew  Marina  was  a  woman, 
Hill  drawn  by  me  that  night  into  her  Chamber,  the  maid 
was  Blanforts  right,  contracted  to  him,  tho'  here  not  known 
by  him  to  be  her  self,  she's  mine  att  present,  having  lov'd  her 
long,  and  now  farwell,  and  may  your  next  adventure  prove 
more  lucky." 

Vil.  Robb'd  of  our  witts,  and  of  our  wealth  att  once,  70 

[To  Lin. 

Lin,  'Tis  vain  to  talk,  we  are  both  fooPd  and  ruin'd. 

Aub.  Such  villany  wou'd  silence  one  with  wonder, 
Did  not  the  joy  that  this  discovery  brings 
Work  stronger  far,  and  raise  me  into  transports. 
Oh!  hear  itt  freinds,  receive  the  happy  sound, 
I  am  no  Hypocrite,  no  secrett  sinner; 
Louder  then  victory,  and  swift  as  fame. 
Proclaim  itt  to  the  world,  I  am  not  wicked. 
And  lett  this  lady,  this  fair  injur'd  lady  [To  Mar. 

Partake  the  joy  and  share  the  reparation.  80 

Blan.  Tis  I  my  Lord,  tis  I  must  make  her  that, 

[Kneels  to  her. 
And  beg  all  help,  to  win  a  pardon  from  her, 
Oh !  now  we  will  not  part,  we  will  not  part, 
Shall  we  Marina,  thou  art  silent  still. 
Oh !  speak,  for  till  that  time,  tho'  twere  for  ever, 
I  wou'd  n'er  speak  more — 

Mar,  My  Lord,  what  I  have  done,  enough  has  spoaken, 
And  told  the  World,  my  love  outrun  my  prudence. 
That  paper  speaks,  and  says  I've  given  my  hand 
Already,  giv'n  itt,  where  my  heart  directed.  90 

All  I  can  do,  is  now  but  to  restore  itt, 

[Gives  him  her  hand,  he  takes  and  kisses  itt. 
And  'tis  your  fault,  if  e're  again  'tis  quitted. 

Blan,  I'll  hold  itt  here  for  ever — 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  335 

And  tye  my  life,  so  fast  to  this  soft  charm, 

That  Death,  and  nothing  else,  shall  e're  dissolve  iti 

Aub.  Seize  on  his  Ship,  tis  forfeit  by  the  Law, 

[To  an  officer. 
For  quitting  of  the  port  without  a  Passe. 
A  third  of  itt  shall  be  thy  share  Capriccio, 
But  let  it  not  be  spent  my  freind  in  drink, 
I'll  ha'  no  more  of  that—  100 

Capr.  Take  itt  again  my  Lord  if  drinks  deny'd 
I  know  no  use,  either  of  gold  or  silver. 
Oh !  world  ungratefull  world,  to  spurn  att  Blessings, 
What  mighty  good,  has  not  been  done  by  drink. 
What  Plotts,  have  not  been  brought  to  light  by  drink, 
The  Goose,  that  sav'd  the  Capitol  was  drunk. 
Or  ne'r  had  gabbl'd  loud  enough  to  do  itt. 
Had  I  not  now  been  drunk 
I  had  not  slept  upon  my  charges  bed. 

And  made  you  all  as  drunk,  with  love  and  joy,  110 

And  must  I  drink  no  more — 

•  to  death  I'll  pine, 
And  spend  this  money  all  in  funeral  wine,      [They  all  laugh. 

Aub.  Before  your  death,  release  your  prisoners  Captain, 
Your  crimes  wou'd  reach  imprisonment  for  ever. 
But  since  against  myself,  they  are  comitted, 
I'll  pardon  ye,  but  upon  this  condition. 
That  of  your  selves  ye  freely  leave  this  isle. 
The  habitts,  and  the  names  of  what  ye  were. 
And  least  necessity  still  make  ye  wicked 
I  give  ye  back  your  wealth,  his  part  excepted,  120 

[Pointing  to  Capr. 
Away,  and  in  three  days,  be  seen  no  more. 

Riv,  I  ought  to  thank  you,  for  this  grace,  but  cannot, 
I'm  fal'n  so  much  below  my  expectations. 
That  all  your  Jayles,  can  add  no  suflFrings  to  me, 


336  The  Poems  of  Anne 

I'll  leave  this  place,  for  all  I  hate  is  here, 

And  all  I  lov'd,  is  now  most  hatefnll  to  me.  [Exii^ 

Vil.  My  Lord,  this  Devil  has  not  damned  us  quite, 
Your  orders  we'll  obey,  and  blesse  your  mercy.  [ExU  Vil:  Lin 

Aub.  Now  fair  Marina,  own  me  for  your  kinsman, 
And  all  our  errours,  tow'rd  your  birth  and  sex  130 

Forgive,  and  think  we'll  ever  try  to  mend  them. 

Qtieen.  My  lord.     I  beg  to  joyn  in  that  request. 
And  thus  embracing,  court  you  for  my  freind  [To  her. 

Mar.  I  fear  I  shall  grow  proud,  with  all  these  honours. 
Aub.  I'll  send  to  tell  the  Duke,  your  noble  Father, 
How  you  intend  to  blesse  my  Nephews  Love, 
He's  not  yett  vow'd,  nor  shall  be,  but  to  you, 
And  to  his  own,  my  lands  shall  all  be  added. 
To  make  him  still  become  more  worthy  of  you, 

[Blan.  offers  to  epeak. 
No  thanks,  dear  Youth,  I  ever  meant  itt  for  you,  140 

And  cou'd  not  give  itt,  att  a  time  more  propper. 
To  harmlesse  revells,  lett  us  now  repair. 
Whilst  mirth  and  musick,  eccho  throo'  the  air. 
And  bear  our  tryumphs,  to  the  blest  above, 
That  spring  like  theirs,  from  innocence,  and  Love. 

the  end 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  337 

ARISTOMENES:  OR,  THE  ROYAL  SHEPHERD 
A  TRAGEDY 

PROLOGUE  TO  ARISTOMENES 

To  my  Lord  Winchilsea,  upon  the  first  reading  the  Play  to  him^ 
at  Eastwell  in  Kent 

When  first  upon  the  Stage  a  Play  appears, 

'Tis  not  the  multitude  a  poet  fears, 

Who  from  example,  praise,  or  dam  by  roate. 

And  give  their  censure,  as  some  Members  vote. 

But,  if  in  the  expecting  box,  or  pitt. 

The  wretch  discerns  one  true,  substantial  witt. 

Towards  him,  his  doubtful  sight,  he'll  still  direct, 

Whose  very  looks  can  all  his  faults  detect. 

So,  though  no  croud  is  gather'd  here,  today. 

And  you  my  Lord,  alone,  must  Judge  this  Play,  10 

Much  more  the  ign'rant  Author  is  concem'd. 

Then  if  whole  troops,  of  vulgar  Critticks  swarm'd; 

Since  Horace,  by  your  mouth,  must  all  condemn. 

And  'tis  her  losse,  that  you're  so  great  with  him. 

But,  when  good  Plays  scarse  pleas'd  our  Charles's  Court, 

(So  nice  him  self,  and  the  refin'der  sort) 

A  droll,  wou'd  att  Newmarkett  make  them  sport. 

Where  rusty  copper,  dect  the  strouling  Vermin, 

And  flannel  dash'd  with  Ink,  make  princely  Ermin, 

Then  lett  not  this  poor  Poem,  quite  dispair,  20 

The  country  asks  but  plain,  and  homely  fare; 

And  if  this  please,  by  a  good  winter's  fire 

More  then  a  visite  from  a  neigh 'bring  squire. 

Or  tedious  sheet,  of  doubtful  news  from  Dyer, 

The  Writer's  too  well,  paid  for  all  her  pain. 

Who'll  now  begin,  in  King  Cambyses'  strain, 

Heroicks,  such  as  Falstaffe  heretofore 


338  Thb  Poems  of  Asse 

Bepeated,  when  a  cusheon  crown  he  wore ; 

Yet,  those  the  Hostesse  mor'd  her  eyes  to  wett. 

These  lines,  she  fears,  no  passions  will  b^ett,  30 

Bat  ^twill  appear,  in  spite  of  all  inditing, 

A  woman's  way  to  charm  is  not  by  writing. 


DRAMATIS  VEBSaSM 


AristomeneSy  Prince  of  the  Messtniatu  and  Arcadians 

AristoTj  Son  to  Aristomenes, 

Alcander,  a  Principal  Officer  under  ArMamenes. 

^^^^"*^^^  /  Son  to  the  Prince  of  12«kxie«,underthel>isgui9e 

Royal  Shepherd,  )     ^  *  Shepherd  call'd  CUmander, 

ArcagiuSf  An  old  Lord,  under  the  Habit  of  a  SheidieTd,Goancellor 

io  Demagetus. 
AnaxandeTy  one  of  the  Kings  of  Laeedenum  (for  they  had  always 

Two)  and  Leader  of  their  FcHrces  against  Aritiomenes. 
ClarinthuSj  Chief  Coimcellor  to  AncucandeTj  a  Lord  of  Sparta. 
Clinias,  A  Shepherd  keeping  his  Flock  on  the  Plains  of  Jfessenuz, 

close  to  the  Walls  of  Phaerea,  with  other  Shepherds. 

WOMEN 

Herminia^  Daughter  to  Aristomenes. 

Barina,  Her  Woman  and  Confident. 

Amalintha,  Daughter  to  Anaxander. 

Phila,  Her  Woman  and  Confident. 

Thceia,    ) 

and      r   Shepherdesses  on  the  Plains  of  Messenia. 
Lamia,  ) 

Soldiers,  Officers,  Guards,  and  Attendants,  several  Lords  of  the 
Spartan  Coimcil. 

The  general  SCENES  are  Aristomenes's  Camp  near  the  Walls  of 
Phcerea;  sometimes  the  Tovm  of  Phcerea,  and  sometimes  the 
Plains  among  the  Shepherds. 


Countess  op  Winchilsba  83ft 


ACT  I    SCENE  I 

A  plecuant  Plain  by  a  Wood-side;  beyond  it  are  seen,  on  one 
side,  some  of  the  Shepherds  Hamlets ;  on  the  other  {at  a  dis- 
tance) the  Walls  of  Phserea,  a  Garrison  of  the  Lacedemonians. 

Enter  Climander  meeting  Arcasius;  both  drest  like  Shepherds. 

Clim.  Hast  thou  provided  me  a  Horse  and  Arms, 
A  Sword,  ArcasiiiSy  that  when  Time  has  freed  me 
From  the  Severe  Injunctions  of  a  Father, 
May  fill  my  Hand,  instead  of  this  vile  Hook, 
And  fit  it  for  the  Work,  a  Prince  is  bom  to? 

Area.  Unwillingly,  I  have  obey'd  your  Orders; 
But,  Hill  to-morrow's,  and  the  next  day's  Sun 
Shall  light  the  angry,  and  contentious  World, 
Your  Promise  to  your  Father  is  in  Force ; 
As  well  as  the  Assurance,  which  you  gave,  10 

That  in  my  Custody  these  Arms  shou'd  rest, 
Until  that  fatal  Time  demands  their  Use. 

Clim.  Call  it  not  Fatal;  Oh!  that  'twere  arriv'd! 
That  Aristomenes,  the  Spartan  Terrour, 
Were  leading  me,  this  moment,  bravely  on 
Through  Dangers,  equal  to  the  Cause  he  fights  for. 
Preserving  these  free  Plains  from  foreign  Bondage! 
Though  in  the  Strife  this  Body  strew'd  the  Ground, 
To  Fame,  and  Publick  Good  an  early  Victim. 

Area.  O  wretched  Rhodes!  Thy  Ruin  is  pronounc'd,    20 
And  thou  beneath  th'  impending  Plagues  may'st  perish ; 
Since  He,  whom  Oracles  appoint  to  Aid  thee. 
Thus  wishes  with  his  Own,  to  sell  Thy  Safety, 
For  the  rash  Praise  of  an  intruding  Warriour. 

Clim.  No  more  of  Oracles! 
Which  oftner  we  fulfil  by  heedless  Chance, 
Than  the  vain  Study  to  pursue  their  Meaning; 


340  The  Poems  of  Anne 

• 

Which  makes  me  banish,  from  my  lab'ring  Thoughts, 
Those  Mystick  Words,  which  serve  but  to  perplex  them. 
Arc.  From  Mine  they  will   not   part,. nor  shon^d    from 
Yours;  30 

Which  to  prevent,  ev'n  now  I  will  repeat  them ; 

The  Isle  of  Ehodes  shall  he  of  Peace  bereft^ 

Unless  it  by  the  Heir  thereof  be  lefty 

And  that  He  wedy  ere  he  returns  ageUy 

The  Beauteous  Daughter  of  the  Best  of  Men; 

Whose  Father^s  presence  there  shall  save  the  Staie^ 

And  smooth  the  threaining  Brow  of  angry  Fate. 

Clim.  But,  Who  this  Man,  or.  Where  his  Daughter  is, 
Was  left  in  Darkness,  to  employ  our  Search: 
Yet,  in  Obedience,  Hither  did  I  come  40 

To  feed  a  Flock,  and  mix  with  simple  Swains; 
Because  the  Priests,  who  sway  in  Princes  Courts, 
Declar'd,  that  perfect  Innocence,  and  Virtue 
Was  to  be  found  but  in  their  lowly  Rank, 
And  There,  the  Best  of  Men  was  to  be  sought  for. 

Arc.  'Tis  True,  they  did;  and  therefore  urg'd  our  Prince; 
That  slighting  (in  a  Case  of  such  Importance) 
The  Pride  of  Titles,  and  of  equal  Birth, 
You  might  espouse  One  of  these  Rural  Maids, 
Whose  Parents  harmless  Presence  in  our  Land  50 

Might  bring  the  Blessings  of  the  Gods  upon  us; 
And,  lest  the  Wars  (which  still  infest  these  Countries) 
Shou'd  tempt  you  from  from  the  Fates,  and  his  Design, 
How  strictly  did  He  Charge  it  on  your  Duty, 
That,  'till  the  Time,  which  now,  Two  Days  must  end. 
You  shou'd  not  leave  these  Plains,  to  seek  the  Camp! 

Clim.  Nor  have  I  done  it,  as  Thyself  can  witness ; 
But  here  have  spent  the  long  and  lazy  Hours, 
Carelesly  stretch'd  beneath  some  Sylvan  Shade, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  341 

And  only  sent  my  Wishes  to  their  Tents:  60 

But  ere  the  Battle  (which  is  soon  intended) 
Shall  meet  in  glorious  Tryal  of  their  Right, 
I  will  be  there,  and  side  with  the  Meaaenians. 

Arc.  Oh!  that  you  wou'd  not! 
That  first  your  Native  Country  might  be  serv'd, 
Think  on  her  Danger,  and  your  Sovereign's  Will: 
'Twas  to  the  Reed,  and  not  the  wrangling  Trumpet 
He  bid  you  listen,  to  secure  his  Peace; 
Nor  have  you  look'd  with  Love,  as  he  required, 
On  any  Shepherdess,  tho'  ne'er  so  Fair,  70 

Or  bom  of  Parents,  harmless  as  their  Flocks. 
Low  on  my  Knees,  my  Lord,  let  me  prevail,  [He  Kneels. 

That,  when  the  Time,  decreed  you,  do's  expire. 
You  will  not  prosecute  this  rash  Design ; 
But  go  with  me  yet  farther  on  these  Plains, 
And  seek  to  please  your  Father,  and  the  Gods, 
Lq  such  safe,  humble  ways,  as  they  direct  us. 

Clim.  Nay,  prithee,  do  not  kneel;  it  grates  my  Nature: 

[Raises  him. 
But  trust  me,  when  we  have  subdued  these  Countries 
When  Lacedemon^s  Kings  shall  sue  for  Peace,  80 

And  make  great  Aristomenes  Returns 
Agreeing  to  his  Merits,  and  their  Wrongs, 
And  I  have  gain'd  such  Honour  as  becomes  me; 
Whate'er  thou  dost  request  shall  be  observ'd: 
And  tho'  my  Soul  finds  such  vast  disproportion 
Betwixt  the  Thoughts,  with  which  she  is  inspired, 
And  those,  that  lodge  in  these  poor  Country  Maids; 
Yet  shall  my  Duty  o'er  my  Temper  rise, 
I'll  trust  (like  Others)  only  to  my  Eyes, 
And  think,  that  Women  in  Perfection  are,  90 

Tho  ne'er  so  Ignorant,  if  Young  and  Fair, 


342  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Arc.  Ha!     \a  Noise  is  heard  of  distant  Drums.    Aside.] 
Sure  I  hear  the  distant  Sound  of  Drums. 
Heav'n  grant  what  IVe  been  told,  and  kept  so  secret, 
Of  a  Design  this  Day  to  end  the  War, 
Be  not  a  Truth  too  tempting  for  my  Reasons! 

Enter  frighted,  Thaeta  and  Lamia,  Shepherdesses. 

Thee.  Oh!  may  we  here  be  safe,  tell  us  Climanderf 
For  all  the  Lawns,  that  lie  beyond  the  Hill, 
Where  still  our  Flocks  were  us'd  to  feed  in  peace, 
Are  fiU'd  with  War,  and  dark  with  flying  Arrows :  100 

The  Sheep  disperse,  whilst  none  regard  their  Safety, 
But  call  on  Pan,  to  shield  th'  advent 'rous  Chief, 
The  noble  Aristomenes  from  Danger. 

Clim.  Hear  me,  ArcasinSj  hear  and  do  not  thwart  me; 

[Aside  to  Arc. 
Not  tye  me  to  a  few  remaining  Hours: 
For,  by  the  horrid  Shield,  that  bears  the  Oorgon, 
I  Swear;  if  thou  refuse  to  arm  me  now 
With  what  I  sent  thee  lately  to  provide, 
These  feet  shall  bear  me  sandal'd  to  the  Battle, 
This  flow'ry  Wreath  shall  mix  with  their  stern  Helmets,  110 
And  Death  I'll  take,  if  not  impower'd  to  give  it. 

Arc.  Oh !  do  not  ask  my  Aid ;  but  in  this  Tryal, 
Call  all  your  fainting  Virtue  to  assist 
And  help  you  keep  your  Promise  to  your  Father. 

Clim.  I  did  not  promise  him  to  be  a  Coward, 
To  let  the  Sound  of  War  thus  strike  my  Sense, 
Yet  keep  my  Heart  in  a  cool,  even  Temper. 
Hark!  this  way  comes  the  Noise,  and  I  will  meet  it. 

[As  he  is  going,  a  confus'd  Noise  and  Cry  is  heard  within. 

Arc.  They're  Cries  of  Grief,  and  not  the  Shouts  of  Battle. 
I  hope  Airs  past,  lest  He  and  Rhodes  shou'd  perish.        120 


Countess  op  Winchilsba  343 

Enter  meeting^  Climander,  Clinias,  and  other  Shepherds. 

1st  Shep.  Ruin'd,  Undone! 

Cflin.  Let  every  Shepherd  weep! 
Tnm  their  sweet  Harmony  to  Sighs  and  Groans! 
To  the  fierce  Wolves  deliver  up  their  Flocks, 
And  leave  Messenia  to  the  cruel  Victor! 

Clim.  The  Victor,  Clinias!  is  the  Fight  then  over? 

Cflin.  It  is,  and  We  again  the  Slaves  of  Sparta. 

Clim.  Then  Aristomenes  must  sure  be  breathless. 
And,  if  he's  Dead,  falPn  in  his  Countries  Cause: 
The  Gods  have  giv'n  Him  Fame,  whilst  We  are  Wretched.  130 

Clin.  Oh!  He's  not  Dead,  but  Living  in  their  Power, 
Which,  'tis  believ'd,  they'll  use  with  utmost  Rigour: 
Pressing  too  far  on  the  Auxiliary  Troops, 
The  Foe  surrounding  bore  him  from  his  Horse, 
Then  with  the  Thongs  of  their  curs'd  Cretan  Bows 
Bound  his  strong  Arms,  and  lead  him  oflF,  in  Triumph. 

Clim.   Convert,   ye   Powers,   to    Blood  and  Tears  that 
Triumph! 

Rescue  from  their  vile  Hands  the  noble  Prey, 
And  send  him  warmer  Friends  than  Demagettis,         [Aside. 
Who,  knowing  not  his  Person,  lov'd  his  Valour!  140 

O  ill-tim'd  Duty,  how  hast  thou  betray'd  me! 
Where  is  Aristorf  Where's  the  brave  Alcanderf    [To  them. 

Clim.  The  first  may  share  in  his  great  Father's  Fate, 
For  ought,  as  yet,  the  Army  can  discover: 
Alcander  heads,  but  cannot  lead  them  on. 
And  'tis  believ'd  they  quickly  will  forsake  him ; 
Such  cold  Dismay  and  Terrour  has  possess'd  'em! 
Yet  ere  we  part,  forever  part  from  hence, 
(If  so  the  cruel  Tyrant  shou'd  Decree) 
Let  us  appoint  one  sad  and  solemn  Meeting,  150 

Where  all  the  Ensigns  of  our  former  Mirth 
May  be  defac'd  and  oflFer'd  to  His  Praise. 


844  The  Poems  of  Anne 

That  made  onr  Nights  secure,  and  blessM  oar  Days. 

lat  Shep.   So  let  it  be! 

Again,  one  Evening  on  these  Plains  we^ll  meet, 

2nd  Shep.  But  never  tread  them  more  with  chearfcd  Feet 
[Exeunt  Shepherds  and  Shepherdessee. 

Clim.  Cruel  Arc€i»ius\  How  hast  thou  undone  me. 
Charming  me^  with  thy  Tears,  to  this  soft  Circle, 
Whilst  the  bright  Spirit,  Honour  is  gone  by, 
And  borne  away  on  never- turning  Pinions!  160 

Why  wou'd'st  thou  thus  contrive  against  my  Fame, 
And  rob  my  fiery  Youth  of  this  first  War, 
(For  which  it  languish^  with  a  Lover's  Fondness) 
By  saying  still  'twou'd  last,  'till  Time  had  freed  me? 
But  I  will  yet  pursue  it  thro'  Despair, 
And  share  their  Ruin,  tho'  deny'd  their  Glory. 

[Aa  he^a  going  Arc  kneeU. 

Arc  Yet,  this  last  time,  behold  my  bended  Knees, 
Which  if  you  slight  shall  of  the  Gods  implore 
A  hasty  Death,  to  fall  on  old  Arcasius: 
Nor  think,  this  Posture  means  to  cross  your  way ;  170 

For,  by  those  Powers  I  swear;  if  they  will  Fight 
As  much,  we  hear  'tis  doubted  by  the  Shepherds, 
I  will  not  sue,  to  keep  you  from  the  Army, 
Or  bring  on  me  your  future  Life's  Reproaches. 
Let  me  obtain  but  This,  for  all  my  Service, 
To  be  first  sent  to  sound  their  Disposition, 
Which  I'll  relate  with  Truth,  and  help  your  Purpose: 
In  this  Attempt  Two  Hours  will  not  be  lost; 
Oh !  give  so  much,  to  save  his  Life,  that  loves  you. 

Clim,  Thou  hast  obtain'd  it,  by  thy  promised  Aid,        180 
And  my  long  Knowledge  of  the  Truth  that  guides  thee. 
About  it  then,  whilst  in  that  shady  Grove, 
I  with  impatience  wait  for  thy  Return. 

Area.  Which  shall  not  be  prolonged  my  Lord,  believe  me. 

[Exeunt  severally. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  345 

Enter  several  SoldierSy  running  over  the  Stage,  and  throwing 
away  their  Arms. 

1st  Sold.  Away,  away,  haste  to  the  Woods  for  Shelter. 
2d  Sold.  Do  they  begin  to  sally  from  the  Town? 
3d  Sold.  I  know  not;  look  behind  him,  he  that  will. 
Here  lies  my  Way —  [They  run  into  the  Wood. 

Enter  more,  doing  as  the  former. 
1st  Sold.  Farewell  the  Wars!     Oh!  never  such  a  General! 
2d  Sold.  Never  such  Sorrow!  never  such  a  General!    190 

Enter  nuyre. 

2d  Sold.  What,  is  the  Army  all  dispersM,  and  broken! 

ITo  them. 

3d  Sold.  No,  but  the  Wisest  of  them  do  as  We  do. 
Away,  away — 

Enter  Alcander  meeting  them. 

Alcand.   Why   do   ye   fly   my   Friends,   and   cast   these 
from  ye? 
For  shame!  like  Men,  that  once  have  known  their  Use, 
Take  'em  again,  and  wait,  or  seek  the  Foe. 

3d  Sold.  Seek  'em,  for  what? 
We  cannot  find  our  General  out  amongst  'em: 
'Tis  thought  they've  made  sure  Work  with  him  already; 
And  now  you'd  have  us  run  upon  their  Swords.  200 

We  thank  you.  Captain.     Ctome  away,  away! 

[Exit  folloufd  by  some  others. 

Ale.  Oh!  yet  my  Fellow-Soldiers,  stay  and  hear  me; 
Can  ye  so  soon  forget  your  Noble  General, 
Your  AristomeneSy  whose  Courage  fed  ye. 
And  by  whose  Conduct,  ye  have  slept  securely 
In  reach  of  Foes,  that  trebled  ye  in  Number! 
Can  ye  forget  the  Care,  that  heal'd  your  Wounds; 
The  Tongue,  that  prais'd  them ;  or  those  Liberal  Hands, 
That  pour'd  down  Gold,  faster  than  they  your  Blood! 


346  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Ist  Sold.  No;  were  he  but  amongst  us,  weM  Dye  with  him. 

2d  Sold.  We  are  no  Cowards,  Captain,  nor  UngratefoL  211 
Bnt  since  they  say,  He's  Dead,  What  can  we  do? 

Alcand.  Go  back,  and  keep  a  little  while  together; 
At  least,  'till  there  are  Tydings  from  the  Town: 
Then,  if  he  lives,  we  may  attempt  his  rescue; 
Or,  if  he's  Dead,  in  a  most  jnst  despair 
Bum  their  accnrst  Phcerea  o'er  their  Heads, 
And  then  disperse,  when  we're  so  far  reveng'd. 
Do  this  my  Friends;  Come,  come,  I  know  you  will: 
Yon  lov'd  the  General —  220 

Ist  Sold.  Curs'd  be  He,  that  did  not! 

2d  Sold.  We  will  go  back,  but  ne'er  shall  see  him  more. 

3d  Sold.  Then  we  will  Fight  no  more,  that's  sure  enough. 

4th  Sold.  Howe'er,  let's  follow  the  brave  Captain  here. 
And  stay,  'till  we're  inform'd  as  he  advises. 

Alcand.  Come,  I  will  march  before  you. 
Take  up  your  Arms  and  trust,  my  Friends,  to  me: 
Your  Lives  shall  not  be  set  on  idle  Hazards ; 
Lose  no  more  time,  but  let  us  join  the  Army. 

[They  take  up  their  Arms^  and  Exeunt. 

Enter  Herminia  and  Barina,  Disguis'd  like  Shepherdesses. 

Herm.  Alas!  Barina,  whither  wilt  thou  lead  me?        230 

Bar.  To  Safety,  Madam,  poor  and  humble  Safety, 
Which  in  those  Hamlets,  now  within  our  Sight, 
The  Shepherds  find,  with  whom  we  may  partake  it. 

Herm.  Thus  far  indeed  thou'st  brought  me  on  to  seek  it. 
Urging  the  Danger  of  a  Virgin's  Honour, 
When  left  defenceless  to  the  Conqueror's  Will: 
But  dost  thou  think,  we  may  not  through  these  Woods 
Find  out  some  gloomy  Cave  to  Men  unknown, 
And  there  expiring,  sleep  secure  for  ever? 

Bar.  Why  should  we  Dye,  240 

Since  Aristomenes  may  yet  be  Living? 


Countess  op  Winchilsba  347 

Herm.  Oh!  that  thou  hadsH  not  named  him! 

[She  starts  and  weeps. 
'Till  we  were  lodg'd,  where  Grief 
Might  have  its  Course;  for  now  Hwill  flow 
And  stop  our  farther  Passage,  barring  the  Sight 
Which  should  conduct  our  Steps. 

Bar.  It  must  not  Madam,  nor  must  you  indulge  it, 
But  put  on  chearful  Looks  to  suit  this  Habit, 
And  make  the  World  believe  you  what  you  seem. 

Herm.  I  cannot  do  it.  250 

In  the  midst  of  Sport 
I  should  forget  the  gay,  f antastick  Sceife, 
And  drop  these  Tears,  when  Smiles  were  most  expected. 

Bar.  Then  'tis  in  vain  farther  to  seek  for  Shelter: 
Let  us  return  and  wait  in  your  Pavilion, 
'Till  Anwcander  shall  command  you  thence 
To  serve  the  base  Delight  of  some  proud  Spartan. 

Herm.  Oh!  yet  avert  that  Fate,  ye  angry  Powers! 
I  yield,  Barina\  make  me  what  thou  wilt: 
See,  I  no  more  am  sad;  look  on  this  Brow;  260 

Canst  thou  read  there  that  I  have  lost  a  Father, 
The  best,  the  fondest,  and  the  dearest  Father? 
Forgive  the  tender  Thought,  that  breeds  this  Change; 
m  weep  it  off,  and  smile  again  to  please  thee. 

Bar.  No;  I'll  weep  too,  for  his,  that's  past. 
And  your  approaching  Ruin. 

Herm.  Alas!  I  had  forgot,  but  now  am  Calm: 
What  must  I  do?  indeed  I  will  observe  thee. 

Bar.  Then  not  far  hence,  conceal'd  within  this  Grove 
Wait  my  Return,  who  must  go  find  the  Shepherds,  270 

And  frame  some  Story ;  that  when  you  appear. 
Thro'  no  Enquiries  we  become  suspected: 
And  in  my  absence,  be  your  Thoughts  employ'd 
To  bend  your  Mind  to  what  the  Times  require. 


348  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Herm,  To  Fate  and  thy  Advice  I  will  submit, 

Suit  to  my  alter'd  State  my  low  Desire; 

My  Fare  be  plain,  and  homely  my  Attire, 

My  Tresses  with  a  simple  Fillet  bind, 

Face  the  hot  Sun,  and  wither  in  the  Wind ; 

In  my  parch'd  Hand  a  rural  Crook  be  found,  280 

The  Trees  my  Curtains,  and  my  Bed  the  Ground: 

That  Fortune  (who  at  Greatness  aims  her  Blow) 

When  thus  disguis'd  may  not  a  Princess  know. 

[Exeunt. 

The  SCENE  changes  to  a  Street  in  the  Toum  of  Phaerea  (the 
Lacedemonian  Oarrison)  a  Rabble  and  many  common  Soldiers 
in  the  Street. 

1st  Sold.  All's  done,  all's  done  my  Fellows. 
We  may  now  go  home  to  our  Wives  and  our  Shops. 

1st  Rabble.  Ay,  that  we  may ;  we  have  caught  him  at  last. 
That  has  been  our  Back-friend  so  long. 
As  one  may  say — 

2d  Sold.  Nay,  I'll  be  sworn, 
Thou  ne'er  look'd'st  him  in  the  Face: 
But  we  shall  have  the  tossing,  and  the  tumbling  of  him 
Assoon  as  ever  the  sowre-fac'd  Senators 
Have  dismiss'd  their  Judgments  upon  him. 

3d  Rabble.  Ay,  I'll  warrant  ye,  shall  we;  10 

Here,  here  he  comes ;  bear  back,  bear  back. 

[Aristomenes  bound  and  guarded  is  conducted  over  the  Stage,  the 
Rabble  crouding  and  following  him  with  confused  Cries  and 
Shouts,  Exeunt. 

The  SCENE  changed,  discovers  a  Council- Chamber  in  Anaxan- 
der's  Palace:  Anaxander,  Clarinthus,  and  several  Lords  of 
Sparta. 

Anax.  Most  happily,  my  Lords,  we  now  are  met. 
To  see  those  Hands  in  servile  Fetters  ty'd 
Which  broke  the  Bondage  of  the  proud  Messenians^ 


Countess  op  Winchilbea  349 

Whom  Sparta  long  had  held  in  hard  Subjection. 

Ere  yet  their  Captive  General  do's  appear, 

Be  it  amongst  your  selves,  My  Lords,  resolved 

What  Course  will  answer  best  our  Ends  upon  them. 

Speak  you,  Clarinthus,  f or'most  of  the  Assembly ; 

And  then,  let  ev'ry  one  add  what  he  pleases. 

Clar.  Short  be  my  Speech,  and  plain,  as  is  the  way       10 

Which  must  secure  what  Lacedemon  toils  for: 

Let  him  resign  that  Country,  kept  by  him 

From  the  entire  Subjection,  to  our  Yoke; 

Or  let  his  speedy  Death  deliver  to  Us 

What  his  too  active  Life  has  long  kept  back, 
Anax.  What  say  the  rest? 
All  the  Sen.  All,  all  agree  to  this. 
Clar.  No  middle  Course  can  be  of  use  to  Sparta^ 
Anax,  It  is  enough ;  Call  for  the  Prisoner  there.  19 

A  Lord.  Bring  in  the  Prisoner ;  His  the  King's  Command. 

Aristomenes  is  brought  in  by  the  Guard, 

Aristor  in  a  Spartan  Dress  presses  in  amongst  the  Croud^  whilst 
Fhila  appears  at  the  Door, 

Anax.  At  last,  we  see  the  Hero  can  be  Conquered, 

[To  Clar. 

Cflar,  Not  in  his  Looks;  for  they  are  haughty  still, 

And  so  his  Mind  will  prove,  if  I  mistake  not. 

Ancuc,  That  you,  our  Pris'ner  now,  of  late  our  Foe, 
Have  urg'd  that  Country,  where  you  rule  in  Chief, 
To  break  our  Yoke,  and  make  Incursions  on  us, 
Since  known  to  all,  will  justify  our  Sentence 
Which  is;  That  you  shall  meet  the  Death  deserv'd. 
Unless  to  keep  our  Quiet  for  the  future, 
You  bring  again  Messenia  to  our  Sway,  30 

Paying  such  Tribute,  as  shall  be  impos'd 
By  Us,  the  Lords  of  that  offensive  State.  , 


350  Thb  Poems  of  Assb 

TtiiB  is  the  Choioe,  we  kindly  set  before  yon. 
And  wish,  that  yoo  would  take  the  safest  Part, 

Aristom,  Enslaye  my  Country,  to  secure  my  Life! 
That  Pow'r  forbid  it,  under  whose  Protection 
I've  often  fought  her  Battles  with  Success, 
And  droTe  th^  ill-grounded  War  home  to  your  Sparta! 

Clar.  He  brayes  us  in  his  Bonds:  then  you  wouM  Dye. 

Aristom.  I  do  not  say  I  wou^d;  40 

I  am  a  Man,  and  Nature  bars  that  saying: 
Yet  I  dare  Dye;  no  Spartan  here,  but  knows  it 
But  since  the  Fates  (whose  WiUs  we  best  can  read. 
When  thus  unfolded  in  their  dire  Eyents) 
Tell  me  by  these  vile  Bonds  I  must  submit ; 
Propose  the  gentlest  Bargain  you  can  make. 
And  if  I  find  my  Life  bears  equal  Weight, 
I  am  content  to  take  it,  else  'tis  Tours. 

Anax.  'Tis  not  for  Us  to  wave,  or  change  our  Terms, 
Mistaken  Man,  who  think  not  of  oar  Power,  50 

And  that  we  may  command  what  we  propose: 
Since  the  first  Sally,  now,  must  take  Possession 
Of  what  your  frighted  Rout  will  soon  abandon. 

Aristom.  My  frighted  Rout! 
Ye  basely  wrong  with  foul  reproachful  Names 
Those  valiant  Troops,  which  yet  ye  cannot  Conquer: 
For  know,  thou  proud  insulting  Anaxander, 
There's  at  their  head  a  resolute  young  Man, 
That  will  not  'bate  thee  in  his  strict  Account 
One  Sigh  or  Groan,  thy  Tortures  or  thy  Dungeons  60 

Shall  wrest  in  Dying  from  his  Father's  Bosom. 

Anaxander  and  the  Senate  talk  among  themselves,  whilst  Aristor 
comes  forward  upon  the  Stage. 

But  there  he  stands!  [Aside  seeing  Axistor. 

Aristor  thro'  that  Spartan  Dress  I  view, 
And  ne'er  till  now,  wished  not  to  see  my  Son. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  851 

Protect  him  from  their  Knowledge,  some  kind  Pow'r, 
If  Youth,  or  Virtue  e'er  engag'd  your  Pity! 

Cflar.  Let  it  be  so,  and  speedily  perform'd,  [AUmd, 

For  He'll  ne'er  yield  to  what  has  been  demanded. 

Anax.  You  nam'd  the  Dungeon,  with  a  Threaten  too 
Of  swift  Revenge,  thinking  to  fright  our  Justice:  70 

But  we'll  take  care,  first,  to  perform  our  Part, 
Then,  venture  what  your  daring  Son  can  oflFer. 
The  Dungeon  is  his  Sentence,  thither  bear  him. 

Aristor,  Not  till  this  Hand  has  done  a  swifter  Justice. 

[Draws  and  runs  at  Anax. 

Anax.  Ha!  what  means  this,  my  Guards! 

[He  avoids  the  thrust :  Phila  runs  in. 

Phila.  Help,  Soldiers,  help;  seize  that  distracted  Spartan. 
Who  now  has  got  a  Sword;  Disarm,  and  take  him. 

[They  disarm  him. 

Aristor.  'Tis   false;  stand  off,    ye   Slaves,   and   know  I 
am — 

PhiUu  Oh !  stop  his  Mouth ;  for  if  he  raves,  he  Dyes. 

[They  stop  his  Mouth  with  a  Handkerchief. 

Aristom.  As  sure  as  now  he  Lives,  had  he  spoke  more  [Aside. 
Therefore  be  blest  the  Stratagem  that  stopt  him!  81 

Anax.  What  means  this,  PAiZa;  speak.  Who  is  this  Madman? 

Phila.  One  by  a  Friend  entrusted  to  my  Care, 
Sent  from  the  Country  here  to  find  a  Cure ; 
But  hearing,  as  the  Croud  pass'd  by  his  Lodgings, 
That  Aristomenes  wou'd  soon  be  Sentenc'd, 
He  broke  his  Ward,  and  fancy'd  He  must  save  him. 
I  have  pursu'd  him,  'till  I'm  faint  with  Crying, 
Ajid  am  confounded  at  his  frantick  Passion. 
Oh!  Royal  Sir,  forgive  it—  90 

Anax.  We  do,  and  pity  him:  remove  him  hence. 
Then,  to  thy  Mistress,  my  dear  Daughter,  Go 
And  say  we  now  again  shall  soon  see  Sparta. 


352  Thb  Poems  of  Akkb 

Phila.  I  shall  my  Lord! 
Now  follow  me,  1^11  lead  ye  to  his  Lodgings.    [To  the  Ouards 
[Exit  Phila  wUh  the  Guards  hearing  off  Arisior. 

Aristom.  Whoe'er  she  be. 
May  Heaven  reward  her,  if  she  means  his  Safety.       [Aside. 
Now  I  can  meditate  on  my  own  Fortunes, 
And  slight  the  worst  can  reach  me. 

Anax.  He^s  deep   in   Thought   which   may    produce   a 
Change.  100 

Again  I'll  try  him —  [To  Clan 

Now,  AristomeneSj  that  this  wild  Chance 
Has  given  you  time  to  think  upon  our  Sentence, 
Have  you  enough  considered  of  its  Horror, 
To  bend  your  stubborn  Will  to  our  Demands? 

Aristom.  Yes,  Anaxander,  I  have  weigh'd  it  well: 
That  active  Faculty,  which  we  call  Phancyy 
Soon  as  you  spoke,  dragged  me  thus  bound  by  Slaves 
Thro'  the  throng'd  Streets,  exciting  several  Passions; 
The  Barb'rous  Croud  shouted  their  clamorous  Joy,  110 

because  unpunish'd  they  might  sport  with  Blood; 
Old  Men  and  Matrons,  destin'd  long  for  Death, 
With  envious  Pleasure  saw  me  forced  before  them 
To  tread  that  Path,  in  spight  of  vigorous  Nature, 
Whilst  tender  Virgins  turned  aside  their  Heads, 
And  dropt,  in  Silence,  the  soft  Tears  of  Pity: 
But,  Oh!  the  Soldiers;  from  the  Soldier's  hands 
Methoughts  I  saw  their  Swords  neglected  thrown. 
When  Fortune  shew'd  they  cou'd  not  save  the  Bravest 
(If  once  she  frown'd)  from  such  a  Fate  as  mine.  120 

Clar,  He'll  move  the  Croud;  urge  him  to  speak  directly. 

Anax.  All  this  is  from  the  purpose ;  plainly  tell 
Whether  you'll  meet  our  Mercy,  or  the  Dungeon. 

Aristom,  My  Train  of  Thoughts  to  that  dark  Cave  had 
led  me : 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  853 

I  stood  reclined  upon  the  horrid  Brim, 

And  gaz'd  into  it,  'till  my  baffl'd  Sight 

Piercing  beyond  the  many  jetting  Bocks 

That  help  to  break  by  turns  the  falling  Body, 

Was  lost  in  Shades,  where  it  must  rest  for-ever: 

And  ready  now  to  be  pushed  rudely  ofiF,  130 

This  was  my  last,  and  best  Beflection  on  it, 

That  there  dwelt  Peace,  which  is  not  to  be  found 

In  his  dark  Bosom,  that  has  sold  his  Country. 

Anax,  Away  with  him  to  instant  Tryal  of  it: 
See  this  obey'd,  and  plunge  him  headlong  down; 
There,  he'll  have  Time,  if  Life,  for  such  fine  Thoughts. 
Away,  and  bring  me  word  it  is  performed. 

[Exeunt  Anax.  and  Lords, 

Aristomenes  bom  off. 

Babble  and  Sold.  Away,  away ;  the  Dungeon,  the  Dun- 
geon. 
Peace  and  Prosperity  to  Lacedemon!  [Exeunt 

ACT  II     SCENE  I 
A  Boom  in  the  Palace.    Aristor  alone. 
Arist  I've  torn  with  Cries  the  Boof  of  this  vile  Mansion. 
And  from  that  Window,  barred  too  closely  up 
To  give  me  leave  to  leap  upon  their  Heads, 
Have  curs'd  the  Croud,  and  told  'em  whose  I  am: 
At  which  they  laugh  and  cry,  'tis  PhikCs  Madman. 

[He  attempts  but  cannot  force  the  Door. 
Confusion!  that  she  dares  confine  me  thus! 
Whilst  my  free  Thoughts,  unfoUow'd  by  my  Hand, 
Must  see  that  cursed  Deed,  they  can't  prevent. 
Oh!  Aristomenes^  my  noble  Father! 

Hear  me,  ye  Fates,  and  let  me  but  Bevenge  him;  10 

Give  me  Bevenge;  and  now,  methinks,  I  grasp  it, 


354  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Broke  thro^  his  Guards,  I  seize  upon  the  TTrani, 

And  stab  him  thns,  and  thns —  [He  acts  all  this. 

Then  bear  him  to  the  Ground,  thns  falling  on  him. 

And  to  his  Heart  thns  tearing  my  wide  way. 

Oh!  O',  O',  O', —  [Throws  himself  upon  the  Ground. 

Enter  Amalintha,  the  Door  by  one  without  immediaiely  locl^d 

after  her. 

Amal.  Where  is  this  wretched  Monmer? 
Oh !  let  me  find  him,  tho^  to  raise  his  Sorrows 
With  the  sad  Sonnd  of  my  repeated  Groans. 
Ha!  on  the  Ground!  then  be  it  too  my  Seat!  20 

[Sits  on  the  Qround  by  him. 
For  I  will  share  in  this  Excess  of  Grief, 
As  well  as  in  the  Days  of  milder  Fortune, 
I  bore  a  part  in  Love,  that  knew  no  Measure. 
O  AristomenesI  oh!  my  Arisior! 

[She  puts  tier  Handkerchief  before  her  Eyes  weeping. 

Aristor.  Whoe'er  thou  art,  repeat  again  that  Soimd: 

Such  Groans  shall  hourly  issue  from  his  Dungeon, 

And  fright  the  bloody  Spartans  into  Madness. 

[He  looks  up. 

Ha!  sure  I  should  know  that  Form,  that  Shape,  those  Limbs, 

That  lab' ring  Bosom,  and  those  Locks  dishevel'd: 

But  take  not  from  thy  Face  that  friendly  Cloud;  30 

Do  not  expose  it,  lest  thro'  all  its  Charms 

My  deep  Revenge  find  out  whose  Stamp  it  bears, 

And  urge  me  on  to  something  Dark  and  Fatal. 

Amal.  This  from  Aristor!  this  to  Amalintha! 

[She  rises  and  shews  her  face. 

Aristor,  Why  wou'd'st  thou  tempt  me  thus  advent'rous 
Maid, 
And  bring  the  Blood  of  Anaxander  near  me? 

[Coming  up  fiercely  to  her. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  355 

Canst  thou  too  fondly  think,  that  Lovers  soft  Bands, 

His  gentle  Cords  of  Hyacinths  and  Roses, 

Wove  in  the  dewy  Spring,  when  Storms  are  silent. 

Can  tye  these  Hands,  provok'd  by  horrid  Morther!  40 

Oh!  do  not  trust  it — 

But  fly  this  Ground,  while  I  have  Power  to  bid  thee. 

Amal.  AristoTj  no;  my  Flight  shall  not  preserve  me: 
The  Life,  I've  kept  but  to  indulge  your  Love, 
Now  to  this  loud,  mistaken  Bage  I  offer. 
Take  it,  Oh!  take  it;  Means  cannot  be  wanting, 
Altho'  no  Listrument  of  Death  be  near  you: 
This  Hair,  these  flatter'd  Locks,  these  once-lov'd  Tresses 
Bound  my  sad  Neck  thus  knit  will  soon  perform  it ; 
Or,  on  these  trembling  Lips  your  Hand  but  prest  50 

Will  send  the  rising  Breath  down  to  my  Heart, 
And  break  it,  telling  who  deny'd  it  Passage. 

Aristor.  Tryal  beyond  the  Strength  of  Man  and  Lover! 

Amal.  Or,  if  you  wou'd  be  quicker  in  Dispatch, 
Speak  but  a  few  such  Words,  as  now  you  utter'd, 
And  my  poor  hov'ring  Soul  will  fly  before  'em. 
Farewel  Aristor^  see !  the  Work  is  done: 
I  did  but  think  I  heard  their  killing  Sound, 
And  the  bare  Fancy  saves  you  farther  Study. 

[She  faints^  he  catches  her  in  his  Arms. 

Aristor.  Oh!  stop  the  glorious  Fugitive  a  moment;       60 
And  I  will  whisper  to  it  such  Bepentance, 
Such  Love,  such  Fondness,  such  imheard-of  Passion, 
As  shall  confine  it  to  it's  beauteous  Mansion. 
Thus  let  me  hug,  and  press  thee  into  Life, 
And  lend  thee  Motion  from  my  beating  Heart, 
To  set  again  the  Springs  of  thine  in  working. 

Amal.    I  hear  your  Summons,  and  my  Life  returns: 
But  tell  me,  ere  again  so  firm  'tis  fixt 
That  it  must  cost  an  Agony  like  this. 


356  The  Poems  op  Anne 

To  let  it  out  to  Liberty  and  Ease,  70 

Will  you  not  hate  me  for  my  Father's  Guilt? 

Aristor.  By  the  soft  Fires  of  Love,  that  fill  my  Breast, 
And  dart  through  all  the  Horrors  of  my  Soul, 
Like  Heaven^s  bright  Flashes  in  a  Night  of  Shadows, 
I  will  not  hate,  or  e'er  reproach  thee  more: 
Yet  let  me  breathe  so  gently  one  Complaint, 
So  gently,  that  it  may  not  break  thy  Peace, 
Tho'  it  for  ever  has  discarded  mine. 
And  ask,  why  you  thus  cruelly  wou'd  use  me. 
Why,  have  me  seized,  and  bound  with  frantick  Fetters,      80 
Snatch'd  from  my  Duty  by  a  Woman's  wile. 
And  here  confin'd,  whilst  my  great  Father  pdrish'd? 

Amal.  'Twas  none  of  mine,  by  your  dear  self  I  swear; 
It  was  the  Fates  design  and  PhilcCs  action; 
She  saw  you  thus  disguis'd  amongst  the  Croud, 
And,  ere  she  would  acquaint  me  with  your  Danger, 
Follow'd  to  watch  the  means  how  to  prevent  it. 

Aristor.  I  will  believe  you  to  my  Heart's  relief. 
Which  must  have  broke,  had  your  Consent  been  with  her. 
But,  Amalinthay  now  my  Rage  is  gone,  90 

And  Love  thro'  this  mistake  has  forc'd  his  way. 
It  spreads  before  my  Thoughts  the  gaudy  Scene 
Of  those  Delights,  which  have  been  once  allow'd  it ; 
Brings  to  my  Phancy  in  their  softest  Dress 
The  gentle  Hours,  that  told  our  private  Meetings; 
Shews  me  the  Grove,  where,  by  the  Moon's  pale  Light 
We've  breath 'd  out  tender  Sighs,  'till  coming  Day 
Has  drawn  them  deeper,  warning  us  to  part, 
Which  ne'er  we  did,  'till  some  new  Time  was  set 
For  the  return  of  those  transporting  Pleasures.  100 

Amal.  And  so  again,  Aristor,  well  contrive. 
And  so  again,  we'll  meet,  and  sigh,  and  love. 

Aristor,  Oh!  O',  O', — Amalintha! 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  357 

Amah  Oh!   why  that  Groan,  that  deep,  that   deathlike 
Groan! 

Aristor.  When  Soul  and  Body  part,  it  canH  be  softer; 
And  I  mnst  leave  thee.  Soul  to  sad  AristoVy 
With  all  those  Pleasures  which  I  but  repeated. 
As  Dying  Friends  will  catch  one  last  Embrace 
Of  what  they  know,  they  must  forego  forever.  109 

Amal.  Indeed,  you've  calPd  my  wand'ring  Fancy  back 
From  those  Delights,  where  'twou'd  have  endless  stray'd: 
But,  my  Aristor!  (for  I'll  call  you  mine, 
Though  all  the  Stars  combine  against  my  Title, 
And  bar  fulfilling  of  the  Vows  they've  witness'd) 
Tell  me,  tho'  we  must  ne'er  in  Nuptials  join, 
May  we  not  meet,  and  at  this  distance  sigh? 
And  when  I've  hoarded  up  a  Stock  of  Tears, 
Which  in  the  Spartan^ s  sight  I  dare  not  lavish. 
Oh!  tell  me,  if  I  may  not  seek  you  out. 
And  in  large  Showers  thus  pour  them  down  before  you  ?  120 

[She  weeps, 

Aristor,  Cease  to  oppress  me  more;  thou  weeping  Beauty, 
And  think  with  what  vast  Storms  my  Soul  is  toss'd! 

[Comes  up  to  hear  earnestly. 
Think  too,  that  but  to  gaze  upon  thee  thus. 
To  stand  in  reach  of  thy  Ambrosial  Breath, 
And  hear  thy  Voice,  sweet  as  the  Ev'ning  Notes, 
When  in  still  Shades  the  Shepherds  sooth  their  Loves, 
I  wou'd  not  mind  an  Army  in  my  way. 
Or  stop  at  raging  Seas,  or  brazen  Towers. 
Yet,  Amalintha,  tho'  I  Dye  to  speak  it. 
Yet  we  must  part,  we  must,  my  Amalinthal  130 

Amal.  Never  to  meet  agen  ?  Tell  me  but  that. 

Aristor,  Alas!  not  I,  the  Fates  can  only  tell  it: 
Let  them  make  even  one  Account  betwixt  us. 
And  give  this  Hand  the  Liberty  to  seal  it. 


358  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  we'll  in  spight  of  vengeful  Thunder  join. 
If  then,  thy  Heart  be  as  resolv'd  as  mine. 

Amal.  No:  on  those  Terms  yon  mean,  we  must  not  meet: 
But  since  those  Fates  deny  it  to  your  Power, 
The  Will  I  to  your  mighty  Wrongs  forgive, 

[From  without  the  Door. 

Phila.  Madam,  you'll  be  surpriz'd;  haste  to  return:     140 
Your  Father's  now  just  going  to  your  Lodgings. 

Arisior.  All  Plagues  and  Curses  meet  him!  [Ajside. 

Amal.  Oh!  then  I  must  be  gone. 
A  little  time  will  call  the  State  to  Council; 
And  when  the  Croud  by  that  is  thither  drawn, 
One  I  will  send  to  wait  on  your  Escape: 
And  if  you  tempt  new  Dangers,  know  Aristor 
That  Amalintha  too  will  perish  in  them. 

Aristor.  Fear  not,  my  Love. 

Phila.  Haste,  Madam,  haste,  or  we  are  all  Undone.     150 

[From  without. 

Amal.  So  from  his  few  short  Moments  calls  away 
A  gasping  Wretch,  the  cruel  Bird  of  Prey ; 
Bids  him  make  haste  th'  Eternal  Shades  to  find, 
And  leave  like  me,  all  that  is  Dear  behind. 

Aristor.  Whilst,  like  the  Friend  that's  sadly  weeping  by, 
I  see  the  much  lov'd  Spirit  from  me  fly ; 
And  with  vain  Cries  pursue  it  to  that  Coast, 
Where  it  must  land,  and  my  weak  Hopes  be  lost. 

[He  leads  her  to  the  Door,  and  returns  speaking  as  he's  going 
out  at  the  Other. 

Now,  let  Revenge  awhile  sustain  my  Heart,  159 

And  Fate  yet  close  my  Life  with  some  exalted  part!      [Exit. 
The  Stage  darkened  represents  the  Inside  of  a  Dungeon,  Aristo- 

menes  lying  down  in  it,  and  struggling  as  coming  out  of  a 

Swoon. 

Aristom.  At  last  'tis  vanquished;  and  my  soaring  Spirits 
Dispel  the  gloomy  Vapours,  that  oppressed  them. 


Countess  of  Winchilsea  359 

And  cloath'd  my  Dreams  with  more  than  mortal  Horrour. 

So  low  in  my  deep  Phancy  was  I  plnng'd, 

That  o'er  my  Head  impetuons  Rivers  rush'd, 

And  Mountains  grew  betwixt  onr  World  and  me: 

Hungry  and  Cold,  methought  I  wander'd  on 

Thro'  fruitless  Plains,  that  Food  nor  Comfort  nourish'd, 

'Till  hideous  Serpents  twisted  me  about. 

And  drew  me  to  their  Den  all  foul  and  loathsome;  10 

But  I  will  quit  the  Bed,  that  breeds  such  Visions, 

And  summon  all  my  Officers  to  Council ; 

For  with  to-morrow's  Dawn  we'll  storm  Phcerea. 

[He  walks  about  feeling  for  the  Door, 

Ha!  Where's  the  Door,  my  Tent  is  sure  transformed. 

And  all  I  touch  is  Rock  that  streams  with  Dew. 

Oh!  that  I'd  slept,  that  I  had  slept  for  ever!  [He  starts. 

Yes,  Anaxander,  yes!  thou  worst  of  Furies! 

I  know  thy  Dungeon  now,  and  my  dark  Ruin: 

Yet  why,  ye  Fates,  since  fall'n  below  your  Succour, 

Wou'd  ye  thus  cruelly  restore  my  Senses,  20 

To  make  me  count  my  Woes  by  tedious  Moments, 

Dye  o'er  again,  choak'd  by  unwholsome  Damps, 

Parch'd  up  with  Thirst,  or  clung  with  pining  Hunger, 

Borne  piecemeal  to  the  Holes  of  lurking  Adders, 

Or  mouldering  to  this  Earth,  where  thus  I  cast  me? 

[Throws  himself  on  the  Ground, 

Musick  is  heard  without  the  SCENE,  after  it  has  played  awhile 
and  ceases.  He  speaks. 

How,  Harmony!  nay  then  the  Fiends  deride  me: 

For  who,  but  they,  can  strike  Earth's  sounding  Entrails, 

Or  with  low  Winds  thus  fill  her  tuneful  Pores  ? 

Oh!  that  some  Words  of  horrid  Sense  wou'd  join  it, 

To  tell  me  where  I  might  conclude  my  Sorrows !  30 


360  The  Poems  op  Anne 

A  Voice  within  Sings, 
Ist  Voice.  Fallen  Wretch!  make  haste,  and  Dye! 
To  that  last  Asylum  fly, 
Where  no  anxious  Drops  of  Care, 
Where  no  sighing  Sorrows  are, 
Friends  or  Fortune  none  deplore. 
None  are  Rich,  and  none  are  Poor, 
Nor  can  Fate  oppress  them  more. 
To  this  last  Asylum  fly, 

Fallen  Wretch!  make  haste  and  Dye!  89 

[The  Voice  ceases. 

Aristom.  Thou  counsell'st  rightly;  show  me  but  the  way. 

And  with  the  Speed  thou  urgest  PU  obey  thee.        [He  rises. 

The  Voice  Sings  again, 

1st  Voice.  A  pointed  Eock  with  little  pains 
Will  split  the  Circle  of  thy  Brains. 
To  thy  Freedom  I  persuade  thee. 
To  a  wat'ry  Pit  will  lead  thee. 
Which  has  no  glorious  Sun-beam  seen. 
No  Footsteep  known,  or  bord'ring  Green, 
For  thousand  rolling  Ages  past. 
Fallen  Wretch!  to  this  make  haste, 
To  this  last  Asylum  fly.  50 

Fallen  Wretch!  make  haste  and  Dye! 
Aristom.  I  come,  thou  kind  Provoker  of  Despair, 

Which  still  is  nearest  Cure,  when  at  the  Highest. 

I  come,  I  come — 

Going  towards  the  Voice,  another  Sings  at  the  other  side,  upon 
which  he  stops  and  listens, 

2d  Voice.  Stay,  oh!  stay;  'tis  all  Delusion, 

And  wou'd  breed  thee  more  Confusion. 
I,  thy  better  Genius,  move  thee, 
I,  that  guard,  and  I,  that  love  thee; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  361 

I,  who  in  thy  rocky  way, 

Cloth'd  in  Eagles  Feathers  lay,  60 

And  in  scJety  brought  thee  down, 

Where  none  living  e'er  was  known. 

Chearful  Hope  I  bring  thee  now, 

Chearfnl  Hope  the  Gods  allow. 

Mortal,  on  their  Pleasures  wait. 

Nor  rush  into  the  arms  of  Fate.  [The  Voice  ceases, 

Arisiom,  To  hope,  is  still  the  Temper  of  the  Brave: 
And  tho'  a  just  Despair  had  dispossessed  it. 
Yet,  thus  encourag'd,  will  I  trust  the  Gods 
With  those  few  Moments,  Nature  has  to  spare  me;  70 

Nor  follow  thee,  thou  bad  persuading  Spirit. 
Tet  tell  me,  who  thou  art,  and  why  thou  tempt'st  me? 

Ist  Voice.  I  thy  evil  Genius  am. 

To  Phcerea  with  thee  came; 

Hung  o'er  thee  in  the  murd'ring  Croud, 

And  clapp'd  my  dusky  Wings  aloud; 

Now  endeavour'd  to  deceive  thee, 

And  will  never,  never,  leave  thee. 
2d  Voice,    I'll  protect  him  from  thy  Pow'r. 
lat  Voice.  I  shall  find  a  careless  Hour.  80 

2d  Voice.   Laurels  He  again  shall  wear, 

War  and  Honour's  Trumpet  hear. 
lat  Voice.  For  one  fatal,  famous  Day, 

He  his  dearest  Blood  shall  pay. 

Hear  it  ye  repeating  Stones, 

And  confirm  it  by  your  Groans! 

[A  dismal  Groan  is  heard  round  the  Dungeon. 

Arisiom.  What   all   this   Bellowing   for    a   Conqueror's 
Death! 
The  Field  of  Honour  is  his  Bed  of  Ease; 
He  toils  for't  all  the  Day  of  his  hard  Life, 


362  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  lays  him  there  at  Night,  renown'd  and  happy:  90 

Therefore  this  Threat  was  vain  malicious  Fury. 
Ist  Voice. '  Now  away,  away  I  fly ; 

For  hated  Qood  is  rushing  by. 

[Here  the  Voice  ceaeea  quite. 
A  Machine^  like  a  Fox,  runs  about  the  Dungeon  smelling^  and 
rushes  against  Aristomenes,  who  taking  it  for  his  evil  GeniuSy 
catches  at  ity  and  speaks. 

Aristom,  What!    hast    thou   Substance    too,   and  dar^st 

assault  me! 
Nay  then,  thou  shalt  not  'scape ;  lUl  seize  and  grapple  with 

thee. 
And  by  my  conqu'ring  Arm  o'ercome  thy  Influence. 
Fool  that  I  was!  to  think,  it  cou'd  be  vanquishi 
This  is  some  rav'ning  Beast;  the  Fur  betrays  it; 
A  FoXy  I  think,  teach  me  to  be  as  subtle, 
Extremity,  thou  Mother  of  Invention!      [He  catches  it.     100 
I  have  it  now ;  and  where  it  leads,  will  follow. 
My  better  Genius  do's  this  Hour  preside: 
Be  strong  that  Influence,  and  thou  my  Guide. 

[Exit,  led  out  by  the  Fox 

The  SCENE  changes  to  the  Plains  by  the  Woodside. 
Enter  from  the  Wood  Herminia  alone  and  faint. 
Herm,  Here  'twas  she  left  me ;  but  so  far  I've  stray'd, 
Unheeding  every  thing,  but  my  sad  Thoughts, 
That  my  faint  Limbs  no  longer  can  support  me. 
Oh!  let  me  rest;  and  if  'tis  Death  I  feel, 
A  Guest  more  welcome  none  yet  entertain' d. 

[She  sits  doum,  leaning  against  a  Tree. 
Enter  Climander  looking  towards  the  Camp,  as  expecting  the 
returns  of  Arcasius. 

Clim,  He  has  exceeded  much  the  time  prefixt ; 
And  yet,  I  wou'd  not  doubt  him: 
I've  climb'd  the  Hill,  better  to  view  the  Camp ; 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  363 

And  all  are  fixt,  and  motionless  as  Death. 

Therefore  awhile  I  will  command  my  Patience:  10 

He  cannot  now  be  long — 

[He  turns  and  sees  Harm,  and  gazes  earnestly  on  her, 
—Ha!  Who  lies  there? 
A  lovely  Shepherdess ;  but  faint  she  seems. 
Say,  beauteous  Maid,  if  so  much  Strength  is  left. 
How  best  a  Stranger,  may  assist,  or  serve  you! 

[He  kneels  dotvn  by  her. 
She  do^s  not  speak ;  but  looks  into  my  Heart, 
And  melts  it  to  the  softness  of  her  Eyes. 
Hard  by,  a  Spring  clear  as  the  Tears  she  drops, 
Runs  bubbling  under  a  delicious  Shade: 
Water,  thence  fetch'd  in  a  Pomegranate's  rind, 
May  call  her  fainting  Spirits  to  their  oflSce.  20 

[He  goes  out, 

Herm.  He's  gone,  but  quickly  will  return  again; 
Yet  he's  so  gentle  sure  I  need  not  fear  him: 
Tho'  at  his  first  approach  my  Heart  beat  high, 
'Till  Halcyon  sounds,  and  words  of  Pity  calm'd  it; 
Nay,  something  courtly  in  them  was  imply *d: 
And  if  the  Swains  are  polish'd,  all  like  him. 
Their  humble  Sheds  may  scorn  our  ruder  Greatness. 

Enter  a^ain  Climander  with  Waier  in  a  Pomgranate-Shell. 

dim.  Pan!  if  thou  e'er  did'st  hear  a  Shepherd's  Prayer, 
Endue  this  Water,  sacred  to  thy  Name, 
With  all  the  Vertues,  needful  to  restore  her.  30 

[She  drinks. 

Herm.  Your  Pray'r   is  heard;   kind    Shepherd  take  my 
Thanks, 
And  He,  whom  you  invok'd,  reward  you  largely! 

Clim.  Oh!  You  may  far  outdo  all  He  can  grant, 
In  but  declaring  where  you  feed  your  Flocks, 
And  to  what  Shade,  when  Phcehus  hottest  shines. 


864  The  Poems  of  Anne 

You  lead  those  happy  Sheep,  to  'scape  his  Fury; 

That  I,  exposiug  mine  to  the  wide  Plains, 

May  seek  you  out,  and  sigh  till  Night  before  you. 

Herm.  Alas!  I  have  no  Flocks,  or  Skill  to  guide  them; 
No  lefiJy  Hamlet,  strew'd  with  painted  Flowers;  40 

Or  mossy  Pillow,  to  repose  my  Head: 
But  wander  from  a  distant,  fatal  Place, 
Where  I  have  lost  my  Parents,  and  my  Succour, 
And  now,  in  such  a  Habit  as  becomes  it, 
Seek  the  low  Plains,  to  learn  the  Art  you  practice. 

Clim.  She  may  be  Noble  then ;  and  for  her  Form, 
'Tis  sure  the  fairest  that  my  Eyes  e'er  fix'd  on.  [Aside, 

Who  were  your  Parents,  gentle  Maid,  declare? 

Herm.  They  were  not  mean,  and  yet  I  must  conceal  them : 
My  Mother  early  Dy'd;  but  Fame  has  told  me,  50 

She'd  all  Perfections,  which  make  others  Proud, 
Yet  wore  them,  as  she  knew  not  they  adom'd  her. 
And  be,  in  this,  my  Father's  Praise  exprest: 
That  by  an  Oracle  He  was  confest 
Of  all  the  Grecian  Race  to  be  the  Best. 

Clim,  The  Best  of  Men!  and  you  the  Fairest  Woman! 
And  in  a  Moment  I  the  greatest  Lover! 

[He  speaks  this  transportedly  and  seizes  her  Hand,  which  he 
kisses. 

Whilst  to  complete  my  Bliss,  by  Heav'ns  decree 

These  Beauties  all  are  mine,  and  thus  I  claim  them.  59 

Herm,  Protect  me  all  ye  Powers,  that  wait  on  Virtue, 
From  the  dark  Ends  of  such  unruly  Transports! 

[She  takes  her  Hand  away  hastily  and  rises. 
Nor  dare,  presumptuous  Swain,  once  to  renew  them. 
Or  tempt  more  Dangers  than  a  Crook  can  answer! 

Clim.  A  Man  there  lives  not,  shou'd  have  urg'd  that  to 
me, 
Built  round  with  Steel,  or  plung'd  all  o'er  in  Styx. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  366 

Then,  let  your  Beauty's  Triumphs  be  complete, 
Which,  after  such  a  Threat,  can  bend  my  Knee, 
And  make  me  sue  for  Pardon,  as  for  Life. 

Herm.  I  can  forgive,  whilst  I  forbid  such  Language ; 
Since  She,  who  yields  to  have  her  Beauty  worshipped,       70 
Must  pay  too  much  to  him,  that  brings  the  Incense. 

Ulim.  To  Me  you  cannot,  His  a  Debt  to  Fate. 
Your  Heart  is  mine;  the  amorous  Stars  ordain  it, 
Which  smiling,  hung  o'er  my  auspicious  Birth, 
And  not  an  angry  Planet  crossed  their  Lifluence: 
They  bid  me  Love,  and  the  Harmonious  God 
When  askt,  what  Path  shou'd  lead  me  on  to  Glory, 
Sent  forth  a  Sound,  that  charm'd  the  hoary  Priest, 
And  said,  a  Passion,  soft  as  that,  must  bless  me. 
Then,  do  not  strive  to  disappoint  their  Purpose,  80 

Or  quench  Celestial  Flames  with  Scorn  or  Coldness. 
Oh!  that  a  Smile  might  tell  me,  that  you  wou'd  not, 
A  gentle  Word,  a  Look,  a  Sigh  confirm  it. 
Or  any  sign,  that  bears  the  stamp  of  Love! 
But  'tis  in  vain,  and  some  more  happy  Youth 
Has  drawn  my  Lot,  and  mock'd  foretelling  Phcebtia. 

Herm.  I  must  not  leave  you  with  a  Thought  that  wrongs 
me: 
For  know,  no  Passion  e'er  possess'd  this  Breast, 
Nor  will  the  mighty  Griefs,  that  now  have  seiz'd  it. 
E'er  yield  to  give  a  softer  Guest  admittance.  90 

But  my  Companion  comes;  Shepherd  farewell! 
When  next  we  meet,  if  Heav'n  that  Moment  sends. 
For  your  Assistance  lent,  we  may  be  Friends. 
'   CUm.  Heav'n  can't  be  true,  if  it  no  more  affords. 
Nor  Oracles  explain  themselves  by  Words. 
Let  talking  Age  the  Joys  of  Friendship  prove. 
Beauty  for  Youth  was  made,  and  Youth  alone  for  Love. 

^Exeunt  severally. 


366  Thb  P0BM8  OF  Akkb 

ACT  m    SCENE  I 
A  Mjfrtle-Orove  with  a  Fountain  beionffing  to  Asuucander^M 
Palace. 

Enter  Amalintha  and  Phila, 

AnuML  Why  had  not  I  a  barb'ronB  Spartctn  Sonl, 
Unapt  for  Love,  and  haish,  as  oar  rode  Castomsl 
Or  why,  ye  cruel  Fates,  did  you  deny 
My  Birth  to  be  among  the  neighboring  Swains, 
Where,  on  the  flowery  Banks  of  smooth  Panisus 
I  might  have  sat,  and  heard  the  gentle  Vows 
Of  some  protesting  Shepherd,  uncontroulMI 

Phila.  'Twas  on  those  fetal  Plains,  I  well  remember, 
That  first  your  Eyes  encountered  with  Aristof^s. 

Amal.  Yes,  in  a  Chaoe  we  met,  when  Truce  allowOd  it,  10 
Where  the  young  Prince,  whom  I  too  much  had  marked 
Thro'  all  the  graceful  Toils  of  that  blest  Day, 
BedeemM  my  Life,  with  Hazard  of  his  own. 
From  the  chased  Boar,  that  now  had  almost  seizM  ma 

Phila.  When  I  arriv'd  the  first  of  all  your  Train, 
I  heard  you  thank  him  for  the  gen'rous  Eescue. 

AmaL  I  did;  yes  Phila^  with  my  Heart  I  thanks  him. 
And  paid  it  down  a  Ransom  for  my  Life: 
Since  when,  how  often  in  this  Place  we've  met, 
And  with  what  Pleasure,  thou  alone  can'st  tell,  20 

The  only  Friend,  and  witness  of  our  Passion. 
But,  prithee  go,  and  keep  off  all  Intruders,  [Exit  Phila. 

Whilst  with  my  Sorrows  now  I  tread  this  Grove, 
Which  shou'd  not  thrive,  when  all  our  Hopes  are  blasted. 

[She  walks  into  the  Grove. 
From  the  other  Door,  the  Fox  runs  over  the  Stage,  folloufd  soon 

after  by  Aristomenes,  his  Hands  foul  vHth  Earth, 

Aristom.  Farewell  my  wild  Companion,  and  my  Leader! 

[Pointing  to  the  Fox. 
Henceforth  thy  figure,  in  my  Ensigns  borne. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  367 

Shall  tell  the  World  (if  e'er  I  'scape  these  Walls) 
That  'twas  thy  Conduct  drew  me  from  my  Bondage. 
How  fair  this  Grove  appears  to  my  loath'd  Dungeon! 

[He  sees  the  Fountain. 
Oh!  welcome  to  my  Sight,  thou  gentle  Spring!  30 

Ne'er  did'st  thou  cool  a  Thirst,  that  rag'd  like  mine: 
I  bow  my  Enees  upon  thy  mossy  Brim, 

[He  kneels  and  lays  his  Mouth  to  the  Stream. 
And,  as  they  drank,  ere  Art  had  worsted  Nature, 
Draw  thy  refreshing  Stream  to  my  scorch'd  Entrails. 

[Drinks  agen. 
Again,  O  Nectar,  most  delicious! 
This  favour  more,  and  then  I  quit  thy  Borders. 

[Washes  the  Earth  off  his  Hands,  and  rises. 

Re-enter  Amalintha 

Amal.  Oh!  'tis  all  dismal,  now  that  Love  is  absent. 
Faded  the  Flow'rs,  and  with'ring  ev'ry  Branch: 
Whilst  thro'  the  Leaves  the  sad,  and  sighing  Winds, 
Methinks,  all  say,  the  Hours  of  Bliss  are  past;  40 

And  here,  we  ne'er  shall  meet  each  other  more. 

[Aristom.  comes  towards  her 
Ha!  what  Intruder  do  my  Eyes  behold? 
A  Stranger,  and  invade  my  private  Walks, 
The  Doors  too  all  secur'd!  Tell  how  you  came. 

Aristom.  As  comes  the  Mole,  by  painful  working  upwards. 
Till  the  the  sweet  Air  beat  on  my  clammy  Brows. 

Amal.  There's  something  mystical  in  what  you  utter; 
Which  (tho'  offended  with  your  Presence  here) 
I  wou'd  be  glad  farther  to  have  Unriddl'd. 

[DraiDS  her  Dagger. 
This  be  my  Guard;  and  now  you  may  proceed,  50 

And,  if  you  dare,  discover  who  you  are. 

Aristom.  I'd  not  deny  my  Name,  to  'scape  that  Dungeon, 

[Pointing  behind  the  Scenes. 


868  The  Poems  of  Anns 

From  whence  these  Hands  have  dog  my  way  to  Light. 
"Tis  Aristomenes  that  stands  before  you. 

Amal.  O  blest  and  strange  Surprise!  [Aside- 

Arisiom.  Now,  if  you  have  a  Soul  for  noble  Deeds, 
As  'tis  reported  of  you  Spartan  Ladies, 
By  my  Escape  your  Fame  shall  rise  so  high. 
That  ne'er  an  ancient  Heroes  shall  outsoar  it: 
If  not,  I  know  the  Place  from  whence  I  came,  60 

And  'twill  be  told  with  more  uncommon  Things, 
Which  shall  make  up  the  Story  of  my  Fortunes, 
That  I  alone  liv'd  to  be  there  twice  Bury'd.  [She  looks  about 
Nay,  look  not  round;  for  if  you  fear  you  wrong  me, 
I  wou'd  not  injure  you,  to  gain  my  Safety. 

Amal.  Nor  wou'd  I  fail  to  help  you  to  secure  it, 
For  all  that  lAicedemon  holds  most  Precious. 
I  gaz'd  about,  lest  any  were  in  sight. 
That  might  prevent  my  dear  Design  to  save  you. 
Support  me,  as  I  walk,  like  one  that  serv'd  me,  70 

And  when  they  have  unlock'd  that  Postern-door, 
I'll  give  you  some  Command  before  the  Guard, 
Which  to  perform  they  shall  admit  your  Passage: 
Or  this  must  force  it,  if  your  evil  Stars 

[Gives  him  her  Dagger, 
Have  plac'd  such  there,  as  know  and  wou'd  detain  you. 

Aristom.  As  long  as  Life,  I'll  proudly  wear  this  Favour. 

Amal.  Oh !  haste,  my  Lord,  lose  not  this  precious  moment. 

Aristom.  No,  stay ;  and  ere  I  take  one  step  tow'rds  Free- 
dom, 
Let  me  be  told,  to  whose  blest  Aid  I  owe  it; 
And  how  I  may  discharge  so  vast  a  Debt:  80 

The'  I,  and  all  that's  dear  to  me  shou'd  perish, 
I  wou'd  not  stir,  'till  satisfy'd  in  this. 

Amal.  Know  then,  my  Lord — 
Tho'  whilst  I  speak,  I  tremble  for  your  Danger, 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  869 

That  to  declare  my  Name,  might  work  my  Ruin: 

But  since  such  Gratitude  crowns  your  great  Virtues, 

I  have  a  Blessing  to  implore  from  you, 

When  the  full  Time  shall  ripen  and  reveal  it; 

Harder,  I  fear,  to  grant,  and  much  more  dear 

Than  what  I  now  assist  you  to  preserve.  90 

Aristom.  By  Liberty,  which  none  like  me  can  value. 
By  new-recovered  Light,  and  what  it  shews  me. 
Your  brighter  Form,  with  yet  a  fairer  Mind, 
By  all  the  ties  of  Honour,  here  I  swear; 
Be  that  untouchM,  and  your  Bequest  is  granted. 

Amal.  Of  you,  my  Lord,  and  of  the  Ijisf  ning  Gods 
I  ask  no  more — but,  that  you  haste  to  'scape: 
Without  that  Gate  the  open  Champain  lies. 
May  Fortune,  which  the  hardest  Part  has  done. 
Crown  her  great  Work,  and  lead  you  safely  on!  100 

[Exit  Aristom.  leading  her. 
Enter  Phila  weeping. 

Phila.  What  shall  I  say,  or  how  reveal  this  to  her? 
Is't  not  enough,  ye  Gods,  we  bear  our  own. 
That  thus  you  suffer  the  vain  trifler  Love 
To  bring  the  Griefs  of  others  too  upon  us! 
Amalintha  returns. 

Amal.  Oh!  Phtla^  I  such  Tydings  have  to  tell  thee, 
But  thou  hast  chilled  them  in  a  Moments  space 
With  that  cold  dew  that  trickles  from  thine  Eyes. 
Is  not  Aristor  safe? — 

Thou  say'st  he  is  not,  in  that  weeping  silence: 
But  lives  he  yet?  if  this  thou  do'st  not  answer,  110 

My  Death  shall  free  thee  from  all  farther  Questions. 

Phila.  Yet  he  do's  live: 
But  oh!  that  some  free  Tongue,  that  lov'd  you  less, 
Cou'd  tell  how  little  time  that  Life  must  last 
To  you  so  precious,  and  I  fear  so  fatal ! 


370  Thb  Poems  of  Annb 

Amal.  Gto  on;  and  if  thou  kill'st  me  with  the  Story, 
Believe  thou'st  crown'd  the  Kindness  of  thy  Life, 
By  giving  endless  Rest  to  her  that  wants  it 

Phila.  I  cannot  speak [Weeping. 

Amal.  Then  one,  that  can,  I  instantly  must  seek  for.  120 

[Going  out. 
Phila.  Publick  Enquiry  pulls  his  Ruin  on  her. 

Stay,  Madam,  stay,  and  since  it  must  be  told, 

Know  that  Ariator^  soon  as  free  to  do  it. 

Again  into  your  Father's  presence  rush'd. 

And  makes  a  new  attempt  upon  his  Person, 

But  miss'd  his  Blow,  was  seized,  and  in  Confinement 

Now  waits  but  the  assembling  of  the  Council, 

Throughly  to  be  examined,  and  discovered. 

Amal.  Darkness,  and  Night  surround  me. 
With  this  Relief  to  my  sad  Bed  I  go,  130 

[Siezee  Fhila'd  Dagger. 
There  wrapt  in  horrid  Shades  will  lay  me  down, 
And,  when  thou  com'st  charg'd  with  the  heavy  News, 
Beware,  no  tedious  Circumstance  detain, 
No  fruitless  Pray'r,  or  word  of  Comfort  'scape  thee; 
But  with  a  Voice,  such  as  the  Dying  use, 
Bid  me  expire — 

— Then  to  my  Father  go, 

And  say,  he  kill'd  his  Daughter  in  his  Foe; 

Who  knowing,  she  his  Temper  cou'd  not  move,  140 

Th'  excess  of  Hate  paid  with  th'  excess  of  Love. 

[Exit  weeping  and  leaning  on  Phila. 

The  SCENE  changes  to  the  Plains, 
Enter  Climander. 
Clim.  All  Patience  this  wou'd  tire — 
I  will  not  wait  the  Trifler  s  slow  return, 
But  go  my  self  (tho'  thus  unarm'd)  amongst  them. 

[He  is  going  and  meets  Arcasius. 


Countess  of  Winohilsea  871 

Art  thoa  at  length  come  back! 

If  'twouM  not  waste  more  time  to  blame  thy  stay, 

Old  loit'ring  Man!  I  shouM  reprove  thee  for  it. 

Areas.  'Twas  vain  to  move,  Hill  I  had  seen  the  utmost, 

Clim.  The  utmost!    What  was  that,  will  they  not  Fight? 
Not  Dye  for  such  a  General! 

Areas,  My  Lord,  they  will  not —  10 

Tho'  brave  Alcander  tries  to  urge  their  Fury, 
And  wastes  his  own,  to  put  new  Life  into  them: 
Sometimes  he  weeps,  and  throws  his  Helmet  from  him, 
Kneels  to  his  Troops,  and  wooes  them  to  Compassion, 
Which  draws  a  gen'ral  sympathizing  Show'r, 
And  makes  him  think,  he  has  obtainM  his  Purpose: 
Then  on  his  fiery  Steed  in  haste  he  leaps. 
And  cries.  Come  on;  but  not  an  Ensign  waves, 
Or  any  Motion  seconds  the  Design. 

The  Meaner  sort  cry  out  aloud  for  Pay,  20 

And  mutiny  to  be  discharg'd  the  Service. 

Clim.  Base,  mercenary  Slaves!     Tet  these  I'll  use: 
The  Gold  and  Jewels  which  my  Father  gave. 
Will  fire  their  Souls,  insensible  of  Duty; 
And  by  it's  aid,  I'll  gain  what  most  I  thirst  for. 
A  king  his  Claim  but  to  one  Kingdom  lays. 
Wide  as  the  Universe  is  boimdless  Praise. 
This  shining  Mass  shall  buy  a  glorious  Name, 
They  purchase  all  the  World,  who  purchase  Fame. 

[He  is  going. 

Areas.  Since  you're  determin'd  to  attempt  these  Dangers, 
Let  me  declare  the  Time  to  be  expir'd,  31 

Which  bound  you  in  your  Promise  to  your  Father: 
By  Artifice  I  wrought  you  to  believe 
Those  Days  remain'd,  which  are  indeed  run  out. 
Your  Soul  may  now  be  free,  and  Heaven  protect  you! 

Clim.  For  this  discov'ry  I'll  return  another 


372  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Worthy  thy  knowledge,  when  we  meet  again: 

But  now  make  haste,  and  from  its  deep  conceaknent. 

In  the  low  Earth,  fetch  me  the  Wealth  I  mentioned. 

About  these  Woods  thy  quick  Return  shall  find  me.  40 

[Exeunt 
Enter  Herminia  and  Baiina. 

Bar.  See  we  are  come  to  soon ;  I  said  'twou'd  prove  so. 

Herm.  It  is  no  matter,  long  we  shall  not  wait. 

[Bar.  looks  out  for  the  Shepherds. 
I  dare  not  tell  her,  that  I  like  this  Shepherd, 
Nor  yet  indeed  scarce  own  it  to  my  self. 
'Tis  strange,  my  Mind  shou'd  sink  thus  with  my  Fortunes; 
Yet  he  did  talk  above  their  humble  strain. 
And,  as  he  knew  that  Nature  had  supply'd 
What  Fortune  had  deny'd  him  for  Attraction, 
Claimed  my  weak  Heart,  and  said  he  must  possess  it. 

Bar.  Sure,  they've  put  off  this  melancholy  Meeting        50 
Designed  in  Honour  of  their  lost  Protector, 
In  which  our  share  (tho'  secret)  must  be  greatest. 
I  see  none  move,  nor  hear  their  mournful  Notes. 

Herm.  Be  not  impatient:  Where  can  we  be  better? 
Have  I  not  heard  thee  say  sometimes,  Barina, 
That  in  a  Dream,  form'd  by  the  Day's  discourse 
Of  the  sweet  Life,  that  here  they  led  in  safety, 
My  Mother  saw  me  wed  one  of  these  Swains, 
And  smil'd,  tho'  I  had  made  a  Choice  below  me? 

Bar.  She  did ;  and  therefore  never  wou'd  consent  60 

That  you,  like  others,  shou'd  behold  their  Revels: 
Nor  have  I,  since  her  Death  left  you  my  Charge, 
AUow'd  it,  till  worse  Dangers  forc'd  us  hither; 
Tho'  of  myself,  I  ne'er  observe  such  Trifles, 

Herm.  D'ye  call  those  nightly  Visions  then  but  Trifles? 

Bar.  No  doubt  our  Dreams  are  so ;  the  work  of  Phancy, 
Where  things  of  Yesterday  are  odly  piec'd 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  373 

With  what  had  pass'd  Bome  twenty  Years  before, 

Knit  in  a  weak  and  disproportion'd  Chain, 

Which  cannot  hold  to  lead  us  to  the  Future.  70 

Whatever  I've  said,  I  wish  this  had  no  meaning,  [Aside. 

And  that  some  other  Place  cou'd  give  us  shelter. 

Herm.  We'll  walk  a  while — 
Great  Aristamenes,  now  cou'd  I  meet  thee! 
But  that's  a  Blessing  which  I  must  not  know,  [Aside, 

'Till  where  thine  is,  my  Spirit  too  shall  go. 
Oh!  that  my  Grief  wou'd  force  it  to  retire, 
And  Tears  for  him  quench  this  new-kindl'd  Fire! 

[They  go  off  the  Stage. 
Enter  at  the  other  Door  Climander. 

Clim.  Either  my  Eyes,  indulgent  to  my  Love, 
Deceive  my  Hopes;  or  now,  within  their  reach  80 

That  unknown  Beauty  moves,  which  lately  charm'd  them. 
'Tie  she!  and  with  the  speed  that  suits  my  Passion, 
I  will  o'ertake,  and  farther  urge  it  to  her.  [Exit. 

Re-enter  Herminia. 
Herm.  She  fears  my  Fate  and  fain  wou'd  have  me  go. 
Before  th'  assembling  Shepherds  are  arriv'd ; 
And  having  met  one  that  can  give  her  tydings. 
Is  busy  to  enquire  about  their  coming. 
Untimely  Caution! — 

— 'Tis  too  late  to  move. 
When  once  o'ertaken  by  the  wings  of  Love. 

Enter  Climander  behind  her. 
Clim.     From  those  fair  Lips  no  sooner  fell  that  word, 
But  all  the  neighb'ring  Ecchoes  caught  the  Sound,  91 

And  sent  it  doubl'd  to  Climander^ s  Bosom: 
The  am'rous  Streams  have  bome  it  down  their  Banks, 
And  the  glad  Plains  breathe  nothing,  since,  but  Love. 
Oh!  speak  it  once  again,  and  the  fond  Vine 


374  The  Poems  of  Annb 

Shall  with  a  stricter  grasp  embrace  the  Elm, 
Whilst  joyf 111  Birds  shall  hail  it  from  the  Branches. 

Herm.  No;  I  have  spoke  too  much — 
Since  on  these  Plains  no  syllable  is  secret. 
Hereafter  my  close  thoughts  shall  be  confined,  100 

And  in  this  Breast  lock'd  up  from  all  Men^s  Knowledge. 

Clim.  Oh!  not  if  Love  be  there;  it  cannot  be: 
Silence  can  ne^er  last  long,  nor  yet  conceal  it, 
A  thousand  ways  'twill  speak  without  a  Voice, 
And,  whilst  it  struggles  to  obtain  that  Freedom, 
Betraying  Sighs  will  'scape,  and  more  declare  it; 
'Twill  speak  in  list'ning  to  the  Lover's  Tale, 
And  say,  'tis  Sympathy  that  makes  it  pleasant. 

Herm.  He  shakes  my  Soul,  whilst  thus  he  do's  describe  it: 
For  all  he  speaks  I  feel,  and  he  must  find.  lAaide.     110 

Oh!  yet,  let  me  reflect  upon  my  Birth, 
And  quit,  in  time,  the  Ground  I  can't  maintain! 

[She's  going, 

Clim,  Nay,  do  not  fly  me,  and  I  will  be  Speechless: 
For  if  I  speak,  whilst  on  your  Eyes  I  gaze. 
It  must  be  all  of  Love,  and  that  ofiFends  you; 
Yet  since,  perhaps,  I  ne'er  may  meet  you  more, 
I  wou'd  have  told  the  Story  of  my  Heart, 
And  e'er  it  breaks,  have  mov'd  you  to  Compassion. 

Herm,  Meet  him  no  more!  then,  what  can  Crowns  afford 
me, 
Amidst  the  noisie  Pomp,  that  waits  their  Lustre?  120 

Still  shou'd  I  vainly  listen  for  the  Sound  [Aside, 

Of  such  soft  Words  which  charm  my  Sorrows  from  me. 
Oh!  that  our  Births  were  equal,  as  our  Thoughts! 
Yet  I  will  pity  him,  and  Fate  be  guilty. 

[She  stops  and  turns  towards  him, 

Clim,  Blest  be  the  Thought,  that  thus  retards  your  steps, 
And  turns  again  those  gentle  Lights  upon  me! 


OOUNTBSS  OP  WiNOHILSEA  376 

If  Pity  Hwas;  Oh!  yet  indulge  that  warmth, 
And  Love  'twill  soon  produce,  to  meet  my  Wishes. 

[She  looks  kindly  on  him. 
'Tis  done,  His  done!  be  witness  ye  still  skies, 
That  all  her  Looks  are  calm,  and  smooth  as  yours,  180 

And  not  one  Frown  forbids  my  forward  Hopes: 
Let  this  fair  Hand  be  added  to  confirm  them, 
And  ease  the  mighty  longings  of  my  Passion. 

[Kneels  and  kisses  her  Hand. 

Herm.  Take,  freely  take  this  first  and  last  of  Favours. 
Now,  Shepherd  rise,  and  hear  what  I've  to  say; 
And  if  a  Sigh  mix  with  the  fatal  Sentence, 
Believe,  'tis  from  the  Grief,  with  which  I  give  it 
You  must  not  love  me —  [She  sighs. 

Cltm.  1  must  not  love  you,  tho'  you  Sigh  to  speak  it! 
Shou'd  Pan  pronounce  it,  in  a  Voice  so  loud  140 

'Twou'd  rive  the  knotty  Oaks,  that  shade  his  Altars, 
I  wou'd  to  Syrinxes  oppose  your  Beauties, 
And  ask  the  Gods,  whose  Loves  had  best  Foundation? 

Herm.  Those  Gods,  who  made  our  Births  so  dispropor- 
tion'd, 
Wou'd  say,  they  ne'er  design'd  our  Hands  shou'd  join. 
But  see!  the  Swains  are  gath'ring  tow'rds  this  Place: 
Yet,  Shepherd,  know,  that  if  a  Prince  wou'd  Love, 
'Tis  in  your  Form  he  must  successful  prove. 

Enter  Arcasius  ivith  a  Casket 
Clim.  Then  in  this  happy  Form,  since  you  approve  it, 
Behold —  [She  interrupts  him.    150 

Herm.  No   more!   as  you  wou'd  keep  th'  Esteem  I've 
shown  you.  [Exit 

Clim.  Another  time  must  tell  this  Secret  to  her. 
Th'  Ambition  of  her  Mind  charms  like  her  Person,      [Aside. 
Nor  can  the  Blood,  that  breeds  such  Thoughts  be  abject. 


876  The  Poems  of  Anne 

But  welcome  good  Arcasitis  with  that  Bait, 

Which  shall  be  soon  dispersed  among  the  Soldiers: 

And  if  it  win  them  to  my  great  Design, 

'Tis  worth  the  Kingdoms  which  its  Price  might  ransom. 

[Exeunt  with  the  Casket  follovfd  by  Arcasins. 

Enter  Thseta  and  Lamia. 

Lamia.  The  Dews  are  falling,  and  the  Snn  declined, 
Whilst  from  this  neighb'ring  Grove  are  heard  the  Notes  160 
Of  that  sweet  Bird,  that  warbles  to  the  Night, 
Now  telling  us  her  Shadows  are  approaching: 
And  yet  the  tardy  Shepherds  are  not  come. 

Thceta,  When  all  our  Hours  were  gay,  it  was  not  thus: 
But  who  can  haste  to  break  his  chearful  Pipe, 
Tear  the  sweet  Garland,  made  by  her  he  sighs  for. 
And  sing  of  Death,  when  Love  is  all  his  Passion? 

Lamia.  Now  thou  dost  talk  of  Love,  yet  ere  we  part, 
Or  fall  into  our  melancholy  Strains, 

Lend  to  that  Eccho,  greedy  of  thy  Voice,  170 

Some  moving  Words,  upon  so  soft  a  subject. 

Thceta.  Rather  that  Song  I'd  chuse,  which  do's  prefer 
To  all  things  else  the  Joys  of  these  sweet  Plains ; 
Since,  now  perhaps,  we  must  too  soon  forsake  them. 

Lamia.  A  better  can't  be  chose ;  haste  to  perform  it. 
Lest  the  sad  Ceremony  break  our  purpose. 

THE  SONG. 

(1.) 
She  Sings        A  young  Shepherd  his  Life, 
In  soft  Pleasure  still  leads. 
Tunes  his  Voice  to  his  Reed, 

And  makes  Love  in  the  Shades.  180 

To  be  Great,  to  be  Wise, 
To  be  Rich,  to  be  Proud, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  377 

To  be  loaded  with  Business 

Or  lost  in  a  Croud, 
He  ne'er  seeks,  or  desires: 

Let  but  Silvia  be  won. 
He  is  Great,  he  is  Rich, 

And  his  Business  is  done. 

(2.) 
Whilst  their  Nymphs  are  as  happy, 

As  Happy  as  Fair;  190 

For  who  has  most  Beauty, 

Has  of  Lovers  most  share. 
Some  will  stay,  some  will  fly. 

Some  be  false,  some  be  true: 
For  the  Lost  we  ne'er  grieve. 

But  still  cherish  the  New.  iShouta. 

'Tis  vain  of  their  Frailties, 

Or  Falshoods  to  mind  'em: 
Mankind  we  must  take, 

We  must  take,  as  we  find  'em.  200 

Thceta.  What  Shouts  are  these!  [Shouts. 

Lamia.  They're   loud,   and   speak  some  Joy;    and  still 
repeated. 

Enter  Herminia  and  Barina. 

Lamia.  Fair  Stranger,  know  you  whence   these   Shouts 

proceed? 
Herm.  I  do  not;  but  these  coming,  sure,  can  tell  us. 

Enter  with  great  Signs  of  Joy  Clinias  ifHth  other  Shepherds  and 
Shepherdesses^  &c. 

Clim.  Swell,  swell,  PanisuSy  o'er  thy  spacious  Bounds, 
Flow  like  our  Joy,  and  chear  the  Meads  about  thee. 
Pan^  take  in  thankful  Sacrifice ;  our  Flocks, 
And  ev'ry  rural  Swain  proclaim  his  Praises ! 

Lamia.  Such  Sounds,  as  these,  meet  with  a  gen'ral  welcome : 


878  Thb  Poems  of  Anns 

But  yet,  the  Cause  we  wish  to  hear  explained.  210 

Good  Clinias^  tell  the  Cause  — 

Clin.  He  is  returned,  and  stands,  like  Fate,  amongst  'em. 
The  Plain's  Protector,  and  the  Army's  Genius, 
The  Virgin's  Refuge,  when  the  Town's  in  Flames, 
And  Shield  to  those  whom  Fortxme  makes  his  Vassals. 

Herm,  'Tis  Aristomenes  thou  hast  described: 
No  other  e'er  cou'd  fill  a  Praise  like  this. 

Clin.  'Tis  He  indeed,  next  to  the  Gt)ds,  our  Succour. 

Herm,  Transporting  News!  how  did  the  Army  meet  him? 

Clin,  Just  as  a  long  stopt  Current  meets  the  Sea,         220 
And  rushes  on,  when  once't  has  forced  a  Passage. 

2d  Shep.  Heav'n  has  their  Plumes;  for  high  as  that  they 
toss  'em: 
And  not  a  dusty  Soldier  in  the  Host, 
That  has  not  hugged  him  to  his  swarthy  Bosom. 

Clin.  No  Voice  is  what  it  was  an  Hour  ago; 
And  their  hoarse  Joy  sounds  like  their  distant  Drums; 
His  Hands,  as  if  the  Cretan  Thongs  still  held  them. 
Are  useless  made,  and  fetter'd  now  with  Kisses; 
Whilst  neighing  Steeds  think  that  the  War  surrounds  them, 
And  prance  in  Air  light  as  their  Master's  Minds.  230 

2d  Shep.  How  he  escap'd,  all  ask  in  such  Confusion, 
That  their  loud  Questions  drive  his  Answers  back, 
And  will  not  let  them  reach  the  nearest  to  him. 

Herm.  It  is  enough,  ye  Powers  that  guard  Messenia! 
We  now  must  change  our  Habits,  and  return.     [Aside  to  Bar. 
What  did  I  say,  return!  O  yes!  I  must, 
And  never  hope  to  see  Climander  more:  [To  herself. 

Yet  will  I  give  my  Heart  this  last  Relief 
(Since  Fate  will  have  it  bear  th'  unequal  Passion) 
To  let  him  know  my  Love,  and  endless  Flight,  240 

And  live  on  the  dear  Thought  that  he  laments  it. 

[Exit  with  Bar. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  379 

Lam.  Where  is  Aristorf    Is  he  too  retnm'd? 
Clin.  That  question  did  the  General  ask  aloud; 
And  'twas  the  only  one  that  cou'd  be  heard: 
But  no  reply  was  made;  I  think  he  is  not.    . 

Theata.  Then  we're  but  half  restor'd — 
For  he  so  heavily  will  take  that  Loss, 
Our  Joys  will  not  be  long,  nor  he  amongst  us. 
Lamia.  Pear  not  the  worst — 

2d  Stiep.  I  met  a  rumour  of  a  stranger  Prince,  250 

That  with  large  Sums  new  fir'd  the  trembling  Host, 
And  from  the  Camp  had  led  on  some  Design 
A  Party,  that  for  Wealth  wou'd  risque  their  Lives, 
Tho'  cold  and  dull  to  Thoughts  of  gen'rous  Duty. 

Clin.  'Tis  true;  of  Rhodes  they  say, 
And  some  I  heard  that  call'd  him  Demagetu8. 
Thick  flew  his  Gold,  as  swarms  of  Summer-Bees, 
And  'twas  to  succor  or  revenge  the  Gen'raL 
He  ask'd  their  Aid  — 

But  whither  he  has  led  them,  none  can  tell.  260 

Ere  Ariatomes  return 'd,  he  went 
And  is  not  heard  of  since. 

2d  Shep.  The  Gen'ral's  safe,  and  that 's  enough  for  us: 
Now  therefore  Clinias,  you  that  guide  our  Sports, 
Tell  us  what  we're  to  do  to  shew  our  Joy. 
Clin.     To  Laugh,  to  Sing,  to  Dance,  to  Play, 
To  rise  with  new  appearing  Day ; 
And  ere  the  Sun  has  kiss'd  'em  dry. 
With  various  Rubans  Nos^ays  tye. 
Deckt  with  Flow'rs  and  cloath'd  in  Green,         270 
Ev'ry  Shepherdess  be  seen: 
Ev'ry  Swain  with  Heart  and  Voice 
Meet  him,  meet  him,  and  rejoice: 
With  redoubl'd  Pecans  sing  him. 
To  the  Plains,  in  Triumph  bring  him: 


880  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  let  Pan  and  Mars  agree, 

That  nonets  so  kind  and  brave  as  He.         [Exeunt. 

ACT  IV    SCENE  I 

The  QeneraVs  Pavilion. 

Enter  Brest  in  the  Habit  of  an  Oj^lcer  Demagetus  with  Arcasius. 

Dema.  Sh^  has  left  the  Plains,  and  is  not  to  be  found. 
How  cou'd'st  thou  bring  this  cruel  Story  to  me, 
Ere  thou  had'st  searchM  Messentd^s  utmost  Bound, 
And  travell'd  o'er  the  spacious  World  of  Shepherds? 
She  must  be  yet  amongst  their  Shades  conceaPd; 
And  thro'  them  will  I  pierce,  like  prying  Phoebus, 
To  find  my  Love,  or  lose  myself  for  ever. 

Area.  You  will  not  hear  (so  much  your  Passion  sways) 
The  Reasons,  why  I  chose  to  see  you  first, 
Ere  I  proceeded  to  pursue  her  Paths.  10 

Dema.  There  spoke  the  sixty  Winters,  that  have  froze 
thee, 
And  tum'd  swift  eager  Love  to  Icy  Reasona 
I  must  be  Cold  as  thou  art,  if  I  hear  thee, 
Or  lose  one  moment  more  in  doating  Questions.   [He^s  going. 

Area.  Behold  these  Tokens,  and  let  them  retard  you. 

Dema.  Tokens  of  Love,  sent  to  the  fond  Climander. 
Oh !  thou  hast  found  a  way  indeed  to  stay  me. 

Area.  Take  that,  to  you  directed;  [a  Letter. 

And  'twas  my  Hopes  from  thence  of  some  discovery. 
That  kept  me  here  'till  you  had  broke  and  read  it.  20 

Dema.  Then  thou  shalt  hear  it.  [Reads  the  Direction. 

This  to  Climander /rom  theNymph  that  leaves  him 
To  everlasting  Griefs  shou'd  have  been  added, 
For  so  'twill  prove,  if  no  more  Comfort's  here.    [He  reads  it. 
To  love,  yet  from  the  Object  fly. 
Harder  is,  than  'tis  to  Dye : 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  381 

Yet,  for  ever  I  remove, 
Yet,  for  ever  will  I  love. 
Shepherd,  seek  no  more  to  find; 
Fate,  not  I,  has  been  Unkind.  80 

We  pluck  on  Fate,  by  striving  to  avoid  it. 
To  shun  the  low  Addresses  of  a  Swain, 
For  ever  has  she  left  a  Prince  despairing. 
Why  didst  thou  not,  as  I  at  parting  bid  thee, 
Find  out,  and  let  her  know  my  fair  Intentions, 
And  that  my  Birth  was  Noble  as  her  Wishes? 

Arccu  I  was  not  negligent,  nor  wou'd  be  thought  so: 
But  full  of  Transports  when  I  heard  your  Story, 
Thinking  the  Fates  wou'd  now  fulfill  their  Promise 
Thro'  her  the  Daughter  to  the  best  of  Men,  40 

Fled  to  discover  what  you  gave  in  Charge, 
Travers'd  the  Plains  in  a  long  fruitless  Search, 
But  cou'd  not  find  that  Beauty  bom  to  Bless  us. 

Demo.  I  shewed  thee,  as  we  passed,  her  new  raised  Hamlet. 

Area.  Thither  at  last  I  went,  but  Oh!  too  late: 
For  ere  I  reach'd  it,  the  fair  Guest  was  vanish 'd; 
Upon  the  Floor  lay  her  neglected  Hook, 
And  o'er  the  Door  hung  Boughs  of  fading  Willow, 
To  shew,  as  Shepherds  use,  the  Place  forsaken. 
That  Paper  there  I  found,  and  near  it  lay  50 

This  precious  Gemm,  that  bears  a  well-cut  Signet, 

[Shews  him  a  Ring, 
By  chance  sure  dropt,  yet  may  assist  your  Purpose. 

Demo,  Give  me  that  Emblem  of  my  fatal  Passion: 
For  without  End  is  that,  as  is  this  Circle. 
Oh!  that  my  way  to  Bliss  shou'd  seem  so  plain, 
Yet  in  a  moment  thus  be  lost  and  wilder'd! 
Now  in  the  midst  of  Crouds  and  loud  Applauses, 
That  greet  me  for  restoring  them  Ariator^ 
Must  wretched  Demagetus  sigh  for  Love, 


882  The  Poems  of  Anne 

And  hang  his  drooping  Head  tho^  wreathed  with  Laurels. 

[A  sound  of  Drums  and  Trumpets. 
But  hark!  the  Gen'ral  comes  — 
To  him  the  Oracle  I  have  reveal'd, 
And  all  the  Story  of  my  rural  Life. 
I'll  tell  him  too  the  Cause  of  my  new  Grief, 
Which  to  relieve,  I  instantly  must  leave  him. 

A  FLOURISH. 

Enter  Aristomenes,  Aristor,  Alcander,  and  other  Attendants. 

Aristom.  Why,  Demagetus^  art  thou  from  my  Sight, 

From  these  fond  Arms,  that  ever  thus  would  hold  thee! 

[Embracing  him. 
Thou  kind  Restorer  of  my  lov'd  Aristor, 

Come  to  the  Camp,  and  hear  them  shout  thy  Name, 

Whilst  I  declare  thee  equal  in  Command  70 

With  him,  who  owes  his  Life  to  thy  young  Valour. 

Dema.     Alas!  my  Lord — 

Aristom.  A  Soldier  sigh,  when  courting  Fame  attends  him! 
I  know  you  Love,  by  your  own  kind  Confession: 
But  that  too  must  succeed,  since  now  your  Birth 
Is  known  to  answer  all  the  great  Desires, 
Which,  to  my  Wonder,  did  possess  the  Breast 
Of  that  fair  rural  Maid,  whose  Beauty  charm'd  you. 
We'll  send,  and  with  the  Pomp  that  suits  a  Princess, 
(Since  such  your  gen'rous  Passion  means  to  make  her)      80 
Have  her  conducted  to  a  rich  Pavilion, 
And  join  your  Hands,  as  Heav'n  has  join'd  your  Heart& 
This,  my  Aristor^  be  your  pleasing  Task. 

Enter  an  Attendant  to  Aristomenes. 

Attend.  The  Princess  is  without,  and  waits  your  Pleasure. 
Aristom.  Conduct  her  in — 
I  sent  for  her,  to  see  the  generous  Stranger.       [To  Alcander. 


OOUNTESS  OP  WiNOHILSEA  383 

Enter  behind  the  Company  Herminia  and  Baxina. 

Aristor,  My  Lord,  what  you  command  I  take  in  charge. 

[To  Aristomenes. 
Tell  me,  my  best  of  Friends,  the  way  to  serve  you. 

[To  Demagetus. 

Dema.  I  know  it  not  my  self,  and  that's  the  Torture. 
Hear  me,  my  Lord,  nor  think  my  Sorrows  light:  90 

[To  Aristomenes. 
For  Love,  the  only  Comfort  of  fond  Youth, 
Is  lost  for  ever  to  the  poor  Climander. 

Herm.  Climander —  [To  Barina. 

That  Name  and  Voice  bears  down  my  fainting  Spirits. 
I  shall  be  known,  yet  have  not  Strength  to  fly: 
Where  will  thiB  end,  and  where's  Herminid*B  Honour. 

[To  herself, 

Aristom.  So  sad  a  Pause  still  keeps  us  in  Suspence: 
Proceed,  and  if  there's  help  on  Earth,  we'll  find  it. 

Dema.  At  my  return,  made  joyful  by  Success, 
With  hasty  Steps,  and  in  my  Heart  soft  Wishes,  100 

Love,  and  a  thousand  flatt'ring  Expectations, 
I  fled  the  clam'rous  Praise  prepar'd  to  meet  me. 
And  sought  the  Path  that  led  to  my  Desires: 
But  ere  I  was  advanc'd  beyond  the  Camp, 
The  Voice  of  this  Old  Man 
Cross'd  my  sad  way,  and  cry'd,  She's  gone  for  ever. 

Aristom.  Perhaps  'tis  some  Mistake, 
If  other  Proofs  are  wanting  to  confirm  it. 

Dema.  Oh!  far  too  many  for  Climander'^B  Peace. 
She  own'd  her  Love,  and  with  this  Signet  bound  it,         110 
And  in  the  Folds  of  this  dear  Paper  left 
At  once  the  tokens  of  my  Joy  and  Ruin. 

[Gives  the  Letter  and  Ring  to  Aristomenes. 

Herm.  The  Character  and  Signet  will  betray  me ; 
And  now  Necessity  must  make  me  Bold.  [Aside. 


384  The  Poems  of  Anns 

» 

Oh!  yet,  ere  you  proceed  to  view  that  Paper, 

[She  throws  herself  at  Aiistomenes  Feei. 
(Wrapt  in  Confnsion)  hear  your  Daughter  speak, 

[As  he  is  opening  the  Letter. 
And  pity  in  her  Pate  all  Women's  Frailty. 

Artstom.  Ha!  Thou  dost  much  surprize  me;  but  go  on, 
And,  Hill  she  has  finished,  let  no  Word  be  uttered 

Dema.  By  all  my  fleeting  Sorrows  'tis  my  Love:  120 

Nor  cou'd  I,  but  to  hear  her  speak,  be  Silent  [Aside. 

Artstom.  Proceed,  and  'bate  those  Tears,  that  stay  thy 
Speech. 

Herm .  That  I  have  stoop'd  below  the  Blood  you  gave  me. 
And  cast  my  doating  Love  upon  that  Shepherd, 
(For  such  he  is,  altho'  a  Plume  adorns  him) 
My  wretched  Hand,  and  now  my  Tongue  confesses: 
For  by  that  Paper,  indiscreetly  penned. 
The  Secret  wou'd  be  told,  should  I  conceal  it. 
But  Oh!  my  Lord,  since  you  can  ne'er  forgive  me; 
A  sad  Recluse  for  ever  let  me  live,  130 

Or  Dye  for  Love,  to  do  my  Birth  more  Justice. 

Aristom.  Be  comforted,  and  farther  yet  unfold 
How  first  you  came  acquainted  with  this  Shepherd. 

Herm.  To  'scape  the  Fury  of  prevailing  Foes, 
Disguised,  I  in  your  absence  sought  the  Plains, 
And  in  that  Habit  heard  the  pow'rful  Sighs 
Of  one  that  knew  not  then  his  own  Presumption. 

Aristom.  Were  he  a  Prince,  and  still  would  urge  his  Suit 
Wou'd'st  thou  receive  't,  and  bless  the  Pow'rs  that  sent  him? 

Herm,   I  shou'd  not  hide  my  Thoughts,  or  blush  to  own 
them.  140 

Yes,  I  cou'd  bless  those  Pow'rs  which  now  undo  me. 

[Demagetus  comes  foruxird, 

Demag.  I  cannot  wait  these  Forms ;  Love  plead  my  Par- 
don, 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  385 

When,  Sir,  I  disobey  your  order'd  Silence, 
And  haste  to  tell  her  'tis  a  Prince  adores  her, 
That  wou'd  have  sought  her  on  the  lowly  Plains, 
And  for  her  Favour  quitted  all  Dominion. 

Aristom.  Then  take  her,  thou   most  worthy   Prince  of 
Rhodes!  [Giving  her  to  him. 

And  know,  Herminia^  to  encrease  thy  Passion, 
Thou  hold'st  that  noble  Hand,  that  sav'd  thy  Brother, 
And  gives  thy  Father  in  this  new  Alliance, 
More  Joy  than  when  he  first  receiv'd  and  bless'd  thee.    150 

Dema.  Let  all  the  Joys  of  Earth  give  place  to  mine. 
Whilst  in  deep,  silent  Raptures  I  possess  them: 

[Taking  her  from  Aristomenes. 
For  Demagetus  is  above  Discourse, 
And  will  not  wrong  his  Love  with  faint  Expressions. 

Herm.  So  let  mine  flow,  and  O  Barina,  see 
I  smiling  give  my  Hand  now  to  a  Shepherd, 
Yet  fear  not  to  offend  my  Mother's  Ghost. 

Bar.  No;  that  smiles  too,  and  all  that  love  and  serve  you. 

Area.     The  Fate  of  Rhodes  is  clear  and  chearful  now; 
And  old  Arcasius  has  outliv'd  his  Cares.  160 

Aristor.  Now  as  a  Brother,  take  this  new  Embrace ; 

[To  Demagetus. 
Tho'  all  the  Love,  it  shews,  you  had  before. 

Aristom.  Conduct  her,  Demagetus,  to  her  Tent: 

I'll  soon  be  there,  and  see  those  Rites  perform'd. 

That  shall  confirm  her  Yours;  be  Kind  and  Happy. 

[Exeunt  Herminia  and  Demagetus  leading  her  follou/d  by 
Arcasius,  Barina  and  others.  Aristor  is  going  too  but  is 
calVd  back  by  his  Father. 

Come  back  Aristor,  and  the  rest  withdraw: 
For  something  I  wou'd  say  to  you  in  private. 

[The  Attendants  go  off. 
Free  from  the  Croud,  and  unobserv'd  my  Transports, 


386  The  Poems  op  Anne 

I  wou'd  embrace,  and  welcome  thee  to  Life, 

And  with  a  loud  repeated  Blessing  pay  170 

The  pions  Care,  that  brought  it  to  such  Dangers. 

Oh!  that  the  Love  of  Women  should  be  thought 

To  pass  the  Fondness  which  a  Father  feels, 

When  thus  he  grasps  a  Son  of  thy  Perfections, 

[Embracing  him. 
My  Dear,  my  Lov'd  Aviator! 

Aristor.  My  Prince,  my  General,  and  the  Best  of  Fathers! 

Aristom.  Thy  Heart  speaks  loud,  and  knocking  at  my 
Breast 
Seems  as  'twould  close  in  conference  with  mine. 

Aristor.  It  would,  my  Lord,  and  strives  to  force  its  Passage. 
[Aristomenes  looses  his  Arms  from  embracing  him. 

Aristom.  Oh,  no  my  Son!  for  now  I  must  be  plain,     180 
And  tell  thee,  thou  dost  lock  some  Secret  there 
Which  all  my  depth  of  Kindness  ne'er  could  fathom: 
I  see  it  in  the  Cloud,  that  shades  thy  Brow. 
And  still  thy  pensive  Eyes  are  downwards  cast, 
As  thou  wou'd'st  seek  the  Grave,  or  something  lower: 
Long  have  I  this  observed  — 

And  thought  whole  Nights  away  to  find  the  Cause, 
Which  now,  my  Son,  I  urge  thee  to  reveal: 
And  think  that  He  who  best  can  love  thee  asks  it 

Aristor.  Oh!  that  you  did  not  love,  or  would  not  ask  it! 
I  cannot  speak,  for  speaking  must  oflFend:  191 

Yet  shou'd  my  Silence  grieve  such  mighty  Goodness, 
'Twou'd  break  that  Heart,  which  thus  you  seek  to  succour. 
Upon  my  Knees  a  strange  Request  I  make, 

[Offering  to  Kneel  but  his  Father  takes  him  up. 
That  you  would  quite  forget  and  think  me  Dead; 
Which  the  approaching  Battle  shou'd  confirm, 
And  leave  you  to  possess  your  other  Comforts. 

Aristom.  My  other  Comforts!  All  are  light  to  Thee: 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  387 

And  when  I  w6nld  have  sharM  amongst  my  Race 

Impartial  Kindness,  as  their  Birthrights  claimed,  200 

Still  to  my  Heart  Aristor  wou'd  be  nearest, 

Still,  with  a  Merit  not  to  be  withstood, 

Wou'd  press  beyond  my  cool  and  equal  Purpose, 

And  seize  a  double  Portion  of  my  Love: 

And  wilt  thou  lose  it  now,  to  keep  thy  Silence? 

Aristor.  My  Life  I  rather  wou'd;  but  Oh!  my  Lord!  [Stgha. 

Aristom.  Another  Sigh,  another  yet,  my  Son! 
And  then,  let  Words  relieve  this  mighty  Passion: 
They  will,  they  will;  the  Sweetness  of  thy  Temper 
Will  melt  before  a  just  and  warm  Persuasion.  210 

Now,  let  me  know  it  — 

Aristor.  Believe  that  if  'twere  fit,  it  shou'd  be  told: 
But  Oh!  my  Lord,  'tis  what  you  must  not  know. 

Aristom.  Not  I,  Aristor!  if  thy  Soul  were  bare 
As  is  thy  faded  Cheek  now  to  thy  Father, 
It  were  most  fit — 

Oh!  think,  my  Son,  who  'twas  that  made  it  Noble, 
And  train'd  it  in  the  Paths  of  Truth  and  Honour: 
Else,  what  had  hinder'd,  but  thou  might'st  have  been 
(In  spite  of  all  the  Virtues  with  thee  bom,  220 

For  Education  is  the  stronger  Nature) 
A  bragging  Coward,  or  a  base  Detractor, 
A  Slave  to  Wealth,  or  false  to  Faith  or  Friendship 
LuU'd  in  the  common  Arms  of  some  Seducer, 
And  lost  to  all  the  Joys  of  Virtuous  Love. 

Aristor.  Ha!  Virtuous  Love! 

Aristom.  What,  dost  thou  start?  why,  so  I  meant  thou 
ehou'dst. 
When  hastily  I  press'd  that  Word  upon  thee. 
To  catch  that  flushing  Witness  in  thy  Face, 
Was  all  this  Bait  contriv'd;  no  more,  my  Son,  230 

No  more  dissembling  of  a  Truth  so  plain: 


388  The  Poems  of  Anns 

I  see  'tis  Love,  the  best  of  all  our  Passions.    * 

And  framed  like  Thee ;  sore  none  cou'd  e'er  Despair, 

Nor  can  I  fear  thou'd'st  make  a  vulgar  Choice. 

Aristor.     On  Ida's  Top  not  Paris  made  a  nobler, 
When  of  three  Goddesses  he  chose  the  Fairest. 

Aristom.  Will  she  not  hear  thy  Love? 

Aristor.  Oh  yes!  with  all  the  softness  of  her  Sex, 
And  answers  it  with  Vows,  more  strong  than  Ours. 

Aristom.  If  thus  it  be,  what  hast  thou  then  to  fear?    240 

Aristor.  A  Father's  Wrath,  more  dreadful  to  Aristor 
Than  is  the  frown  of  Jove,  that  shakes  the  Poles, 
And  makes  the  Gkxls  forget  they  are  Immortal. 

Aristom.  Thou  wrong'st  my  Love  in  that  mistaken  Terror. 
By  all  those  Powers  I  swear,  I  will  not  cross  thee; 
Be  she  a  Spartan  Dame,  'bate  me  but  One, 
And  tho'  a  Foe,  I  yield  thou  shou'd'st  possess  her. 

Aristor.  1  dare  not  ask;  my  trembling  Love  forbids  it. 
Who  is  that  One,  so  fatally  excepted? 

Aristom,  Then,  I'll  by  telling  thee  prevent  that  Trouble. 
It  is  the  Tyrant  Armxander^B  Daughter,  251 

Whom,  tho'  I  ne'er  beheld,  I  must  abhor. 
As  borrowing  her  Blood  from  such  a  Fountain. 

Aristor.  Take   mine,   my  Lord,  then  to  wash  out   that 
Stain  [Offers  his  Breast 

You'll  think  it  has  contracted  by  her  Love: 
For  'tis  that  Tyrant's  Daughter  I  adore. 
And  ne'er,  while  Life  is  here,  will  change  my  Purpose. 

Aristom.  Confusion  seize  those  Words,  and  Her  that  caus'd 
'em! 
Not  Groans  of  Earthquakes,  or  the  Burst  of  Thunder, 
The  Voice  of  Storms  urging  the  dang'rous  Billows,  260 

E'er  struck  the  Sense  with  sounds  of  so  much  Horror. 
It  must  not,  Oh !  it  must  not,  shall  not  be : 
Sooner  this  Dagger,  tho'  my  Soul  lives  in  thee, 

[Drawing  Amalintha's  Dagger. 


Countess  op  Winchilsea  889 

Shou'd  let  out*  thine  with  this  prepost'rous  Passion, 
Than  I  wou'd  yield,  it  e'er  shon'd  meet  Success. 

Artstor.  Of  all  the  Instruments  by  Aulcan  form'd, 
That  Poinard  best  is  fitted  to  my  Heart, 
Since  Her's  it  was,  whose  Eyes  have  deeper  pierc'd  it: 
Quickly,  my  Lord,  let  me  receive  it  here, 
And  see  me  proud  in  Death  to  wear  that  Favour.  270 

[Aristomenes  amazed  looks  on  the  Dagger^  and  speaks  to 
himself. 

Aristom  This  Dagger  Her's,  this  Ancucander^s  Daughter's ! 
Fate  then  is  practicing  upon  my  Soul 
What  sudden  Turns  and  Tryals  Man  can  bear. 

Artstor.  Oh!  do  not  pause — 
Lest  fainting  with  the  Weight  of  what  I  feel, 
I  poorly  fall,  unlike  your  Son  or  Soldier. 

Aristom.  If  this  were  Her's,  Her's  were  the  grateful  Vows, 
With  which  I  rashly  charg'd  the  Life  she  gave  me.  . 

[Still  to  himself. 

Artstor.  Ha!  not  a  Look,  not  one  sad  parting  Word! 
Then  my  own  Hand  thus  sets  me  free  for  ever.  280 

[Offers  to  Stab  himself y  but  is  stayed  by  Aristomenes. 

Aristom.  Hold!  by  Love  and  Duty  yet  a  moment  hold! 

Artstor.  My  Life  they've  sway'd,  and  must  command  a 
Moment 
But  let  it  not  exceed,  lest  both  I  cancel, 
And  only  listen  to  my  wild  Despair. 

Aristom.  Shall  I  perform  them?  shall  I  hear  her  plead? 
And  to  a  Woman's  Claim  resign  my  Vengeance? 
No;  let  my  Ear  still  fly  the  fatal  Suit, 
And  from  her  Tears  be  tum'd  my  harden'd  Face. 
What  did  I  say!  a  hasty  Blush  has  seized  it. 
For  but  imagining  a  Thing  so  vile.  290 

Turn  back  my  Face  from  Her  that  shunn'd  not  mine. 
When  it  was  Death  to  know,  and  to  preserve  me! 


390  The  Poems  op  Anne 

No;  let  the  Fiends  be  obstinate  in  111, 

Bevenge  be  their's,  while  Qodlike  Man  is  grateful. 

Enter  an  Attendant. 

Attend.  Pardon,  my  gracions  Lord,  this  bold  Introsion. 
Two  Ladies  veil'd,  escaping  from  PhcereOy 
Ask  with  such  earnestness  for  Prince  Aristor, 
That,  sure,  their  Bus'ness  is  of  mighty  Moment. 
From  one  this  Ring  at  her  entreaty.  Sir,  I  must  deliver. 

Oivea  it  to  Aristor  and  Exit. 

Aristom.  Retire,  and  if  not  call'd,  return  no  more.       300 

Aristor.  'Tis  Amalintha^^  Ring,  my  Amaliniha^^i 
She's  come  in  time,  to  see  me  fall  her  Victim. 

Aristom.  No;  to  receive  her  from  my  Hand,  my  Son; 
Since  'twas  from  her's,  I  took  this  healing  Weapon, 
That  has  cut  off  the  Hate  in  which  I  held  her. 
'Twas  she  that  met  me  rising  from  my  Grave, 
And  fearless  freed  the  Foe  to  her  and  Sparta: 
Then  in  a  grateful  Promise  was  I  bound 
Not  to  deny  whatever  she  shou'd  request ; 
And  sure  thy  Love,  before  the  Pomp  of  Crowns,  310 

Is  what  a  Maid  must  ask,  that  knows  its  Value. 

Aristor.  The  Transports  of  my  Soul  be  thus  exprest ; 
Then  let  me  Dye,  for  having  griev'd  such  Goodness. 

[Embracing  his  Father^s  Knees. 

Aristom.  No;  rise  my  Son,  go  meet  and  chear  thy  Love, 
And  to  this  Tent  conduct  the  Royal  Maid, 
Whilst  in  that  inner  Part  I  stand  conceaFd, 
And  hear  her  tell  why  thus  she  comes  to  seek  us: 
Thence  will  I  issue,  as  occasion  calls, 
And  giving  thee,  give  all  I  hold  most  precious. 

[He  goes  into  the  inner  Tent,  Aristor  goes  mit  at  the  other 
Door  and  re-enters  immediately  leading  Amalintha  veiVd 
followed  by  Phila. 

Aristor.  Dismiss  that  Cloud,  and  with  it  all  your  Fears, 
Safe  in  this  Camp,  and  in  Aristor'^  Love,  321 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  391 

Which  ne'er  was  truly  bless'd,  Hill  this  glad  Moment. 

Now  Amaltnthaf  let  my  Joys  overflow; 

And  ere  I  ask  what  brought  thee  to  my  sight, 

Let  it  be  filled  with  thy  amazing  Beauties, 

And  with  this  Hand  my  longing  Lips  be  clos'd. 

[Kisses  her  Hand. 

Amal.  Thus,  after  each  short  absence,  may  we  meet, 
Thus  pleas'd,  thus  wrapt  in  Love,  thus  dying  fond. 
But  Oh  Aristorl  since  I  last  beheld  you. 
So  has  this  Life  been  threatened  by  the  Fates,  830 

That  to  your  Arms  'tis  forc'd  for  Peace  and  Safety. 

Aristor.  Still  may  they  prove  a  Haven  for  my  Love, 
Too  strong  for  all  the  Shocks  of  rig'rous  Fortune. 
But  what  beneath  thy  Father's  Roof  cou'd  fright  thee? 
Or  what  bold  Danger  break  thro'  his  Protection? 

Amal.  'Twas  from  Himself,  and  all  the  Lords  of  Sparta. 
When  Aristomenes  they  found  escap'd. 
High  was  their  Rage  as  Billows  in  a  Tempest; 
And  all  the  Arts  of  State  were  put  in  use 
To  find  who  had  assisted  in  his  Flight:  840 

But  still  in  vain,  'till  subtle,  vile  Clarinthus — 

Aristor.  That  Villain  will  be  first  in  Blood  and  Mischief. 
But  cou'd  he  pry  into  thy  generous  Heart, 
And  find  it  there,  that  you  had  nobly  done  it? 
And  are  not  secret  Thoughts  secure  against  him  ? 

Amal.  I  did  believe  them  so,  'till  he  disprov'd  it: 
For  'twas  his  Counsel,  when  all  others  fail'd. 
To  know  by  speaking  Gods  the  deep  Contrivance; 
And  from  the  Oracle,  in  some  few  Moments, 
The  full  Discov'ry  will  have  reach 'd  Phcerea.  850 

Which  ere  it  does,  I  was  advis'd  to  leave, 
By  one  that  heard  the  horrid  Voice  accuse  me. 
And  with  a  Speed  unmark'd  outflew  the  rest. 

Aristor.  As  swiftly  may  the  bounteous  Gods  reward  him. 


892  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Amal.  This,  my  Aristor,  brings  me  to  your  Tents, 
Bnt  not  to  save  my  Life,  or  'scape  their  Fury: 
For  shou'd  your  Heari;,  which  boldly  I  will  claim, 
Be  yet  deny'd  me  by  your  injured  Father, 
Not  all  his  Army  shou'd  retard  my  Steps 
From  leading  to  the  Town,  and  certain  Ruin;  360 

For  they  have  sworn  it  (with  this  Imprecation, 
That  'till  'tis  done,  no  Victory  may  bless  them) 
To  sacrifice  the  Soul  that  sav'd  the  Gen'raL 

Enter  Aristomenes  from  the  inuxird  Tent. 

Aristom,  That  Army  you  have  nam'd,  shall  first  in  Flames 
Consume  the  utmost  Town  of  Lacedemon. 
Take  your  Security,  and  softest  Wishes, 
Your  dear  Aristor  take,  and  if  ought  more 
The  fair  Preserver  of  his  Father  claims. 
Be  it  but  nam'd,  and  at  that  instant  granted. 

Amal.  Beyond  Aristor's  Heart  there's  no  Request,      370 
No  longing  Thought,  no  Hope  for  Amalintha: 
For  still  his  Love  prescribed  their  tender  Limits. 

Aristor,  Oh !  let  it  not  be  thought  irrev'rent  Passion, 
If  in  the  awful  Presence  of  a  Father 
I  run  upon  my  Joys,  and  grasp  'em  thus.  [Embraces  her. 

Aristom.  Thou  well  dost  intimate  I  shou'd  retire ; 
For  Privacy  is  only  fit  for  Lovers. 

Aristor.  Pardon  my  Transport,  Sir,  nor  thus  mistake  it. 

Aristom.  No  more,  my  Son!  but  when  the  Trumpet  calls, 
Which  must  be  soon,  remember  thou'rt  a  Soldier,  380 

And  that  the  Battle,  we  shall  lead  to  morrow. 
Will  ask  our  best  of  Care  and  Preparation. 

Aristor.  Never  was  I  yet  wanting  to  my  Charge. 
But  give  me  leave  here  to  attend  that  Summons. 

[Exit  Aristomenes. 
For  Oh!  my  Amalintha^  since  thou'rt  mine, 
Since  I  can  tell  my  Heart  that  darling  Truth ; 


Countess  op  Winohilsba  893 

The  Moments  that  must  take  me  from  th j  sight, 

Will  pass  for  lost,  and  useless  to  Aristor. 

And  this  War  done,  which  we  now  soon  shall  finish 

(For  You  not  there,  what  God  will  fight  for  Spartaf)       390 

ni  swear  the  Sun  and  radiant  Light  shall  part. 

Ere  I  will  once  be  found  from  this  lov'd  Presence. 

Amal.  Confirm  it,  all  ye  soft  and  gentle  Pow'rs! 
And  let  the  pattern  of  a  Love  so  perfect 
Reform  Mankind,  and  bless  believing  Women. 
But  can  I  think  it  is  Aristor  speaks? 
That  I  behold,  and  hear  you  safe  from  Danger, 
Whom  late  I  saw  assaulted  so  with  Death, 
When  from  the  Guard  a  Weapon  you  had  snatched, 
And  but  that  brave  Swords  length  cou'd  keep  him  from  you? 
Hope  and  fond  Expectation  all  had  left  me:  401 

Arm'd  with  this  Dagger  full  I  stood  in  vain. 
And  from  my  Window  watch'd  the  fatal  Stroke, 
Which  soon  was  to  be  copy'd  on  my  Heart; 
Then,  had  I  meant  to  own  your  noble  Love, 
And  told  mine  Dying,  whilst  the  Croud  had  trembFd. 

Aristor.  I  saw  your  dire  Intent,  and  that  preserved  me: 
For  'twas  to  stop  your  Arm,  that  mine  perform'd 
What  else  had  been  above  the  Force  of  Nature; 
And  when  the  Drums  of  Demagetus  thunder'd,  410 

As  thro'  the  shiver'd  Gates  he  rush'd  to  save  me. 
You  may  remember,  that  I  wou'd  not  meet  him, 
Till  I  had  told  my  Love  what  meant  the  Tumult, 
Which  since  has  given  me  Fears,  cold  as  pale  Death, 
Lest  some  Observer  might  have  charg'd  it  on  you. 

[Trumpets  sound. 

Amal.  No ;  for  too  much  their  own  Concern  engag'd  them. 
But  Oh!  already  hark!  the  Trumpet  calls. 
And  jealous  Fame  no  longer  lets  me  keep  you. 
Must  you  be  gone,  must  you  obey  this  Summons  ? 


394  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Aristor.  Oh!  yes,  I  must;  it  is  the  Voice  of  Honour.  420 
Yet,  do  not  weep — 

Be  this  Embrace  the  Earnest  of  a  Thousand. 
Now  let  me  lead  you  to  Herminia's  Tent- 
Then  think,  I  go  more  to  secure  your  Charms, 
And  fight  to  rest  with  Peace  in  these  fair  Arms. 

[He  leads  her  off, 

ACT  V    SCENE  I 

The  SCENE  is  the  Camp.  A  Noise  of  Drums  and  Trumpets. 
Enter  Aristomenes,  Aristor,  Demagetus,  Alcander,  several 
Officers  and  Soldiers. 

Enter  an  Officer  from  the  other  Door,  and  speaks  to  the  Creneral. 

Officer.  My  Lord!  I'm  from  Alcander  bid  to  say, 
The  Battle  he  has  marshalPd  as  you  ordered; 
And  that  your  Presence  now  is  only  wanted. 

Aristom.  Tell  him  we  come ;  and  let  the  Drums  beat  higher. 

Now,  my  brave  Followers,  be  your  selves  to  Day, 

And  more  I  need  not  ask,  that  know  your  Valour; 

Who've  seen  you  at  the  backs  of  Spartans  ride. 

Till  their  long  Flight,  and  not  your  Conquest,  tir'd  you. 

[The  Soldiers  sfwut. 

And  Oh!  my  Sons,  since  they  who  bravely  seek  it, 

May  meet  with  Death,  when  all  his  Darts  are  flying,  10 

Let  me  Embrace,  and  breathe  my  Blessings  on  ye. 

[Embraces  Demagetus. 
Yet,  Demagetus,  if  I  'scape  him  now. 

And  Victory  attends  my  great  Endeavour, 

Thou  shalt  Triumphant  lead  me  into  Rhodes, 

Where  we'll  obey  the  Gods,  and  save  thy  Country. 

Dem.  Still  you're  the  Best  of  Men,  as  they  declared  you. 

Aristom.  Now  let  mefold  thee  thus,  my  Life's  best  Treasure ! 

[He  embraces  Aristor,  but  seems  disordered,  and  not  to  feel  him  in 
his  Arm^,  which  he  often  clasps  about  him. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  395 

Thou  dost  not  fill  my  Arms,  'tis  Air  I  grasp: 
Nor  do  my  Eyes  behold  thee — 

Where  is  my  Son,  ha!  where  is  my  Aristorf  20 

Aviator.  Here  my  dear  Lord,  here  pressing  to  your  Bosom. 

[His  Voice  seems  to  Aristomenes  {still  under  his  disorder)  to  he 
low  and  different  to  what  it  was  usually, 

Aristom.  From  what  far  distant  Valley  comes  thy  Voice? 
It  sounds  so  hollow,  scarce  my  Ear  receives  it. 

Aristor.  What  means  my  noble  Father! 

Aristom.  Till  now,  my  faithful  Senses  never  faiFd  me. 
They  talk  of  Omens,  ha!  I  must  not  think  onH; 
Such  chilling  Damps  would  blast  a  Day  of  Battle:       [Aside. 
Yet  let  my  evil  Genius  but  be  true. 
And  a  fam'd  End  is  all  it  can  portend  me. 

Aristor.  You  reason  with  your  self,  and  turn  from  us.  30 
May  we  not  know  what  thus  disturbs  your  Thoughts? 

Aristom.  Nothing — a  Vapour  crossed  me,  but  'tis  gone: 
And  now  the  Field,  the  dusty  Field,  my  Sons, 
Must  be  the  Scene,  where  we  shall  nobly  act 
What  our  great  Spirits,  and  our  Country  urges. 
The  Trumpet  calls,  with  the  impatient  Drum; 
And  He  that  loves  his  Honour,  let  him  come. 

[He  draws  his  Sword  and  goes  off  followed  by  the  rest  unth  their 
Swords  dravm,  Drums  and  Shouts  of  Battle  immediately  sue- 


The  Noise  continues^  the  SCENE  changes  to  a  fine  Tent. 
Enter  Amalintha  followed  by  Fhila. 

Amal.  Not  yet  enough!  when  will  this  Discord  end! 
Is  there  no  happy  Land, 
Where  only  Love,  and  its  kind  Laws  prevail? 
Where  the  false  Trumpet  flatters  not  to  Death, 
Nor  the  more  noisy  Drum  outcries  the  Dying? 
Oh!  Phila^  why  shou'd  Men  with  Hearts  unmov'd 
Seek  the  bold  War,  and  leave  ours  trembling  for  them? 


396  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Now  whilst  I  speak,  a  chilling  Fear  surrounds  me; 

And  ev'ry  Tread  I  hear,  is  hastening  on, 

Methinks,  to  tell  me,  all  my  Hopes  are  perish'd.  10 

Phila.  Why  shou'd  you,  Madam,  who  have  pass'd  already, 
Unhurt  by  Fortune,  thro'  more  threatening  Dangers, 
Now  faint,  when  Reason  bids  you  think  the  best? 
The  Sound  goes  from  us,  and  the  lucky  War 
(Since  you've  the  Promise  of  your  Father's  Life) 
Proceeds,  as  we  cou'Ji  wish,  for  the  Messenians. 

Amal.  So  do's  it  seem ;  but  yet  my  failing  Spirits 
Sink  to  my  Heart,  and  bid  it  think  of  Ruin. 
Last  Night  my  Dreams  shew'd  me  Aristor  bleeding; 
And  o'er  my  Head  a  screaming  Voice  proclaim'd  20 

That  Amalintha^s  hasty  Fate  had  kill'd  him: 
I  clos'd  my  Eyes  to  catch  another  Vision, 
That  might  interpret,  or  prevent  the  first ; 
But  all  in  vain,  no  Help  or  Comfort  found  me. 
And  wrapt  in  Fears,  I  wak'd  and  still  continue 
For  what's  foretold  so  fatal  to  my  Love. 

Phila.  Your  Fate  work  his  ?  it  rather  will  protect  him. 
But  here  come  Tydings,  and  the  Bearer  smiles ; 
Good  let  them  be,  and  these  vain  Fears  will  vanish. 

Enter  an  Officer. 

Amah  From  Prince  Aristor f  Do's  he  live,  and  send  you  ? 

Officer.  Madam  he  does —  31 

And  bids  me  say,  what  I  my  self  can  witness. 
That  Lacedemon's  Battle  breaks  to  pieces, 
And  soon  will  give  him  leave  to  find  you  here. 

Amal.  Take  this,  and  wear  it.  Soldier,  for  your  News; 

[Gives  him  a  Jewel, 
And  may  your  Honours  still  outshine  its  Lustre. 
Stay  here,  whilst  I  report  this  to  Herminia, 
If  Demagetus  too  be  yet  in  safety. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  397 

Officer.  He  is;  and  near  Arisior  did  I  leave  him. 

Amal.  Come  with  me  Phila;  yet  my  Heart  is  heavy,    40 
And  wou'd  be  forcing  Tears  to  my  sad  Eyes: 
But  I'll  repel  them  with  this  welcome  Message, 
And  put  on  all  the  smiles  of  Love  to  meet  him. 

[Exit  with  Fhila  into  the  Tent. 

Offi^cer.  The  Centinels  have  all  forsook  the  Tents, 
In  hopes  to  share  the  Plunder  of  the  Foe, 
Finding  by  their  retiring  we  prevail: 
But  I'll  report  it  loudly  to  the  General. 
Oh!  here  are  some  returning;  are  they  Messeniansf 
They  wear  the  Habit,  yet  no  Face  I  know; 
Their  Haste  and  Looks  do  seem  to  point  at  Mischief:        50 
I  will  conceal  my  self,  and  watch  their  Purpose. 

[He  conceals  himself. 

Enter  Clarinthus  tvith  others  disguised  like  Messenian  Soldiers. 

Clar.  Tou   heard    the   King,  and  the  chief   Lords  of 
Sparta 
Wish,  that  no  Victory  might  bless  our  Arms, 
Till  we  had  sacrificed  the  Traytor's  Life, 
That  freed  this  Lyon,  which  devours  us  all. 

Sold.  We  did,  we  did — 

Clar.  You've  also  heard,  'twas  Amalintha^s  Action. 

Sold.  Yes,  and  the  King  then  said,  his  Vowshou'd  stand: 
And  she  had  Dy'd,  I  think,  had  she  not  fled  for't. 

Clar,  'Tis  true ;  therefore  when  I  reflected  on  our  Curse, 
And  saw  that  Conquest  wou'd  no  more  attend  us  61 

Till  we  perform'd  what  to  the  Gods  we  swore, 
I  mov'd  the  King — 

To  let  me  with  your  Aid  attempt  the  Camp, 
Which  if  I  found  unguarded, 
I  would  to  Sparta  soon  convey  the  Traytress, 
Where  she  should  meet  the  Rigour  of  the  Law. 


898  The  Poems  op  Anne 

These  are  the  Royal  Tents,  where  she  mtist  be; 
Therefore  no  more  remains,  but  to  secure  her. 

[They  follow  him  into  the  inner  Tent  and  the  conceaVd  Officer 
comes  Old. 

Ojfficer,  Curst  Conspiration,  not  to  be  prevented  70 

With  but  my  single  Arm  against  their  Numbers ! 
But  to  the  Battle,  and  Aristor's  Ear  I'll  fly  for  Help; 
That  may  overtake,  and  cross  the  bloody  Purpose.  [Exit. 

The  Women  shriek  in  the  inner  Tent,  and  Re-enter  Qarintha 
d:c,  leading  in  Amalintha  and  Phila. 

Amal.  Messenians  are  ye,  and  yet  treat  me  thus! 
Restrain  those  Hands,  that  gave  your  General  to  you. 
Let  me  but  hear  you  speak,  and  name  the  Cause; 
Which,  if  a  just  one,  I'll  submit  to  Fortune. 

Clar.  'Tie  but  too  just,  and  do's  not  ask  explaining. 

Amal.  Oh !  now  Clarinihus  in  your  Voice  I  read 
The  cruel  Sentence  of  an  angry  Father.  80 

Turn  not  away  that  Face,  but  hear  your  Princess ; 
I  can't  resist,  no  Force,  no  Help  is  near  me: 
Therefore  command,  that  but  my  Arms  be  freed. 
And  let  me  not  be  dragg'd,  where  I  must  follow. 

Clar.  Will  you,  relying  then  on  me  for  Safety, 
Forbear  to  cry  for  Help,  as  we  conduct  you? 

Amal.  By  Castor'* s  Soul  I  swear  it. 

Clar.  Then  taking  first  her  Dagger,  free  her  Arms. 
Give  me  your  Hand,  and  now  perform  your  Promise, 
To  follow  where  I'll  lead  you —  90 

[Just  as  Clarinthus  is  offering  to  take  her  Hand,  she  snatches 
Phila's  Dagger,  and  then  answers  Clarinthus. 

Amal.  No,  stay  Clarinthus;  that  I  did  not  Promise. 
My  Voice,  and  not  my  Feet,  my  Word  engag'd ; 
And  whilst  my  Hand  holds  this,  I  will  not  follow. 

Clar.  So  swift  and  subtle  ?  yet  disarm  and  take  her. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  399 

Amal.  Hear  me  but  speak,  Clarinthus: 
My  Father's  Life  already  Tve  secured; 
And  if  you  yet  vdll  quit  this  dangerous  Purpose, 
Yours  with  Rewards,  as  great  as  your  Desires, 
Shall  too  be  given  you,  and  all  Wrongs  lie  bury'd. 

Clar.  More  than  I  love  Rewards,  I  hate  Messenia;     100 
Therefore  alive  or  dead  will  bear  you  from  'em. 

[He  offers  to  sieze  her^  she  keeping  him  off  with  her  Dagger 
kneels. 

Amal.  Oh!  Pity  yet  my  Youth,  and  wretched  Fortunes: 
A  Princess  at  your  Feet  behold  in  Tears, 
And  Spare  the  Blood,  the  Royal  Blood  of  Sparta. 

Clar.  Yes,  and  be  lost  our  selves  to  save  a  Trayt'ress? 
For,  such  you've  been  to  that  high  Blood  youVe  boasted. 
I  vdll  not  spare  nor  pity,  but  thus  seize  you. 

[He  wrests  the  Dagger  from  her,  she  rises  hastily  and  folloti/d  by 
Phila  escapes  into  the  Tent,  Clarinthus  pursues  her,  and 
immediately  the  Cries  of  Women  are  heard. 

Enter  at  the  other  Door  Aristor  and  Soldiers. 

Aristor.  Oh  I  we  are  come  in  time.     Detested  Villains, 
Your  Deaths  are  all  that  you  shall  meet  with  here. 

[They  fight. 
Re-enter  Clarinthus. 

Clar.  The  Victim's  struck  which  could  not  be  borne  oflf. 
Now  my  next  Task  111 

Must  be  to  rescue  those,  who  shar'd  the  Danger. 

[He  runs  at  Aristor,  who  kills  him,  he  speaks  falling. 
Thou'st  kill'd  Clarinthus;  And 
The  Fiends  reward  thee. 

Aristor.  Dye;  and  those  Fiends  thou  call'st  on  meet  thy 
Spirit. 
I  askt  but  that,  to  crown  the  War  we've  ended. 

[He  and  his  Men  fall  on  the  rest,  fighting  off  the  Stage. 


400  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Enter  Amaliniha  uxmnded  and  supported  by  Phila. 

Amal.  Phila  thy  Hand;  help  me  to  reach  that  CJouch, 
The  dying  Bed  of  wretched  Amaliniha! 
Nay  do  not  weep,  since  His  the  Pate's  Decree, 
Who  let  one  luckless  Moment  interpose  120 

Betwixt  Ari8ior*8  coming,  and  my  Rnin. 
Here,  set  me  down ;  and  let  this  last  Embrace       [Sits  dawn. 
Reward  the  Cares  and  Pecurs,  my  Life  has  cost  thee. 
Now  leave  me,  Phila,  to  perform  a  Part 
Which  must  not  be  prevented  by  thy  Tears. 

Phila.  Thus  pale,  thus  faint,  thus  dying  must  I  leave  you ! 

Amal.  Yes;  if  thou  wilt  obey,  thou  must  retire. 
But  be  not  far,  and  when  thou  seest  me  fall'n 
Dead  in  Aristor's  Arms,  who'll  soon  return. 
Come  forth,  and  tell  him  'twas  my  last  Request  130 

(By  all  our  Love,  by  all  our  Sighs  and  Sorrows, 
By  our  new  Vows,  and  swiftly  faded  Joys) 
That  He  wou'd  yet  survive  his  Amaliniha; 
Nor  let  my  fatal  Vision  prove  a  Truth, 
That  'twas  my  Fate,  my  hasty  Fate  that  kill'd  him. 

Phila,  Let  me  but  stay,  at  least  'till  he's  arriv'd. 

Amal,   'Twou'd   cross   my  Purpose,  hark!    I   hear   him 
coming. 
Quickly  retire  and  let  me  hide  this  Stream, 
Lest  he  shou'd  swell  it  with  a  Flood  of  Tears, 
And  waste  in  Grief  my  small  remaining  Life,  140 

Which  I  design  to  lavish  out  in  Love. 

[Phila  goes  off,    Amalintha  pulls  her  Oarment  over  her  Wound, 
About  him  let  my  dying  Arms  be  thrown. 
Whilst  I  deny  my  parting  Life  one  Groan. 
My  failing  Breath  shall  in  soft  Sighs  expire, 
And  tender  Words  spend  my  last  vital  Fire ; 
That  of  my  Death  Men  this  Account  may  give, 
She  ceas'd  to  Love,  as  others  cease  to  Live. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  401 

Enter  Aristor  hastily,  and  aits  down  by  her. 

Aristor.  How  fares  my  Love  ?  sink  not  beneath  your  Pears, 
When  this  most  Incky  Hand  has  made  them  groundless, 
Securing  to  my  Life  its  greatest  Blessing,  150 

Your  matchless  Love  and  all  its  dying  Transports. 

Amal.  Its  dying  Transports,  did  you  say  Aristort 
I  would  be  glad  to  know,  that  Death  has  Transports. 
But  are  there  none,  none  that  do  live  and  Love? 
That  early  meet,  and  in  the  Spring  of  Youth, 
Uncrossed,  nor  troubl'd  in  the  soft  Design, 
Set  sweetly  out,  and  travel  on  to  Age 
In  mutual  Joys,  that  with  themselves  expire? 

Aristor.  Indeed,  there  are  but  few,  that  are  thus  Happy. 
But  since  our  Lot  it  is,  f  encrease  the  number;  160 

Let  us  not  lose  a  Thought  on  other's  Fortunes, 
But  keep  them  still  employ'd  upon  our  own; 
For  in  no  Hearts,  sure,  Love  e'er  wrought  more  Wonders. 

Amal.  Oh  I  no,  to  mine  I  gladly  did  admit  it 
Thro'  the  stem  hazards  of  a  Father's  Wrath, 
And  all  the  Hate  of  Sparta  and  Messenia^ 
If  e'er  I  wept,  'twas  Love  that  forc'd  the  Dew, 
Ajid  not  my  Country,  or  my  colder  Friendships; 
And  on  my  Face  (when  Lacedemon  moum'd) 
Suspected  Smiles  were  seen  to  mock  her  Losses;  170 

Because  that  Love  was  on  the  adverse  Party. 
Thus  fond,  thus  doating  have  I  pass'd  my  Hours, 
And  with  their  dear  remembrance  will  I  close 
My  Life's  last  Scene,  and  grasp  you  thus  in  Dying. 

[She  embraces  him, 

Aristor.  Far  be  that  Hour;  but  Oh!  my  Amalintha^ 
Proceed  thus  to  describe  thy  tender  Soul, 
And  charm  me  with  thy  mighty  Sense  of  Passion; 
For  know,  'twas  that  which  fix'd  me  ever  thine. 
When  with  a  Pleasure,  not  to  be  express'd, 


402  The  Poems  of  Anne 

I  fonnd  no  Langaage  of  my  Love  escaped  thee,  180 

Tho'  wrapped  in  Myst'ry  to  delade  the  Croud; 
When  ev'ry  longing  Look  cou'd  raise  a  Blush, 
And  every  Sigh  I  breath'd  heave  this  lov'd  Bosom, 
Which  held  such  soft  Intelligence  with  mine. 
And  now  overflows  with  a  like  Tide  of  Pleasure. 

Amal.  Oh!  yes,  it  do's;  it  meets  the  vast  Delight, 
And  takes  the  Thought  ev'n  of  Elysium  from  me. 
Nor  will  I,  as  some  peevish  Beauty  might. 
Take  light  offence,  that  mine  you  did  not  mention; 
Since  His  my  equalling  Aristor's  Love  190 

Is  all  the  Charm,  I  wou'd  be  proud  to  boast  of. 

Aristor.  Believe  not,  that  I  slighted  such  Perfections. 
I  saw  you  Fair,  beyond  the  Fame  of  Helen; 
But  Beauty's  vain,  and  fond  of  new  Applause, 
Leaving  the  last  Adorer  in  Despair 
At  his  approach,  who  can  but  praise  it  better: 
Whilst  Love,  -^amssus-like,  courts  his  Reflection, 
And  seeks  itself,  gazing  on  other's  Eyes. 
When  this  I  found  in  yours,  it  bred  that  Passion, 
Which  Time,  nor  Age,  nor  Death,  shall  e'er  diminish.     200 

Amal.  For  Time,  or  Age,  I  think  not  of  their  Power. 
But,  after  Death,  Aristor,  cou'd  you  love  me, 
Still  call  to  me  your  Thoughts,  when  so  far  absent, 
And  mourn  me  sleeping  in  that  Rival's  Arms? 

Aristor.  Yes;  if  I  cou'd  outlive  my  Amalintha, 
Still  shou'd  I  turn  my  Eyes  to  that  cold  Grave, 
Still  love  thee  there,  and  wish  to  lie  as  low. 
But  why  do's  ev'ry  Period  of  thy  Speech 
Thus  sadly  close  with  that  too  mournful  Subject? 
Why,  now  I  press  this  Question,  dost  thou  weep,  210 

Yet  in  my  Bosom  strive  to  hide  thy  Tears? 
Paleness  is  on  thy  Cheek,  and  thy  damp  Brow 
Strikes  to  my  Heart  such  sympathizing  Cold, 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  403 

As  quenches  all  its  Fire,  bnt  that  of  Love. 
Oh  1  speak  my  Life,  my  Soul,  my  Amalintha; 
Speak,  and  prevent  the  boding  Fears  that  tell  me 
Eternal  Separation  is  at  hand, 
And  after  this,  I  ne^er  shall  clasp  thee  more. 

[Embraces  her^  and  she  starts  and  groans. 

Amal  Oh!0',  O',  O'. 

Aristor.  Nay,  if  the  gentle  foldings  of  my  Love,  220 

The  tender  circling  of  these  Arms  can  wound, 
^Tis  sure  some  inward  Anguish  do^s  oppress  thee, 
Which  too  unkindly  thou  wilt  still  keep  secret 

Amal.  Secret  it  should  have  been,  Hill  Death  had  seal'd  it ; 
Had  not  that  Groan,  and  my  weak  Tears  betrayed  me: 

[Speaks  faintly. 
For  Death,  which  from  Clarinihus  I  receiv'd. 
Is  come  to  snatch  my  Soul  from  these  Embraces. 

Aristor.  Oh  fatal  sound!  but  let  me  not  suppose  it, 
Till  Art  is  weary'd  for  thy  Preservation. 
Haste  to  procure  it  Phila:  all  that  hear  me  230 

Fly  to  her  Aid ;  or  you  more  speedy  Gods 
The  Cure  be  yours,  and  Hecatombs  attend  you. 
But  none  approach ;  then  let  me  haste  to  bring  it, 
Tho'  thus  to  leave  her  is  an  equal  Danger. 

[Endeavours  to  go. 

Amal.  Aristor  stay;  nor  let  my  closing  Eyes 
One  Moment  lose  the  Sight  that  ever  charm'd  them. 
No  Art  can  bring  relief;  and  melting  Life 
But  lingers  till  my  Soul  receives  th'  Impression 
Of  that  lov'd  Form,  which  ever  shall  be  lasting, 
Tho'  in  new  Worlds,  new  Objects  wou'd  efface  it.  240 

Aristor.  No,  Amalintha;  if  it  must  be  so. 
Together  we'll  expire,  and  trace  those  Worlds, 
As  fond,  and  as  united  as  before: 
For  know,  my  Love  the  Sword  of  War  has  reach'd  me ; 


404  Thb  Pobms  of  Avvb 

And  none  won'd  I  permit  to  bind  the  Wound, 
Till  to  thy  gentle  Hand  I  oon'd  reveal  it 
The  Blood  unchecked  shall  now  profusely  flow. 
And  Art  be  scom'd,  that  oon^d  bat  haU  restore  me. 

Afnal.  Oh!  let  me  plead  in  Death  against  that  PnrpoBe, 
Employ  my  Hand,  yet  warm,  to  dose  the  Wound,  250 

And  with  my  suppling  Tears  disperse  the  Anguish. 
Your  Ciountry  asks  your  stay,  and  more  your  Father: 
This  Blood  is  his,  ally'd  to  all  his  Virtues, 
By  him  more  prized,  than  what  supports  his  Frame, 
Nor  should  be  lavished  thus  without  his  Licence. 
Oh!  Arisiomenea  haste  to  preserve  it. 
Since  Life  from  me  departs,  and  Love  is  useless 
Aristor—  iSheDieB. 

Aristor.   Her  fleeting  Breath  has  borne  far  hence  my 
Name: 
But  soon  my  following  Spirit  lAall  overtake  her.  260 

My  Ghxilike  Father  gave  her  to  my  Arms, 
And  then  resigned  to  her  more  powerful.  Claim 
This  purple  Stream,  which  wafts  me  to  possess  her. 
May  every  Power,  that  shields  paternal  Goodness, 
Enfold  his  Person,  and  support  his  Sway: 
His  dear  remembrance  take  these  parting  drops,    [He  loeeps. 
And  then  be  free,  my  Soul,  for  ties  more  lasting, 
Eternal  Love,  the  faithful  Lovers  due. 
In  those  blest  Fields,  which  stand  displayed  before  me. 
My  Amalirdha —  [He  takes  her  in  his  Arms  and  dies.  270 

Enter  Phila. 

Phila.  I  shou'd  have  come,  and  urg'd  his  Preservation, 
K  when  I  saw  her  fall  my  Strength  had  served  me: 
But  all  my  Cares  departed  with  her  Life, 
And  mine  I  hope  is  now  for  ever  going. 

[Sfie  falls  in  a  swoon  at  Amalintha's  feet. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  405 

Shouts  of  Victory,    Enter  Demagetus,  Arcasius,  Alcander,  and 
several  officers^  their  Swords  dravm  as  coming  from  Battle. 

Demag.  A  glorious  Day,  and  warmly  was  it  fought: 
Nor  ever  did  a  Victory  more  complete 
Stoop  to  the  General's  Valour — 
Some  Troops  are  order'd  to  secure  Phasrea; 
And  with  to-morrow's  Sun  he  enters  there 
To  take  the  Homage  of  the  conquer'd  Spartans.  280 

Alcand.  They  say,  that  Anaxander  he  has  freed 
As  generously,  as  he'd  ne'er  known  the  Dungeon. 

Demag.  He  did,  at  Prince  Aristor^s  kind  Request; 
And  now,  with  the  high  Marks  of  Conquest  crown'd 
Is  coming  to  declare  to  Amalintha 
That  all  her  Wishes,  and  her  Fears  are  ended. 

[Turning  to  go  into  the  Tent^  he  sees  the  Bodies, 
They  are,  indeed;  for  ever,  ever  ended. 
Oh  I  turn  and  see  where  that  pale  Beauty  lies, 
And  faithful,  dead  Aristor^  bleeding  by  her! 

Alcand.  O  suddeii  Horror!  where's  our  Conquest  now. 
Our  lofty  Boasts,  and  brave  expected  Triumphs?  291 

Lie  there,  my  Sword,  beneath  my  Leader's  Feet; 

[Lays  his  Sword  at  Aristor's  Feet, 
For  under  him  I  fought,  and  now  weep  for  him. 

Dema.  We'll  all  join  to  encrease  the  mournful  Shower. 
A  Soldier  for  a  Soldier's  Fall  may  weep. 
And  shed  these  Drops  without  unmanly  Weakness. 

[A  Sound  of  Trumpets, 
But  hark!  the  Gen'ral,  how  shall  we  receive  him? 
Awhile  we'll  with  our  Bodies  shade  this  Prospect, 
And  tell  him  by  our  Looks,  some  Grief  attends  him ; 
Lest  all  his  Fortitude  shou'd  not  support  300 

A  Change  so  sudden  in  his  wretched  Fortune. 
Nor  can  we  learn  from  whence  this  Loss  proceeds. 


406  The  Poems  op  Anne 

Phiku  Yes,  that  you  may  from  me:  Life  yet  remains. 
And  will  admit  of  the  too  dire  Relation. 

Demag.  Then  gently  bear  her  hence,  and  hear  it  from  her; 

[They  lead  off  Phila. 
That  when  the  Sorrow,  which  at  first  must  bar 
All  cold  Enquiries,  shall  awhile  be  past. 
The  General  may  be  told  to  what  he  owes  it. 
But  see!  he  enters;  be  we  Sad  and  Silent: 
For  Oh !  too  soon  this  fading  Joy  must  vanish.  310 

[They  stand  all  together  before  the  Bodies. 

A  Floubish  of  Drums  and  Trumpets,  with  Shouts  of  Joy. 

Enter  several  Officers  and  Soldiers,  the  Shepherds  and  Shepherd- 
esses strewing  flowers,  followed  by  Aristomenes  his  Sword 
drawn  in  his  Hand,  and  a  Wreath  of  Victory  on  his  Head. 

Aristom.  Enough  my  Friends!  enough  my  Fellow-Soldiers! 
And  you  kind  Shepherds,  and  your  gentle  Nymphs, 
Receive  my  Thanks  for  the  Perfumes  you  scatter. 
Which  yet  shall  flourish  under  our  Protection. 

Shepherds,  &c.  Great  Aristomenes!  Live  long  and  happy! 

Others.  Live  long  and  happy,  Father  of  Messenia! 

Aristom.  Now  to  fair  Amalintha  won'd  I  speak 
The  joyful  Tydings  of  this  Day's  Atchievements: 
Therefore  let  her  be  told,  we  wish  her  Presence. 

[Seeing  none  move. 
Ha!  what  none  stir!  perhaps  Aristor^s  with  her:  320 

Why  let  him  tell  it;  from  a  Lover's  mouth, 
'Twill  bear  a  Sound  more  welcome  and  harmonious. 
And  sure  in  Love  and  Battle  none  exceeds  him, 
The  last  you  all  can  witness ;  you  saw  him  Fight, 
Saw  the  young  Warrior  with  his  Beaver  up 
Dart  like  the  Bolt  of  Jove  amongst  their  Ranks, 
And  scatter  'em  like  an  Oak's  far-shooting  Splinters. 
Will  none  confirm  it  ?  this  is  envious  Silence. 

[WaZ/»  up  and  down. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  407 

Thon  Demagetus^  ha!  thon^rt  all  in  Tears, 

And  so  are  these  that  make  a  Wall  abont  th^:  830 

The  Cause  deliver,  Oh !  declare  it  quickly. 

Demag.  Enquire  it  not,  my  Lord ;  too  soon  'twill  find  you. 

Aristom.  I  must  prevent  it  by  my  hasty  Search. 
Reveal  it  you,  or  you,  since  all  partake  it: 

[To  Alcander,  dc. 
What  silent  still!— 

If  yet  ye  do  not  speak,  ye  do  not  love  me; 
I  find  you  do  not,  since  ye  all  are  Speechless. 
Aristor  would  have  spoke,  had  he  been  here. 

Demag.  Aristor* s  here,  but  Oh!  he  cannot  speak. 
You  have  it  now,  my  Lord,  and  must  weep  with  us.         340 

Aristom.  Thy  Tongue  has  wam'd  my  Eyes  to  seek  the 
Centre :  [Looks  doum. 

For  round  this  Place  I  dare  not  let  them  stray, 
Lest  they  explain  too  soon,  thy  fatal  meaning. 
Oh !  Anaxander,  had  such  Trembling  seized  me. 
When  at  the  Army's  Head  I  met  thy  Fury ; 
The  poorest  of  thy  Troops  had  cry'd  me  Coward. 
Why  so  we're  all,  there's  not  a  Man  that  is  not; 
We  all  dread  something,  and  can  shrink  with  Terror: 
Yet  he  that  comes  a  Conqu'ror  from  the  Field, 
Shall  find  a  vain  Applause  to  crown  his  Valour,  350 

Tho'  fainting  thus,  and  sweating  cold  with  Fear. 

[Pauses  and  leans  on  an  Officer, 
But  didst  thou  say,  Aristor  cou'd  not  speak? 
Oh!  that  I  live  to  ask  it!  not  answer  to  his  Father! 

Demag.  Oh!  never  more! 

Aristom.  The  Sun  will  keep  his  Pace,  and  Time  revolve, 
Rough  Winters  pass,  and  Springs  come  smiling  on; 
But  Thou  dost  talk  of  Never,  Demagetus: 
Yet  ere  Despair  prevails,  retract  that  Word 
Whose  cloudy  distance  bars  the  reach  of  Thought, 


408  The  Poems  of  Anne 

Nor  let  one  Ray  of  Hope  e'er  dawn  beyond  it  360 

Never,  Oh  never! 

Demag,  This  Passion  must  rise  higher,  ere  it  falls. 
Divide  and  let  him  know  the  worst  [To  the  Officers. 

Aristom.  Where  is  my  Son?  my  Grief  has  passed  all 
Bounds, 
All  dallying  Circumstance,  and  vain  Delusion, 
And  will  be  told  directly  where  to  find  him. 

Demag.  Oh!  then  behold  him  there! 

[They  divide.    He  seeing  the  Bodies  stands  awhile  amas^d  and 
speechless,  drops  his  Sux)rdy  then  speaks. 

Aristom.  So  look'd  the  World  to  PyrrhcL,  and  her  Mate; 

So  gloomy,  waste,  so  destitute  of  Ciomfort, 

When  all  Mankind  besides  lay  drowned  in  Ruin.  370 

Oh!  thou  wert  well  informed,  my  evil  Gtenius; 

And  the  complaining  Rocks  mourned  not  in  vain: 

For  here  my  Blood,  my  dearest  Blood  I  pay 

For  this  poor  Wreath,  and  Fame  that  withers  like  it; 

[Tears  the  Wreath,  and  throws  himself  upon  his  Son. 
The  Ground,  that  bore  it,  take  the  slighted  Toy, 
Whilst  thus  I  throw  me  on  his  breathless  Body, 
And  groan  away  my  Life  on  these  pale  Lips. 
Oh!0',  0',0',— 

Thus  did  I  clasp  him,  ere  the  Battle  join'd. 
When  Fate,  which  then  had  Doom'd  him,  mock'd  my  Arms, 
Nor  in  their  folds  wou'd  let  me  feel  my  Son.  381 

Oh !  that  his  Voice  (tho'  low  as  then  it  seem'd) 
Cou'd  reach  me  now! — But  the  fond  Wish  is  vain. 
And  all  but  this  too  weak  to  ease  my  Pain. 

[He  takes  the  Sword  that  lay  at  Aristor's  Feet,  and  goes  to 
fall  upon  it,  Demagetus  takes  hold  of  it. 

Demag.    Oh!    hold,    my    Lord;    nor   stab   at   once   your 
Army. 

[All  the  Officers  and  Soldiers  kneel,  Alcander  speaks. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  409 

Alcand,  We're  all  your  Sons;  and  if  you  strike,  my  Lord, 
The  Spartans  may  come  back,  and  take  our  Bodies; 
For  when  yours  goes,  our  Spirits  shall  attend  it. 

[They  all  prepare  to  fall  on  their  Swords. 

Aristom.  Wou'd  you  then  have  me  live,  when  thus  unbow- 
ell'd, 
Without  the  Charms  of  my  Aristor^s  presence,  390 

Without  his  Arm  to  second  me  in  Fight, 
And  in  still  Peace  his  Voice  to  make  it  perfect? 

[He  rises  in  a  Passion  and  comes  forward  on  the  Stage. 
Yes  I  will  live,  ye  Sov'reign  Pow'rs,  I  vrill: 
You've  put  my  Virtue  to  its  utmost  Proof; 
Yet  thus  chastis'd,  I  own  superior  Natures, 
And  all  your  fixt  Decrees  this  Sword  shall  further, 
'Till  Rhodes  is  rescu'd,  and  my  Task  completed. 
Who  knows,  but  that  the  Way  to  your  Elysium 
Is  Fortitude  in  Ills,  and  brave  Submission; 
Since  Heroes  whom  your  Oracles  distinguish,  400 

Are  often  here  amidst  their  Greatness  wretched? 
But  yet  my  Heart!  my  lov'd,  my  lost  Aristor! 

Demag.  Let  me  succeed  him  in  his  active  Duty, 
And  join  with  all  the  Earth  to  bring  you  Comfort 

Aristom.  Comfort  on  Earth!  Oh!  'tis  not  to  be  found. 
My  DemagettbSy  thou  hast  far  to  travel; 
The  Bloom  of  Youth  sits  graceful  on  thy  Brow, 
And  bids  thee  look  for  Days  of  mighty  Pleasures, 
For  prosp'rous  Wars,  and  the  soft  Smiles  of  Beauty, 
For  generous  Sons,  that  may  reflect  thy  Form,  410 

And  give  thee  Hopes,  as  I  had,  of  their  succour. 

Demag.  With  these  indeed  my  Thoughts  have  still  been 
flatter'd. 

Aristom.  Then  let  me  draw  this  flatt'ring  Veil  aside, 
And  bid  thee  here,  here  in  this  Face  behold, 
How  biting  Cares  have  done  the  work  of  Age, 


410  Thb  Pobmb  ov  Avvb 

And  in  my  bert  of  StxengOi  marked  me  a  Dotard. 

Defeated  Annjea,  atsnghteE'd  Friends  aie  here; 

Dugracefol  Bonda^  and  Gities  laid  in  Aahea: 

And  if  them  findH  tibat  Life  wiU  yet  endme  it, 

Since  wbat  I  here  have  loat —  ^0 

So  bow'd,  8o  waining  ahalt  thoa^ee  this  CSaicaaa, 

That  acaice  then  wilt  recall  what  once  it  waa. 

Then  be  inatmcted  Thou,  and  All  that  hear  me, 

Not  to  expect  the  compaaa  of  soft  Wiahea, 

Or  constant  Joys,  which  fly  the  fond  Pooooooor. 

Since  Man^  by  8udft  rehims  qf  Oood  and  lU, 

In  aU  the  Coune  cfUf^t  wucertain  sUU; 

By  Forhmefawmred  now^  and  now  opprestf 

And  not,  'HU  DeaO^  Boonre  of  Fame,  or  Best 

A  SONG 

Designed  to  have  been  brcmght  into  the  paH  between 
and  Herminia. 

Wretched  Amintor  with  a  flame 

Too  strong  to  be  BnbdnM 
A  nymph  above  his  Rank  and  Name 

Still  eagerly  pursu'd. 

2 
To  gain  her  ev'ry  art  he  try'd, 

But  no  return  procured. 
Mistook  her  prudence  for  her  pride. 

Nor  guest  what  she  endur'd. 

3 

Till  prostrate  at  her  feet  one  day 

Urging  in  deep  dispair, 
Thus  softly  was  she  heard  to  say, 

Or  sight  itt  to  the  air. 


Countess  op  Winohilsea  411 

4 
Witnesse  ye  secret  cares  I  prove, 

Which  is  the  greater  tryal, 
To  sue  for  unrewarded  love, 

Or  dye  by  self  denyaL 


EPILOGUE  TO  ARISTOMENES 

An  Epilogue,  after  a  tedious  Play, 
Is  like  the  last  long  mile  in  dusty  way. 
That  trys  your  patience,  and  that  wearies  more, 
Then  all  the  irksome  road  you  passt  before. 
Or  like  the  Stirrup  cup,  a  Bumkin  forces. 
When  men  already  scarce  can  sitt  their  horses. 
Yett  for  one  here,  good  arguments  prevail ; 
And  since  the  Play  so  many  ways  does  fail. 
For  her  own  sake,  the  Author  thought  itt  fitt 
To  lett  the  Audience  know  when  this  was  writt, 
'Twas  not  for  praise,  or  vrith  pretense  to  witt: 
But  lonely  Godmersham  th'  attempt  excuses. 
Not  sure  to  be  endur'd,  without  the  Muses; 
Then  if  what  was  composed  vrithin  that  shade, 
(And  has  no  farther  from  itts  limmitts  strayde 
Then  Eastern  Beautys,  which  are  only  shown 
To  the  dear  spouse,  and  family  alone) 
Can  gain  your  Pardon — cancell  but  the  past, 
And  of  this  kind,  this  fault  shall  be  the  last 


NOTES 
[Notes  by  Lady  Winchilsea  are  inclosed  in  brackets] 

INTRODUCTION 

P.  xviii:  ''Sketch  of  Lady  WinchiUea's  l^fe."— The  chief 
authorities  quoted  in  this  sketch  are  Oenealogiaty  New  Series,  ed. 
Keith  Murray,  Vol.  XII,  ''The  Hoyal  Descent  of  Eingsmill; "  Oene- 
alogist,  ed.  Marshall,  Vol.  I ;  Burke,  Landed  Oentry;  Harl.  Soc, 
Pub,,  Vols.  XXrV,  XXVI;  Doyle,  Official  Barona^;  Collins,  Peer- 
age. 

P.  xxii,  1.28:''.  ...  the  list  of  ladies."— Tins  list  is  quoted  in 
Miss  Strickland's  Lives  of  the  Queens  of  England  from  the  origi- 
nal document.  The  maids  of  honor  were  Frances  Walsingham, 
Catharine  Fraser,  Anne  Killigrew,  Anne  Eingsmill,  Catharine 
Walters,  and  Catharine  Sedley.  In  other  references  to  Anne 
Kingsmill  Miss  Strickland  makes  curious  blunders.  On  p.  283  of 
the  Life  of  Mary  of  Modena  Anne  is  spoken  of  as  the  wife  of  the 
Heneage  Finch  who  stopped  the  flight  of  James  II.  at  Faversham, 
but  that  Heneage  Finch  was  Anne's  father-in-law.  On  p.  476, 
under  the  date  of  1712,  Miss  Strickland  calls  Anne  Finch 
''Queen  Anne's  learned  lady  of  the  Bed-chamber,"  apd  says : "  Her 
Jacobite  influence  with  Queen  Anne  is  never  calculated  in  general 
history,  but  those  versed  in  the  signs  of  the  times  know  that  it  was 
considerable.  The  dislike  that  her  royal  mistress  had  to  the  war 
is  alluded  to  in  some  lines  playfully  addressed  to  her  by  Pope. 
....  Lady  Winchilsea,  recently  left  a  widow  with  a  small  provi- 
sion, was  a  devoted  partisan  of  the  house  of  Stewart :  she  was 
always  near  the  royal  person.  This  lady  was  a  pleasant  rhymstress, 
and  possessedof  some  personal  influence,  but  was  without  territorial 
power."  In  Notes  and  Queries  (Eighth  Series),  Vol.  V,  p.  5,  is 
a  note  on  Lady  Winchilsea,  evidently  based  on  Miss  Strickland,  for 
it  repeats  all  her  errors.  In  point  of  fact,  the  Lady  Winchilsea 
"lately  left  a  widow"  in  1712  was  Sarah,  the  wife  of  Charles,  the 
third  Earl  of  Winchilsea,  and  the  nephew  of  Anne's  husband. 

P.xxv,l.  11:  "Heneage  Fiiich  ....  aged  ah.  27  years.*' — In 
Doyle's  Official  Baronage  the  date  of  Lord  Winchilsea's  birth  is 
given  as  1654,  which  would  make  him  thirty  at  the  time  of  his  mar- 

413 


414  NoTXS 

xiage;  but  his  Jowmal  has  the  entry,  ^  Jan.  8^  165f,  I  was  boni, 
nth  I  was  dujatened."  Add.  MBS.  6607,  Kit  Mns^  also  gms 
1666  as  the  date  of  his  birth. 

P.  zxni,  1.  27:  ^  .  .  ,  «^  foUowmg  stolemtful."— Quoted  in 
Nichols,  IMerary  AnecdOes  of  the  Eighiemih  Cewhtry,  Y6L  I, 
p.  629. 

P.xzix,L18:  **HeneaifeFineh  ....  cwaium^uror.''— ^Hene- 
age  [fourth  Earl  of  Winchilsea]  a  man  of  great  worth  and  honor; 
he  was  a  Non  juror.  His  ladj  was  Maid  of  Honoor  to  JSng  James 
^  Queen.  She  was  a  poetess;  publisht  a  book  of  poems."  Mem. 
an  the  Peerage^  by  Edward  Harley,  Eaii  of  Oxford.  See  Ndes 
and  QuerieSy  Second  Series,  Na  17,  p.  826. 

P.  zliT,  1.  8:  *^Lady  Marrow  to  her  Daughter  Lady  Ka/gr 
Letter  quoted  in  MSS.  of  Earl  of  Dartmoath,  8:147,  Brit.  Mns. 

P.xlTi,1.6:  ''T%6Paral2e2.''--The fan  title  is:  The  Ptodld; 
or,  A  Collection  of  Extraordinary  CSases  Belating  to  Ooocealed 
Births,  and  Disputed  Successions.  Containing,  I.  The  ffistory  of 
Richard  Flantagenet,  Son  to  Bichard  m.  n.  An  Account  of  Mrs. 
M.  Cognot,  etc.,  London^  1744 

P.  xlvii,  1.  4:  ^Lord  Winehilaea'e  anUquarkm  zeaV—Jn 
Nichols,  niugtrations  of  IMerary  History  of  18th  Cent^  a  note, 
Vol.  n,  p.  770,  says  that  ''Daniel,  the  fifth  Earl  of  Winchilsea" 
was  the  author  of  the  antiquarian  letters:  but  the  letters  date  Octo- 
ber 20,  1722— October  18, 1726;  and  Heneage  Finch,  the  fourth 
earl,  did  not  die  till  1726.  This  error  is  corrected  by  Nichols,  Vol. 
IV,  p.  496.  But  in  Oent  Mag,,  August  and  October,  1802,  certain 
inquiries  about  a  Commonplace  Book  ''kept  by  Lord  Winchilsea 
in  1721 "  are  answered  in  a  note  attributing  the  book  to  the  Lord 
Winchilsea  who  died  January  1, 1780.  But  this  again  was  Daniel 
Finch,  who  held  the  earldom  VI2&-dO.  The  book  was  by  Heneage 
Finch,  the  fourth  earl. 

P.  xlvii,  1.  6:  ^^Mr.  Creykr — See  ArchceologiayYol.  I,  p.  xxxvii, 
for  note  on  "  Mr.  Creyke."  Also  Clarke,  Life  of  James  II.,  Vol.  II, 
Appendix,  for  signed  statement  by  "  J.  Oeyk  "  January  10, 172f , 
concerning  the  disposition  made  by  him  of  important  historical 
docimients  formerly  in  the  possession  of  the  late  earl  of  Winchilsea. 
Also  letters  in  which  the  earl  of  Winchilsea  refers  to  Mr.  Creyk,  in 
Nichols,  Illustrations  of  the  Literary  Hist,  of  18th  Cent,,  Vol.  II, 
p.  769  ff.  The  letter  by  Mr.  Creyk  on  Lord  Winchilsea's  death 
(quoted  p.  Ixxxvi)  is  in  Vol.  II,  p.  783. 


Notes  415 

P.  zlviii,  1.  4:  "  Lord  Winchilsea  was  elected  President  of  the 
Society  of  Antiquaries,^^ — See  Granger,  Biog,  Did.  4  vols.  Con- 
tinuation by  Noble,  3  vols.  1806.  In  ''A  Catalogue  of  Engraved 
British  Heads  "  is  the  statement:  ''On  the  revival  of  the  Society 
of  Antiquaries  in  1717,  the  Earl  [of  Winchilsea]  was  chosen  presi- 
dent, when  he  procured  the  excellent  artist,  Vertue,  the  office  of 
engraver  to  that  respectable  body.  His  lordship  was  well  ac- 
quainted with  his  skill,  which  he  had  eminently  shown  in  engraving 
his  lordship's  portrait,  before  mentioned. 

P.  xlix,  1. 11 :  ^^ Books  which  I  have  subscribed  for," 

(a)  ^^Carm,  Quad,"  This  is  doubtless  the  Carmina  Quadragesi- 
malia  referred  to  by  Coleridge  in  a  note  on  his  poem  Kisses.  A 
copy  in  the  Bristol  Library  is  catalogued  as  in ''  2  vols.  Oxon,  1728- 
48, 4to." 

(6)  ^^Recuille  des  Piers"  etc.,  is  probably  the  book  by  Stosch, 
entitled,  Pierres  antiques  gravies  ....  DessirUes  et  gravies  .... 
par  B.  Picarty  Tire6s  des  principaux  cabinets  de  I  'Europe,  1724. 

{cy^  Monfaucons  Supplim." — Bernard  de  Monfaucon  published 
V  AntiquitS  eocpliqu^e  et  representee  en  figures  in  1719.  A  Sup- 
pliment  au  livre  de  V Antiquity,  etc.,  appeared  in  Paris,  1725,  5 
vols. 

(d)  ''Cardinal  Wolsey's  Lt/e."— Doubtless  the  Life  by  Fiddes, 
published  by  subscription  in  1724. 

(e)  "  Querels  Testament. "  —  Probably  QuesnePs  E^flexions 
morales sur  le  Nouveau  Testament"  published  1694;  condemned 
by  Pope  Clement  XI.,  1713. 

(f)  "iSr.  Ra,  Winnwood's  Letters."— In  1725  Edmund  Sawyer 
published  in  London  (3  vols.)  Memorials  of  Affairs  of  State  .... 
collected  chiefly  from  the  original  papers  of  the  Hon.  Sir  Ralph 
Winnux>od,  etc. 

(g)  "  Rev,  Lewis^  Isle  of  Thanet." — One  of  Lewis's  topograph- 
ical works,  published  1723. 

(h)  Mr,  BrevaVs  Book." — John  Durant  Breval  wrote  The  Con- 
federates,  and  so  would  doubtless  be  well  known  to  Lord  and  Lady 
Winchilsea.  The  book  mentioned  here  is  probably  Breval's 
Remarks  on  Several  Parts  of  Europe,  1723,  4  vols. 

(t)  ''Dr.  Bdnvick^s  Lt/e."— Probably  the  Vita  J.  Barwick 
written  by  Peter  Barwick  in  Latin,  and  published  1721 ;  or  per- 
haps the  translation  by  Hilkiah  Bedford,  published  1724. 

P.  lii,  1. 1 :  "An  Ode  on  Love."— In  Report  of  Hist.  MSS.  Com- 


416  Notes 

miaaum^  Vol.  Vlll,  is  a  notice  of  this  ode.  It  is  in  a  package 
containing  many  papers  relating  to  Steele  and  Addison,  among 
them  one  hmidied  letters  to  the  authors  of  the  TcUler  and  the 
Spectator. 

P.  \Yi,l.S: ''....  her  Spleen  had  attained  the  dignUy  of  a 
second  edition'* — See  The  Spleen :  A  Pindarique  Ode^  By  a  Lady. 
Together  with  a  Prospect  of  Death:  A  Pindarique  Esaayj  1709. 
The  Prospect  of  Death  was  by  John  Pomfret  who  had  died  in  1702. 

P.  Ivi,  1, 31:  ^Courthope  coT^ecturea,''  etc. — See  Pope,  Works 
(Elwin  and  CoiuihopeX  Vol.  I,  p.  20,  note;  Vol.  VI,  p.  198,  note. 

P.  Ixxvii,  1.  16 :  ''  The  note  runs  ^t»."— Thiooghoat  these 
letters  by  Wordsworth  the  page  references  were  to  the  edition  of 
1713.  They  have  been  changed  here  to  correspond  with  the  pages 
of  this  edition. 

P.  Ixxxix,  1. 3:  ^  Versification.'* — ^for  the  following  references  to 
Swift,  Pope,  and  Dryden  see  Pope,  Works  (Elwin  and  CSoiuihopeX 
Vol.  I,  p.  338.  In  Essays  of  John  Dryden  (ed.  W.  P.  Ker,  Oxford, 
1900)  see  "Dedication"  to  Aeneis,  IVoL  11,  pp.  216-30  (passim) 
and  "  Dedication  "  of  Examen  Poeticuniy  Vol.  11,  pp.  10-11. 

THE   PBEFAOB 

P.  8, 1.  24:  ^'From  their  new  Worlds,  I  know  not  where.''-' 
[Cowley.]    The  lines  occur  in  Cowley's  Complaint. 

P.  9, 1.  31 :  ".  .  .  .  correct  Essay 

Which  so  repairs  our  old  Horatian  way," 
[L**  Roscommon  on  L**  Mulgrave's  Essay  on  poetry.]    The  quota- 
tion is  from  Roscommon's  Essay  on   Translated  Verse  (1684). 
Mulgrave's  Essay  on  Poetry  appeared  in  1682. 

P.  10, 1.  26 :  "...  .  the  two  short  pieces  of  that  Pastoral"— 
[A  scene  or  two  more  have  been  translated  from  the  Italian  and 
since  added,  at  the  end  of  the  first  part  of  the  Book.]  The  two 
short  pieces  from  the  Aminta  are  Though  we  of  small  proportion 
see  and  Then  by  some  Fountain's  flov/ry  side.  They  number  5  and 
6  in  the  folio  MS.  The  other  three  pieces  from  the  Aminta  num- 
ber 60,  61,  62,  in  the  MS.,  and  just  precede  the  religious  poems. 

P.  10, 1.  27  :  ".  .  .  .  the  Songs  and  other  few  lighter  things,"— 
In  the  MS.  "  Fables  "  is  inserted  in  pencil  after  "  Songs,"  the  list 
of  "  lighter  things  "  having  apparently  been  made  before  the  writing 
of  the  Fables. 

P.  11, 1.  6 :  "  My  Lord  Roscommon  under  the  name  of  Piso.^' 


Notes  417 

"  A  noble  Piso  does  instruct  us  here,"  is  a  line  in  Waller's  Upon 
the  Earl  of  Eoacommon's  Translation  of  Horace  (1680). 

P  11, 1. 18 :  "...  .  the  Triumphs  of  Love  and  Innocence** — 
[Which  title  I  have  since  given  to  that  play  called  by  me  at  first 
the  "  Queen  of  Cyprus ;  or  love  above  ambition."]  This  note  is 
one  of  many  slight  indications  that  the  folio  MS.  was  revised  by 
Lady  Winchilsea  herself. 

FBAOMENT 

L.  17 :  After  1. 17  in  the  MS.  the  following  lines  have  been 
crossed  out: 

Nor  feeds  a  hope  that  boasts  but  mortal  birth. 

Or  springs  from  man  though  fram'd  of  Royal  earth. 

L.  23:  Abandoned  pleasures  in  Monastick  Walls" — [Wye 
College  in  Kent,  formerly  a  Priory.]  The  parish-church  of  Wye 
was,  in  1447,  endowed  by  Archbishop  Kempe  and  converted  into  a 
college  for  the  education  of  the  youth  of  that  district.  At  the  close 
of  the  sixteenth  century  the  site  and  buildings  of  the  college  were 
willed  to  the  master  of  the  grammar  school  and  the  master  and 
mistress  of  Lady  Joanna  Thomhill's  charity  school.  The  manor 
of  the  vicarage  of  Wye  had  long  been  in  the  possession  of  the 
Finches  of  Eastwell.  It  is  the  children  of  the  Free  School  of  Wye 
whom  Lady  Winchilsea  celebrates  in  Fansconib  Bam.  See  W.  H. 
Lreland,  History  of  the  County  of  Kent  ( London,  1829),  Vol.  II, 
p.  413. 

A   LETTEB   TO   DAFNIS 

The  title  in  the  octavo  MS.  is,  A  Letter  to  Dapnnis  from  West- 
minster,  Ap:  the  2d,  1685.  The  "Daphnis"  is  a  substitution  for 
**Mr.  Finch,"  partially  erased. 

TO   MB.    P.,    NOW   BABL   OP   W. 

L.  41 :  "  Jn  Haste  th*  affrighted  Sisters  fled.**— [The  Musea— 
Erato,  Melpomene,  Thalia,  Urania.] 

L.  73 :  " Urania  only  lik*d  the  choice.** — [Urania  is  the  Heav- 
enly Muse,  and  supposed  to  inspire  thoughts  of  Virtue.] 

UPON   ABDELIA^S   BETUBN   HOME 

L.  8:   "jHaw    threaten* d  Hanging,  Homy  or  Drowning.** — 

''To  put  to  the  horn"  is  to  proclaim  one  an  outlaw.    ''Makbeth 

.  .  .  syne  confiscat  Makduff's  guddis,  and  put  him  to  the  horn" 


418  NoTBS 

(JamieBon's  BtymoL  Did.  ofSeaL  Lanffuoffe).  The  phiaae  origi- 
nated bom  the  manner  in  whidi  a  pencm  was  prodaimed  an  oat- 
law.  The  King^B  MeBsengery  after  the  ionnalities,  most  give  tiuee 
blaata  on  a  horn,  hi  annoiinoement  of  the  decree  of  oatlawxy. 

L.  48:  ""But  he  replffd  Bhefd  break  ^e  Oloam/'— << Glaaa 
coaohe8,"a8  coadieB  with  glass  in  the  doors  and  in  the  bont  of  the 
ooach  were  called,  were  still  comparatively  rare  in  the  early  eight- 
eenth century.  Advertisements  speak  of  coaches  as  having  full 
sets  of  glasses,  or  having  the  glasses  entire.  In  ICrs.  Oentlivre's 
The  Baeeet  TVx&ls,  Act.  IH,  scene  1,  a  despairing  lover  throws 
himself  so  violently  into  his  coadi  as  to  ''break  all  the  glasses.'' 

AN  INVITATION  TO  DAFNI8 

L.  25:  ^  Come  and  let  Saneon^e  World  no  more  engager— 
An  edition  of  the  DeacripUon  de  tout  VUnwers^  etc,  by  Nicholas 
and  Onillamne  Sanson,  appeared  in  1700.  That  this  is  tiie  voltmie 
to  which  Lady  Winchilsea  refers  is  indicated  by  L  27.  This  refer- 
ence helps  to  date  the  poem  and  so  the  MS.  in  which  it  occurs. 

UPON  THB  DEATH  OF  VALLUM  LOBD  MAIDSTONE 

William.  Lord  Maidstone,  the  oldest  son  of  Heneage,  the 
second  Earl  of  Windiilsea,  was  kiUed  in  the  twenty-first  year  of  his 
age.  In  Add.  MSS.  30,999,  Brit.  Mus.,  is  a  curious  memorial  to  him. 
Its  heavy  black  borders  and  sketch  of  a  tomb  are  crudely  done  by 
hand.    The  proposed  epitaph  begins, 

Here  William  Lord  of  Maidstone  lies,  whose  end 
The  greatest  Navies  of  the  World  did  tend 
With  eight  hours  Prologue  to  his  Tragedy. 

The  closing  lines  are, 

Youth  =  Beauty  =  Honour  =  Courage  =  Wit  =  Good  Nature 
All  ly  enclos'd  together 
In  his  Tombe 
Who  for  his  King  and  Country  suffered  Martyrdome. 

The  English  Hiads,  a  poetical  tract  of  361  pages,  printed  in  1674^ 
also  commemorates  the  death  of  Lord  Maidstone.  {Kentish  Oar- 
land,  chap,  cxx.) 

FBOM  THE  MUSBS  AT  PABNASSUS 

The  Lord  Winchilsea  of  this  poem  is  Charles,  the  posthumous 
son  of  William,  Lord  Maidstone.  He  came  into  the  title  on  the 
death  of  his  grandfather  in  September,  1689,  when  but  seventeen 


Notes  419 

years  of  age.  This  poem  was  probably  in  honor  of  his  eighteenth 
birthday. 

L.  16:  *^And  trace  hia  blood,  until  itt  mix  with  Kings J^ — 
[A  Daughter  of  Henry  the  Sevenths,  when  Queen  Dowager  of 
France,  married  to  the  Earl  of  Suffolk,  by  whom  she  had  a 
Daughter  that  married  to  the  Earl  of  Hartford,  Great-grand-Father 
to  the  late  restor'd  Duke  of  Somersett,  from  a  Daughter  of  whom 
my  L*^  Winchilsea  is  descended.] 

UPON  MY  LORD  WINOHILSBA'S  OONVBBTINQ  THB  MOUNT,  ETC. 

The  Lord  Winchilsea  here  eulogized  is  the  Charles  of  the  pre- 
ceding poem.  The  improvements  made  by  him  at  Eastwell  may 
be  approximately  dated  by  the  following  letter  from  Edward 
Southwell,  who  wrote  from  Eastwell,  July  22,  17Q2,  ''  My  Lord 
Winchilsea  has  been  making  very  fine  gardens  which  added  to  the 
beauty  of  the  Park  makes  it  a  very  fine  seat." 

L.  26:  ''Where  late  it  stood  the  Olory  of  the  Seat.*"— In 
Murray's  Handbook  for  Kent  and  Sussex,  1868,  under ''  Eastwell " 
there  is  a  parenthetical  reference  to  "  an  edifying  story  of  the  mis- 
fortunes which  resulted  from  the  felling  of  a  most  curious  grove 
of  oaks  here  by  one  of  the  Earls  of  Winchilsea."  The  authority 
for  Murray's  ''  edifying  story  "  is  probably  the  following  passage  in 
John  Aubrey's  The  Natural  History  and  Antiquities  of  the 
County  of  Surrey  (London,  1718),  Vol.  II,  p.  37: 

I  cannot  omit  here  taking  notice  of  the  great  Misfortunes  in  the 
Family  of  the  Earl  of  Winchelsea,  who  at  Eastwell  in  Kent,  felled  down 
a  most  curious  grove  of  Oaks,  near  his  noble  seat,  and  gave  the  first 
blow  with  his  own  hands.  Shortly  after,  the  Countess  died  in  her  Bed 
suddenly,  and  his  eldest  son,  the  Lord  Maidstone,  was  killed  at  sea  by 
a  cannon-bullet. 

The  destruction  of  the  oak-grove  took  place,  then,  about  1669  or 
1670.  The  earl  referred  to  would  be  Heneage  Finch,  the  second 
Earl  of  Winchilsea.  In  the  MS.  after  1.  77  the  following  lines  have 
been  crossed  out: 

When  by  a  Consort's  too  prevailing  Art, 

The  Park  was  rifl'd  of  so  fair  a  part, 

Which  now  restor'd  like  itt's  new  Master's  Mind 

Is  with  the  whole,  but  in  just  bounds  confin'd. 

The ''  consort "  here  referred  to  would  be  the  second  of  the  Earl's 
four  wives,  Mary  Seymour,  daughter  of  William,  Duke  of  Somerset. 


420  Notes 

a  song  upon  a  punch  bowl 

Leslie,  or  Lashley,  Finch  was  bom  in  1669,  the  year  of  his 
father's  and  mother's  return  from  Turkey.  At  thirty  he  married 
Barbara  Scroop.  He  died  without  issue  at  Longleat.  This  poem 
was  first  published  in  Mr.  Gk)6se's  Ooasip  in  a  Library. 

THB  BABGAIN 

On  the  margin  of  the  manuscript  is  written  in  pencil, ''  Made  at 
my  request  by  Ardelia."  The  handwriting  is  the  same  as  that  of 
many  of  the  corrections  in  the  text. 

TO  IfY  SISTEB  OQLE 

"  From  Kyrby,  Dec.  31,  88  "  is  added  in  the  earlier  MS.  There 
is  also  a  note  in  pencil :  '^Also  found  on  p.  5  of  folio  MS.,"  showing 
that  the  two  manuscripts  have  been  at  some  time  in  the  same 
hands.  Christopher  Hatton,  the  owner  of  Eirby  Hall,  had,  in  1685, 
married  as  his  third  wife  Elizabeth  Haselwood,  Anne's  cousin. 

ABDELIA'8  AN8WEB  TO  EPHBLIA 

L.  75:  "And  some  few  Authors  old  and  dull  to  me."— The 
following  lines  were  added  here  in  the  margin  of  the  MS.: 
Ev'n  Wicherly  admires  whose  biting  pen 
Reveals  our  Frailty  to  insulting  men, 
And  speaks  of  Otaway  with  such  delight 
As  if  no  other  pen  could  move  or  write. 

L.  78:  ^^  Ere  twelve  was  struck  she  calls  me  from  my  hed,^^ — 
The  hours  observed  by  a  fashionable  lady  are  somewhat  variously 
indicated  in  the  satire  and  the  comedy  of  this  period.  Lodowick  in 
Sir  Patient  Fancy  (Mrs.  Behn,  1678)  in  describing  how  a  married 
woman  of  quality  ought  to  live,  says:  "From  eight  till  twelve  you 
ought  to  employ  in  dressing,  till  two  at  dinner,  till  five  in  visits,  till 
seven  at  the  play,  till  nine  in  the  Park,  at  ten  at  supper  with  your 
lover."  In  The  English  Lady*s  Catechism  (1703)  the  lady  says: 
"  I  lie  in  Bed  till  Noon,  dress  all  the  Afternoon,  dine  in  the  Even- 
ing, and  play  at  cards  till  Midnight "  (quoted  by  Ashton:  Reign  of 
Queen  Anne),  In  The  Basset  Table  (Mrs.  Centlivre,  1705)  Lady 
Reveller  says:  "Why  does  anybody  dine  before  Four  o'Clock  in 
London  f  For  my  Part,  I  think  it  an  ill-bred  Custom  to  make  my 
Appetite  Pendulum  to  the  Twelfth  Hour; "and  her  Maid  adds, 
"  Besides  'tis  out  of  fashion  to  dine  by  Daylight."    In  The  Rape  of 


Notes  421 

the  Lock  (ed.  of  1712)  Belinda  wakes  '^  when  striking  watches  the 
tenth  hour  resound,''  but  in  the  edition  of  1714  she  wakes  ^'just  at 
twelve."  Prior's  Hans  Carvel  (published  1709,  but  written  prob- 
ably several  years  earlier)  says  of  the  fashionable  lady, 

She  without  fail  was  wak*d  at  Ten, 

Drank  Chocolate,  then  slept  again. 

At  Twelve  she  rose,  with  much  ado 

Her  cloaths  were  huddled  on  by  Two. 

Then  she  dines,  makes  a  tour  of  interesting  places  in  the  city,  and 
closes  the  day  by  a  turn  in  Hyde  Park  much  after  the  fashion  of 
Almeria  in  the  poem  of  Liady  Winchilsea. 

L.  85:  "  Of  the  best  China  Equipage,  he  lost'* — Concerning  the 
rage  for  china  and  the  custom  of  boarding  the  India  ships  before 
the  cargo  was  unloaded  so  as  to  have  the  first  chance  to  pick  up 
novelties,  see  Sydney:  Social  Life  in  England,  1660-1669,  p.  270. 
Cf  description  of  Leonora's  library  (Spectator,  April  12, 1711)  and 
Gay's  Fan  (1714). 

L.  133:  '^But  Noble  Piso  passes  "—[Ifl Roscommon.] 

L.  161:  "  Whilst  all  he  sung  vxis  present  to  our  eyes** — [In  my 
lA  Roscommon's  Sylenus.] 

L.  203:  "  Which  through  all  ranks,  down  to  the  Carman, 
goes." — Carmen  have  traditional  notoriety  for  singing  and  whistling. ' 
For  an  assemblage  of  literary  references  similar  to  this  one  by 
Lady  Winchilsea,  see  Chappell:  Popular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time, 
Vol.  I,  p.  138. 

TO  THB  HONOBABLE  THE  LADT  WOBSLET 

The  Utresia  of  this  poem  is  Frances  Thynne,  only  daughter  of 
"^^scount  Thynne  of  Longleat  and  Frances,  his  wife,  the  daughter 
of  Heneage  Finch,  second  Earl  of  Winchilsea.  Frances  Thynne 
married  Sir  Robert  Worsley  in  1690.  This  poem  was  evidently 
written  very  soon  after  her  marriage.  The  tone  of  11.  1-16  would 
seem  to  date  the  poem  before  the  final  settlement  at  Eastwell. 

L.  72:  "His  genius  who  th*  original  improved," — Baron 
Thynne  of  Warminster,  made  Viscount  Weymouth  in  1682.  He 
came  into  possession  of  Longleat  in  1682  on  the  murder  of  his 
cousin  Thomas  Thynne.  Viscount  Weymouth  lived  much  at  Long- 
leat, where  he  laid  out  gardens  in  the  Dutch  style.  The  new 
English  larch,  introduced  into  England  in  1705,  was  named  after 
him  the  Weymouth  pine.  He  was  noted  as  a  peer  who  maintained 
"the  splendour  and  hospitality  of  the  ancient  peerage  of  England." 


422  NoTXS 

THB   MABBIAOB  OV  BDWABD  AHD  BXJZABBVH  HKBBXBT 

EUzabeOi  Heiberly  groat-gieat-giaiiddaiigliter  of  ibe  toarOi 
Earl  of  Pembiroke,  maiiied  Edwaid  l^irbert  of  Swanflea,  ooimty 
GhiiKKgan.  The^Won]07''of  thepoemis  flteFiaiioeB  Wonfej 
who  became  Ladj  Gariarel  in  1710.  Henoe  the  mamage  of 
Edwaid  and  Elizabeih  Herbert  must  have  oocimed  befoace  that 
date»  or  yAMBoi  Edwaid  was  nineteeen  and  Eliaabeth  aixteen. 

ON   THB  DBATH  OV  THB  HOMODBABIiB  KB.  JAMBS  THTHHB 

L.  28:  ^Aitd  his  remoumed  AneeatotB  repose/' 

(a)  <'Oot9enlfif.''~p[joid  Keeper  Oovenftr^.]  Locd  Keeper  Gdfven- 
trjr'B  aeoond  wile  had  four  daaghtera,  one  of  whom,  Mary,  maoied 
8br  Henry  Frederick  Thynno,  flie  grand&Qier  of  the  jotaqg  Jamae 
Thynne  of  the  poeoL 

(5)  *<.  .  .  .ftt9PatoniailVecieoeMor.''—ffir  John  Thynne^  who 
bought  Longkat  in  1641,  and  was  ooonpied  in  flie  yeaia  1687-79  in 
building  the  manrion,  said  to  ha^e  been  Hbe  first  weD-boilt  house 
in  the  kingdom.  Hie  whole  of  the  outside  and  the  interior  faxn 
the  hall  to  the  chapel  court  were  oon^leted  by  him. 

(c)  '^ISsssx."— Bobert  DeFarenx,  second  Earl  of  Bssei,  had  a 
dan^ter  Frances,  who  was  married  (April,  1818)  to  Sir  William 

'  Seymoor,  afterward  Marquis  of  Hertford  and  Doke  of  ScMnerset 
Thdr  daughter,  Mary  Seymour,  the  second  wife  of  Heneage  Pinch, 
the  second  Earl  of  Wind^ilaea,  was  the  mother  of  Frances  Unch, 
who  married  Viscount  Thynne. 

(d)  "Somerset."— The  Sir  William  Seynaour  of  the  preceding 
note.  He  was  one  of  the  three  lords  who  prayed  the  court  to  lay 
upon  them,  as  the  advisers  of  Charles  I.,  the  entire  responsibUity 
for  his  acts.  Upon  his  execution  they  gained  permission  to  bury 
his  body  at  Windsor.  At  the  Bestoration  the  dukedom  of  Somerset 
and  the  barony  of  Seymour  (declared  forfeit  in  1552)  were  reviyed 
and  conferred  upon  Sir  William  Seymour  by  act  of  Ftoliament 
September  IS,  1660.    He  died  October  24  of  the  same  year. 

(e)  "  .  .  .  .  that  matchless  Female*'— \The  Lady  Packington 
supposed  by  many  to  be  the  author  of  The  Whole  Duty  of  Man.] 
Dorothy  Coventry,  daughter  of  Lord  Keeper  Coventry  smd  wife  of 
Sir  John  Packington,  a  lady  of  great  learning  and  piety.  The  tra- 
dition connecting  her  name  with  The  Whole  Duty  of  Man  was 
persistent.  Her  grandson  caused  to  be  engraved  on  her  monument, 
"justly  reputed  the  author  of  The  Whole  Duty  of  Man,"^  but  the 


Notes  423 

proof  seems  strong  that  the  book  was  really  written  by  Sichard 
Allestree.    See  Journal  of  Sckcred  Literature^  July,  1864. 

GLEONE   ILL-PAINTED 

The  "Theanor"  of  this  poem,  Henry  Thynne  (c/.  A  Descrip- 
tion of  one  of  the  Pieces  of  Tapestry  at  Longleate\  son  of  Viscount 
Weymouth,  died,  vita  patriSy  1708.  "Cleone"  is  his  wife  Grace, 
the  daughter  of  Sir  Gborge  Stroud.  This  poem  was  apparently 
written  not  long  after  the  marriage  of  Henry  Thynne  and  Qraoe 
Stroud,  which  took  place  in  1696. 

TO  THE  BIGHT  HONORABLE  THE  COUNTESS  OF  HEBTFOBD 

Frances,  the  daughter  of  Henry  Thynne,  married  Algernon 
Seymour,  Earl  of  Hertford,  in  ''about  1713,"  according  to  Doyle's 
Official  BaronagCy  but  "in  1715,"  according  to  the  note  in  Lord 
Winchilsea's  private  journal.  Lady  Hertford  was  the  correspondent 
of  Henrietta  Louisa  Fermor,  countess  of  Pomfret,  and  of  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Bowe.  Dr.  Watts  published  four  of  her  pieces  under  the 
pen-name  "  Eusebia  "  in  his  Miscellanies.  Thomson  dedicated  his 
/gyring  to  her  in  1727.  In  1728  she  befriended  Savage.  It  is 
implied  in  the  poem  that  the  volume  sent  to  Lady  Hertford  was 
largely  made  up  of  poems  that  had  been  seen  by  her  father  Henry 
Thynne;  hence  it  would  seem  to  be  the  volume  of  1713.  But  manu- 
script poems  were  also  sent  to  Lady  Hertford. 

UPON  THE  DEATH   OB  SIB  WILLIAM   TWI8DEN 

Sir  William  Twisden  (or  Twysden),  the  third  baronet  of  Boydon 
Hall,  East  Peckham,  Kent,  died  November  27, 1697,  and  the  poem 
was  probably  written  soon  after.  Sir  William's  grand&ther  had 
married  Anne  Finch,  the  daughter  of  Sir  Moyle  Finch  and  Eliza- 
beth Heneage.  The  qualities  attributed  to  Sir  William  Twysden 
by  Lady  Winchilsea  are  the  qualities  for  which  his  father.  Sir 
Boger  Twysden,  was  especially  noted.  During  the  years  1650-60 
Sir  Boger  was  living  quietly  on  his  estate  and  occupying  himself 
chiefly  with  historical  and  antiquarian  researches.  During  these 
years  his  son  William  was  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  years  of  age, 
and  was  closely  associated  with  his  Mher's  interests.  In  1672  the 
baronetcy  devolved  upon  Sir  William,  and  he  evidently  kept  up  the 
jbmily  traditions  in  the  way  of  learning. 

L.  70:  "A  heavy er  Immage  of  our  Country  drew^ — [A  person 


424  NoTBS 

7^  has  been  chosen  Et.  of  the  Shire  to  flie  exclusion  of  Sir  W™ 
Twisdan.] 

L.  178:  ^^Beneaih  ihe  covert  of  a  moving  wood/* — (This  is 
a  poetical  allusion  to  the  common  Proverb  that  Kent  was  never 
oonquer'd.]  According  to  a  historic  legend,  the  Kentish  men 
assembled  with  boughs  in  their  hands  {eirea  1067)  and  demanded 
of  William  the  Conqueror  a  recognition  of  their  rights,  when  that 
monarch  was  on  his  way  bom  London  to  take  possession  of  CSan- 
terbury  and  Dover  Castle.  In  1795  was  circulated  a  Kentish  half- 
penny bearing  on  its  obverse  the  mounted  figure  of  the  Conqueror 
confronted  by  three  men  holding  boughs.  The  legend  on  the  coin 
was  ^Kentish  Liberty  preserved  by  Virtue  and  Courage."  Invieia 
is  the  motto  of  Kent.  Drayton,  in  his  Polyolbion  (song  xviii,  1. 
787),  says  of  Kent:  '^  Of  all  the  i^Iis^  shires  be  thou  sumamed 
the  Free."  See  Lambarde's  PeranOniMicm  of  Kent  (1576);  The 
KentiOi  Oarland,  Hertftxd  (1881). 

L.  191:  ^Ae  much  the  PoePB  Friend^  as  much  ihe  WorldPB 
DeUghJtr^\Ti^  line  is  an  immitation  of  Spenser's  thought  of  St. 
Phil:  Sid[n]ey  whom  he  calls  ^'Astrophel"  in  his  poem.]  The  line 
referred  to  is  probably  ''Sidney  is  deed,  dead  is  my  friend,  dead  is 
the  world's  delight,"  in  the  poem  (ascribed  by  Lamb  to  Lord  Brooke) 
entitled  Another  of  the  Same  in  the  Aetrophc^  volume  of  1695. 

AN    BNQUIBT  AFTER  PEAOB 

The  title  in  the  MS.  is:  Verses  incerted  in  a  Letter  to  my  Lady 
Thanet;  being  an  enquiry  after  Peace;  and  shewing  that  what 
the  World  generally  persues^  is  contrary  to  it. 

THE   PETITION   FOB   AN   ABSOLUTE   BETBEAT 

L.  59:  "  The  Luxurious  Monarch  wore.** — [Josephus  says  that 
every  Monday  Solomon  went  to  the  House  of  Lebanon  in  an  open 
Charioty  cloath'd  in  a  Bobe  most  dazling  White,  which  makes  that 
aUusion  not  improper,  and  may  give  us  Grounds  to  believe  that  the 
Lilly  mention'd  by  our  Saviour  (compared  to  Solomon  in  his  Qlory) 
might  really  be  the  common  white  Lilly y  altho'  the  Commentators 
seem  in  doubt  what  Flowers  are  truly  meant  by  the  Lillies,  as 
thinking  the  plain  Lilly  not  gay  enough  for  the  Comparison; 
whereas  this  Garment  is  noted  by  Josephus  to  be  wonderfully 
Beautiful  tho'  only  White;  nor  can  any  Flower,  I  believe,  have  a 
greater  Lustre  than  the  common  White  Lilly.] 


Notes  425 

L.  89:  ^^  A8  gathered  from  Fidentia^s  vales J^ — [These  dicum- 
stanoes  are  related  by  Plutarch  in  the  Life  of  Sylla.] 

L.  206:  "  Thus  had  Crassus  been  content."— [  The  Description 
of  this  Cave  is  exactly  taken  from  Plutarch  in  the  Life  of  Crassus.] 

L.238:  ^^ Nor  had  he  who  Crouds  could  blind" — [Sertorius.] 

L.  265:  ''Truly  Fortunate,  and  Blest.''— [The  Canary  Islands, 
called  by  the  Ancients  the  Fortunate  Islands,  and  taken  by  some 
of  the  Poets  for  Elysium,] 

TO  THE  B^  HON"^=  THE  LADY  0.  TUPTON 

In  this  and  the  next  poem  '' Serena"  is  Catharine  Tufton,  (bom 
April  24, 1692,  daughter  of ''  Arminda,"  the  Countess  of  Thanet). 

A  POEM  FOB  THE  BIBTHDAY  OP  THE  LADY  GATHEBINE  TUPTON 

L.  19:  ''How  Oreat  that  more  distinguished  Peer.''— The  sixth 
Earl  of  Thanet,  known  as  ^^the  good  Lord  Thomas."  '^  He  is  a 
good  country  gentleman,  a  great  assertor  of  the  prerogatives  of  the 
monarchy  and  the  church;  a  thin,  tall,  black,  red-faced  man,  turned 
of  60  years  old. —  Of  great  piety  and  charity."  Macky,  Charac- 
ters in  the  Court  of  Queen  Anne  ( Swift's  additional  comment  in 
italics). 

L.  33:  "Of  Her,  whose  Fav'rite  she  appears."— [The  Lady 
Coventry.]  Margaret  Tufton,  sister  of  the  second  Earl  of  Thanet, 
married  to  Lord  Coventry  in  1653. 

L.  63:  «  When  Hothfeild  shall  {as  heretofore)."— Roihl^el^,  the 
&mily  seat  of  the  Tuftons  in  Kent.  The  five  daughters  of  Thomas, 
the  sixth  Earl  of  Thanet,  married  early  and  into  noble  families, 
thus  maintaining  the  reputation  of  the  family  for  '^illustrious 
Hymens." 

UPON  THE  DEATH  OP  KINQ  JAMES  THE  SECOND 

L.  37:  " Earlier  than  Ccssarfar" — [The  king  was  bom  in  the 
year  1633,  and  in  1642  He  was  in  the  Battel  atEdge-hill.] 

L.  41:  "  Which  Ccesar  never  proved  nor  his  tenth  Legion 
knew." — [The  Tenth  was  the  most  vaillant  and  favoured  of  Julius 
Caesar's  Legions.] 

L.  45:  ''  WhiVst  the  best  General  which  the  World  cou'd 
boast." — [The  King  when  very  yong  was  in  the  French  service 
and  Lieutenant  General  under  Mareschall  Turenne  against  the 
Spaniards  where  he  behaved  himself  with  that  Valour  and  Conduct 
that  in  a  sicknesse  of  Turenne's  when  'twas  thought  he  could  not 


426  VoTBS 

live,  the  King  of  Franoe  wending  for  hie  advice  wlio  ahoiild  oom- 
mand  liie  Army,  if  lie  shoo'd  nol  xeoover,  He  answered  the  King 
that  if  he  woa'd  have  hia  affaires  piosper,  he  shoa'd  make  choioe  of 
a  noble,  valooioas  and  fortunate  GeneEal  and  oou'd  chnee  no  fitter 
Peraon  than  Hke  thiioe  Heioick  Duke  of  Tork.  In  that  fiunoua 
Action  when  Toienne  foio'd  the  Spanish  Tienches  (al&o  deCeoded 
by  the  Prince  of  Oond^)  and  xdiev'd  Anas,  the  D.  (rf  Tork  behaved 
himself  with  remarkable  bravery  and  was  wounded,  as  may  be 
seen  in  the  French  translation  of  CSsrd.  Maanrin^s  Life,  written  in 
Italian  by  Count  GnaUb.] 

L.B^:**Whieh  to  ^ke  skies  vxis  borne  in  Opdam'6  fiery  hla^^ 
[In  our  first  Dutch  war  after  the  Bestoratkni  the  D.  of  Yoadc  com- 
manded  our  Fleet,  beat  the  Dutch,  and  blew  up  Opdam  flielr 
Admiral,  for  which  service  the  Parliament  with  great  applause  of 
his  Vallour  and  Conduct  made  him  a  magnificent  Preeentas  apeais 
upon  their  Journals.] 

L.  102:  In  stanza  6,  heiote  L 102,  three  lines  have  been  croased 
out,  and  the  sense  of  those  that  follow  consequently  left  imperfect 
lliese  lines  seem  to  read: 

Weep  then  ye  Realms  who  once  his  sway  oontasti 
Who  had  he  been  of  your  Belief  possest 
Amongst  your  Kings  that  have  laid  down. 

L.  lOi:  "  Then  Alfred's  Piety  had  form'd  his  Praised— 
[Alfred  was  one  of  our  Saxon  Kings  famous  for  his  Piety  and 
application  day  and  night  to  the  publick  affaires.] 

L.  108:  ''Unto  our  frugal  Henry's  been  preferred."— ['SLea. 
the  Seventh.] 

L.  Ill:  ''  What  even  Eliza's  dayes  brought  tn."— [Cambden 
sais  that  the  custom  of  excessive  drinking  was  brought  amongst 
us  out  of  Holland  by  those  Troops  which  Queen  Elizabeth  lent  the 
States.] 

L.  112:  ''  The  wasting  foul  Eoccesse  MiscalVd  Oood-natured 
Sin." — [Drinking.]    After  1. 112,  twelve  lines  are  crossed  out  so 
effectuaUy  that  it  is  impossible  to  restore  them.    Decipherable 
words  and  phrases  indicate  that  these  lines  have  to  do  with  the 
private  life  of  James  II.    Lines  9-11  seem  to  read: 
In  his  own  Breast  a  rebell  world  to  find 
Where  such  embattled  troops  of  vices  grew 
As  the  Souldier  did  at  length  subdue. 

But  in  what  connection  they  were  used  is  not  apparent. 


Notes  427 

L.  139:  After  1. 139  are  these  two  lines  which  have  been  crossed 

out: 

Least  Ruin*d  by  their  complicated  charms 
Mankind  had  laid  on  Fate  their  unprevented  Harms. 

THE  CIBOUIT  OP  APPOLLO 

L.  11:  "fi6  lamented  for  Behn  o*re  that  place  of  her  birth?* — 
[M"  Behn  was  Daughter  to  a  Barber  who  liv'd  formerly  in  Wye,  a 
a  little  market  Town  (now  much  decay'd)  in  Kent:  though  the 
account  of  her  life  before  her  Works  pretends  otherwise;  some 
persons  now  alive  Do  testify  upon  their  knowledge  that  to  be  her 
Original.]  See  Mr.  Gosse  on  this  point  in  the  Athenceum,  Septem- 
ber 6,  1884.  He  finds  the  statement  verified  by  the  records  of 
the  parish  of  Wye. 

A  POEM  OCCASIONED   BY   THE   SIGHT   OP   THE  4™  EPISTLE   OP 

HOBACE 

The  Mr.  Richard  Thomhill  here  referred  to  is  the  one  who  after- 
wards killed  Sir  Cholmley  Deering,  his  intimate  friend,  in  a  duel, 
May  9, 1711,  and  was  himself,  in  consequence,  assassinated  August, 
1711.  See  Swift's  Journal  to  Stella  under  these  dates.  This 
famous  duel  is  fully  described  by  Ashton,  Reign  of  Queen  Anne^ 
pp.  392-4.  Mr.  ThomhiU's  remorse  is  described  under  the  char- 
acter of  '^Spinamont,''  Spectator^  84,  June  6,  1711.  See  also 
Wotton,  English  Baronetage^  2 :  21.  The  "  Orania  "  of  the  poem  is 
Frances  Coell,  daughter  of  Thomas  Coell,  Esq. 

LI.  5&-62:  "The  Vine"  was  a  tavern  in  Long- Acre.  The  two 
men  supposed  to  meet  Mr.  Thomhill  there  were  probably  Nicholas 
Bowe  and  Charles,  Earl  of  Winchilsea. 

TO   A   FELLOW   SCBIBBLEB 

L.  10:  "T/ie  night-shade  tvith  a  dismal  floufr" — ^This  is  proba- 
bly the  Solanum  Dulcamara,  the  woody  night-shade,  "  a  climbing 
plant  found  in  moist  hedges  and  thickets  with  purple  flowers  in 
drooping  clusters."    See  Catlow,  Field  Botany,  London,  1848. 

L.  12:  "  O  honesty  tvith  feather' d  doum" — A  local  name  for 
wild  clematis,  the  full  name  being  "  Maiden's  Honesty."  "About 
Michalmass  all  the  hedges  about  Thickwood  (in  the  parish  Goleme) 
[Wilts]  are  as  it  were  himg  with  maydens  honesty,  which  looks 
very  fine."  Aubrey's  Wilts,  Royal  Soc.  MS.,  p.  120.  Quoted  in 
English  Plant  Names,  English  Dialect  Society. 


• 

428  NoTBS 


L.  19:  ''WUh  beatOeaua  Eglantine  nn^rac'd.''— ''Eglantiiie'' 
and  ^haney-sackle"  (1-  21)  seem  to  be  used  as  synonymofcis.  The 
plant  probably  lefened  to  is  woodbine.  Prior  in  Popular  Names 
of  BrUiah  Plants  (1879)  says  thai  honeyHsackle  in  ^poetry  and 
p(^nlar  usage''  is  Lonicera  perielymenumj  but  that  the  name 
** honey •suekle''  seems  to  have  been  given  to  the  woodbine  '^be- 
canse  of  the  hcmey-dew  so  plentifully  deposited  on  its  kavea.'' 
^^l^lantine"  is  a  name  much  discussed  and  not  certain  of  ai^lica- 
tion.  Its  usual  signification  at  the  present  day  is  the  sweet-briar. 
But  Prior  says  that  the  ''twisted  ee^tine"  of  Hilton's  VAUegro 
was  probably  the  woodbine.  And  i^  English  Plant  Names  (Eng. 
Dialect  Soc.)  says  that  woodbine  is  still  called  eglantine  in  N.  E. 
Yorkshire.  Qf.  EUacombe,  Plant-Lore  and  Qarden-Craft  of 
Shakespeare^  188i,  pp.  88, 125. 

TO  DB.  WALDBON 
In  the  Oxford  and  Cambridge  MisoeUany  Poems  (Bemaxd 

Untot,  1709X  p.  11%  is  .An  Essay  an  Death  by  Dr.  W of  All 

Souls. 

TO  MB.  JBBVAS 

Ciharles  Jervas,  a  popular  portrait  painter,  was  on  intimate 
terms  with  Pope,  Swift,  Arbuthnot,  Addison.  He  painted  several 
portraits  of  Pope.  After  the  return  of  Jervas  from  Italy  in  1709 
his  house  in  Cleveland  Court  was  a  meeting-place  for  his  Uterary 
friends.  Lady  Winchilsea's  town-house  was  close  by  in  Cleveland 
Bow.  Of  Mrs.  Chetwynd  Swift,  in  a  letter  dated  London,  March 
22, 1708-9,  and  addressed  to  "A  Monsieur  Monsieur  Hunter,"  says: 
^'The  beauties  you  left  are  all  gone  off  this  frost,  and  we  have 
got  a  new  set  for  spring,  of  which  Mrs.  Chetwynd  and  Mrs.  Wors- 
ley  are  the  principal." 

A  SONG  OF  THB  GANIBALS,  OUT  OF  MOUNTAIN'S  B88AT8 
This  love  song  of  the  cannibal  chieftain  is  in  Les  Essais  de 
Montaigne,  Paris,  1886,  Vol.  II,  chap.  31,  p.  145. 

AN  EPISTLE  FBOM  A  GENTLEMAN  TO  MADAME  DESHOULIEB8 
Madame  Deshouli^res  (Antoinette  de  Ligier  de  la  Garde)  was 
one  of  the  chief  female  poets  of  France.  Her  works  were  published 
in  1687-88,  and  again  in  1695,  the  year  after  her  death,  by  her 
daughter.    The  letter  here  translated  is  included  in  her  works  and 


Notes  429 

is  there  entitled  Lettre  de  M,de  SenecSy  premier  valet-de-cfiainbre 
de  la  Reine,  d  M^  Dea  HouHerea^  en  lui  envoyant  de  Vargent 
qu'elle  lui  avoit  prtte  d  la  Baaaette. 

BALPH^S  BEFLBGTION8 

L.  19:  "Bu*  throw  our  stockina  at  our  heada" — For  the  cus- 
toms and  superstitions  connected  with ''  flinging  the  stocking"  and 
drinking  the ''  sack-posset "  see  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  Popular  Antiquitiea 
of  Oreat  Britain  (1870),  Vol.  H,  pp.  112, 114. 

THB   OWL   DESGBIBING   HER  YOUNG  ONES 

L.  50:  "A<  length  he  cry'd  with  VuUur^a  Becka:'-'ln  Tusser, 
Huabandry  (1573)  ^  bex  "  is  the  plural  form,  as  in  the  lines,  (chap. 
34,  St.  11): 

So  doing,  more  tender  and  greater  they  wez 
If  peacock  and  turkey  leave  jobbing  their  bex. 

Murray  {Diet)  gives  ^beck"  as  still  in  use  in  the  eighteenth 
century. 

LI.  52-4:  ''  Palatines  "  were  fur  tippets.  Cent.  Diet,  quotes  from 
Ladiea  Dictumaryy  1694:  ^* Palatine j  that  which  used  to  be  called 
a  sable  tippet,  but  that  name  is  changed."  Doily  was  a  woolen  stuff 
introduced  for  summer  wear  in  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth 
century.  Dryden  speaks  of  '^  Doily  petticoats  "  (Liniberhamy  Act 
IV,  Sc.  1, 1678).  Spectator y  283,  speaks  of  doily  as  a  stuff  at  once 
genteel  and  cheap.  Arbuthnot  {John  Bully  I,  vi)  says:  ''His  Chil- 
dren were  reduced  from  rich  silks  to  Doily  stuffs,"  and  Congreve 
speaks  of  "a  fool  and  a  doily  stuff"  {The  Way  of  the  Worldy  Act 
III,  Sc.  3X  but  Gay  makes  doily  synonymous  with  silken  drugget 
{Triviay  1 :43),  and  Lady  Winchils^  classes  her  "  Doily  stuffs"  with 
silks  as  opposed  to  calicoes.  Dr.  Johnson  {Diet)  defines  ''calico" 
as  "an  Indian  stuff  made  of  cotton;  sometimes  stained  with  gay 
and  beautiful  colors."  Murray  {Diet,)  quotes  from  J.  Roberts, 
Spinatevy  347  (1719):  "A  tawdry,  pie-spotted,  flabby,  ragged,  low- 
priced  thing,  called  Callicoe,  miade  by  a  parcel  of  Heathens  and 
Pagans  that  Worship  the  Devil,  and  work  for  half  a  penny  a  day." 

THE   EAGLE,   THE   SOW,   AND   THE   GAT 

LI.  27-9:  ^'Leat  Pettitoea  ahould  makey"  etc.— William  King  in 
Art  of  Cookery  y  chap.  9,  in  his  pretended  excerpts  from  a  great 
work  by  Caelius  Apicius,  puts  emphasis  on  the  simiptuous  dishes 
prepared   by  the  ancients  from  "hog-meat"  in  various  forms. 


480  NoTBS 

Aiddns  is  repieseiited  as  lauding  the  ^H^er,  lights,  borains  and 
pettitoes''  of  a  black  Qiina  pig,  and  as  speaking  of  a  dish  miioh  in 
favor  with  certain  Soman  emperarsy  one  of  the  rinmiBnlB  of  this 
dish  being  ^  a  wild  sow's  hock  and  udder." 

L  46:  ""A  Pesiilmtial  Saw,  a  meazUd  Porib."—*' Measles" 
was  a  name  for  several  diseases  of  swine  or  sheep.    Butler  {Hvdi- 
bras,  Fart  I,  Oanto  II,  1.688)  has:  "^As  e'^  in  measled  pock  was 
hatched."    Tusser  (Oood  Husbandry,  chap.  17)  has: 
Hog  measeled  kill 
For  Fleming  who  will, 

With  evident  derogatory  estimate  of  the  discriminatkm  of  the 
<<  Flemings." 

F^NSOOMB  BABN 

L. 7:  ^Through Ages paaifdoon»igfk€dfc^H€ubofU^ 
[Fanscomb-Bam,  near  Wje  in  Kent,  is  a  piivil^dBetreatfinr  Ed- 
gars.] 

L.97:  *^Wh&re  the  WhUe  Sparrow  never  eaUed  her  Plumes/*— 
[Fanscomb-Bam  is  famous  for  breeding  white  mice  and  white  flpar- 

lOWB.]  . 

L.  100:  ^  Thca  flowe  near  PMeersdane  renaumed  Stream.**— 
[PickerBdane,  is  a  pdnt  of  Wye-Downs,  where  there  is  an  excdlent 
spring,  much  frequented  by  the  scholars  of  the  Free-School  at 
Wye;  who  meet  there  to  drink  the  water  with  sugar;  which  has 
been  an  ancient  custom  and  a  great  diversion  to  them.] 

L.  111.  "  Nor  sfum'dy  quoth  he,  that  Well  o'er-hung  wUh  shade.*" 
— [A  very  deep  well,  within  a  little  wood  near  Fanscomb  Bam.] 

JEALOUSIB   IS  THB  BAGS  (fV  A   MAN 

L.  14:  ^^ Smooth,  e&ry  clinging  plume  imth  anger  lies." — [A 
dove  when  angry  or  going  to  fight  lays  her  feathers  dose.] 

THB   SPLEEN 

L.  41:  *^  We  faint  beneath  the  Aromatick  Pain.**— Mr.  Saints- 
bury  (Short  History  of  Eng.  Lit.,  p.  663)  suggests  that  Lady  Win- 
chilsea  borrowed  her  phrase  '* aromatic  pain"  from  Dryden.    The 
reference  is  probably  to  Dryden,  AnniiS  MirabiliSj  st.  29,  reads: 
Amidst  whole  heaps  of  spices  lights  a  ball, 

And  now  their  odours  armed  against  them  fly; 
Some  preciously  by  shattered  porcelain  fall 
And  some  by  aromatic  splinters  die. 


Notes  431 

Mr.  GkMse,  in  Ward's  English  PoetSj  called  attention  to  the  fact 
that  Pope  borrowed  from  Lady  Winchilsea  his  phrase '' aromatic 
pain."    The  line  in  Pope  is  (J^«8a2^  on  Af an,  1:200): 

Die  of  a  rose  in  aromatic  pain. 
Mr.  Oosse  now  further  calls  my  attention  to  the  following  lines  in 
Shelley's  Epipsychidion : 

And  from  the  mass  yiolets  and  jonquils  peep, 
And  dart  their  arrowy  odour  through  the  brain. 
Till  you  might  faint  with  that  delicious  pain. 

This  is  almost  certainly  a  conscious  recollection  of  Ardelia's 
lines. 

A   PINDABIOK   POEM   UPON   THE   HUBBIGANB 

L.  96:  "  O  Wells!  Thy  Bishop's  Mansion  We  lamenV— [The 
Bishop's  Palace  at  Wells  was  blown  down,  and  kill'd  Bishop  Kidder 
with  his  lady.] 

L.  233:  "Fe  Clouds!  that  pity'd  our  Distress:'— [We  had  a 
great  shower  of  rain  in  the  midd'st  of  the  storm.] 

L.  247:  "  Which  toforeshew  the  still  portentous  Sun  J'— {The 
ancients  look'd  upon  the  Sun  (or  Phoebus)  as  prophetick.] 

L.  248:  *^Beainless  and  pale  of  late  his  Race  begun.'' — [One 
day  of  the  summer  before  the  storm  we  had  an  unusual  appearance 
of  the  sun  (which  was  observ'd  by  many  people  in  several  parts  of 
Kent).  It  was  of  a  pale  dead  colour,  without  any  beams  or  bright- 
ness for  some  hours  in  the  morning,  altho'  obstructed  by  no  clouds; 
for  the  sky  was  clear.] 

PROLOGUE   TO   ABISTOBIENES 

This  Prologue  was  not  published  with  the  play  in  1713.  The 
Lord  Winchilsea  to  whom  it  was  addressed  was  doubtless  Charles, 
the  third  Earl  of  Winchilsea. 

L.  17:  "A  droll  wou'd  at  Newmarket  make  them  sport," — Cart- 
wright's  ed.  of  Sir  John  Reresby's  Diaryy  March  22,  1684,  de- 
scribes the  diversions  of  King  Charles  at  Newmarket  as  a  progress 
*from  the  cock-pit  to  the  horse-race,  back  to  the  cock-pit,  and 
then  to  the  play,  though  the  commedians  were  very  indifferent." 
Shadwell's  "Prig"  in  The  True  Widow  enumerates  among  the 
delights  at  Newmarket  the  "play  in  a  bam"  (Sidney,  England^ 
1660-1669),    Ashton  {Social  Life  in  Reign  of  Queen  Anne,  ch.  20) 


482  NoTBS 

describes  the  shows  at  the  various  faiis.    Among  them  was  what 
Waid  called  '^  a  dwarf  Comedy^  Sir-named  a  Droll!* 

L.  24:  *'Or  tedious  sheets  of  doubtful  news  from DtferJ'— In 
the  MS.  this  line  is  written  over  the  earlier  fiorm,  **fulsom  lyes 
from  Dyer!*  Dyer^s  News-LMer  was  disoontini]«l  September, 
171&.  For  references  to  this  News-Letter  see  Toiler  (18X  where 
Dyer's  skill  in  manufacturing  ezdting  news  is  commenled  on; 
Spectator^  Nos.  4B  and  127;  and  Ashton.  Eeign  of  Queen  Anne^ 
p.  800. 


INDEX 


Ab§ence^  On,  121. 

Adam  Pot'd,  cxTiii,  148. 

''  iEsop,"  VaDbrugh,  lis. 

Affliction^  On^  19, 

Alcidor,  151. 

Alexander  to  Hephcution,  199. 

All  is  Vanity,  Hi,  Ixzrii,  cWi,  2S8. 

Aminta  of  Tasto,  Some  Pieces  out  of  the^ 

xciv,  cxxx,  10, 112,  416. 
Amintor,  113. 

"Apollo  Outwitted,"  Swift,  liv. 
Appollo,  The  Circuit  of,  zciii,  92. 
Appology,  The,  13. 
Ardelia,  Hi,  Ixxxiv,   98,  192;   see  Win- 

chilsea.  Lady. 
Ardelia,  Dialogue  between  Teresa  and, 

xxi,223. 
Ardelia,   Friendship    between    Ephelia 

and,  xxxix.  46. 
Ardelia  to  Melancholy,  xlHi,  15. 
Ardelia  to  Mrs.  Randolph^  96. 
Ardelia*s  Answer  to   Ephelia,   zzxtUI, 

czzi,  U,  38. 

Ardelia's  Return  Home,  Upon,  cxH,  24. 
Aristomenes,  xxviii,  xxix,  Wi,    IxxtIU, 

ci-ciii,  czzz,  11,  337. 
Aristomenes,  A  Song  for,  410. 
Aristomenes,  Bipilogue  to,  411. 
Aristomenes,  Prologue  to,  xxxt,  337, 481. 
Armioda,  see  Thanet,  Countess  of. 
AsteU,  Mary,  Ixi,  Ixix,  cxr,  cxyH. 
Astrop,  xlH. 

Athaliah,  PaH  of  the  Second  Act  of,  128. 
Atheist  and  the  Acorn,  The,  Ixxvi,  Ixxxi, 

cz,  169. 
BaUard,  George,  IxxL 
Bargain,  The,  37. 
"Basset -Table,"    CentUyre,    1x1,     418, 

420. 
Battle  between  Rats  and  Weazeis,  Vfl, 
"  Beggar^s  Opera,  The,"  Gay,  czU,  oxliL 
Beho,  Mrs.,  Ivui,  420,  427. 
Better,  For  the,  166. 

Birch,  Thomas,  Ixx,  Ixxl,  IxxH,  Izzzrili. 
Bird,  The,  265. 
Bird  and  the  Arras,  The,  51. 
Birds    in    Lady    Winchilsea*8    poetry, 

czzvii-zzz. 
Books  subscribed  for  by  Lord  Winchil- 

4ea,  zlix,  415. 


Brass-Pot  and  Stone^MOO,  Tht^  117.  • 

Breval,  John  Darant,  IzilL 

Britton,  Thomas,  zItH. 

Bnssy-Rabntin,  xcr,  12L 

CoBsar  and  Brutus,  138. 

Calico,  429. 

Canibals,  A  Song  o/  the,  120. 

CatUious  Lovers,  The,  IxxtUI,  147 

Centlivre,  Mrs.,  Izi,  Izii,  418,  420. 

Change,  The,  zzz,  Izzviii,  84. 

Chetwynd,  Mrs.,  zlH,  109, 428. 

Cibber,  Colley,  Iz,  Izii. 

Cibber,  Theophilos,  Izzi. 

Clarinda's  Indifference  at  Parting  with 
Beauty,  111. 

Cleone,  See  Thynne,  the  Hon.  Mrs. 

Clinket,  Phosbe,  Izii-lzz. 

"  Comparison  between  the  Two  Stages," 
Gildon,  Izi. 

"  Complete  Key,  The,"  E.  Parker,  Philo- 
math," Iziv,  IzviH. 

"  Confederates,  The,"  Breval,  IxiU,  IzIt. 

C(msolation,  The,  18. 

Country,  DisHke  of  the,  czxi. 

Cowley,  Abraham,  ctH. 

Creyk,  J.,  zlru,  Ixzxyi,  414. 

Critick  and  the  Writer  of  Fables,  The^ 
czU,  153. 

Cupid  and  Felly,  159. 

Dafnis,  An  InvittUion  to,  zIt,  28. 

Daphne*s  Answer  to  Sylvia,  112. 

Death,  To,  270. 

Democritus  and  his  Neighbours,  206. 

DeshoaH6res,  Madame,  zcv,  126, 428. 

"  Desiderata  Curiosa,"  Peck,  zlrL 

Dog  and  his  Master,  The,  206. 

DoUy,  429. 

Don  Carlos,  A  Prologue  to,  96. 

Dorinda,  Timely  Advice  to,  135. 

Dramas.  Lady  Winchilsea^s,  Izzriil, 
zcTi-oHi,ll,l2. 

Dryden.  John,  zzUi,  Hi.  Iziz,  Izzziz- 
zciii  (passim),  zcri,  czi,  czIt,  czzriii, 

Doncombe,  John,  Izz,  Izxi. 

Dundee,  On  the  Lord,  81. 

Dyee,  Alezander,  Izzyi,  Izzlz. 

Dyer,  John,  337,  432. 

Eagle,  the  Sow,  and  the  Cat,  The,  196. 


433 


434 


Index 


Earl  of  TT.,  To  Mr.  F.,  note,  xxTii,  20. 

Eatter  Day^  On,  220. 

Eastwell,  xzyiii,   xxxi-xzxiv,   8,  24,  S2, 

419. 
Sccho,  To  the,  204. 
Eglantine,  428. 
*'  Eighteenth  Century  Literature,"  Gosse, 

Ixxxii. 
*'  Eminent  Ladies^Poems  by,"  lxxii,Lcxvi. 
"English  Poets,"  Ward,  Ixxzii,  Ixxxiii. 
Epholia,  See  Worsley,  Lady. 
"Epistle  to  Flayia,"  Rowe,  liii. 
Equipage,  The,  122. 
"  Essay  Supplementary  to  the  Preface," 

Worasworth,  Ixxv. 
Estwick,  Mr.,  18. 
Etheredge,  Sir  George,  41. 
Executor,  The,  189. 
External    Nature,    Lady    Winohilsea^s 

Attitude  toward,  cxxi-cxxxiv. 
Fables,     Lady     Winchilsea^s,     Ixxrii, 

ixxviii,  CTiii-cxi,  416. 
Fanscomb  Bam,  Ixx,  cxii-cxiv,  210,  417, 

430. 
Fellow  Scribbler,  To  a,  105. 
"  Feminead,"  Duncombe,  Ixx,  Ixxi. 
FemmcB  Savantes,  Moli^re,  Iviii,  Ix. 
Finch,  Charles  (Third  Earl  of  Winchil- 

sea),  xxiT,  xxix,  xxxiv,    xxxv,  xlvii, 

Ut,  32,  S3, 337,  413,  418,  419. 
Finch,  Heneage  (Fourth  Earl  of  Win- 

chilsea),  xxiv-xxxv    (pasnm),  xliv-li, 

19,  20,  23,  28,  30,  413,  414,  415. 
Finch,  Heneage  (Second  Earl  of  Win- 

chilsea),xxiv,  xxviii,  413,  419. 
Finch,  Lashley,  xxxiv,  xxxv,  36,  420. 
Finch,  Sir  Moylo,  xxxi,  xlv. 
Flowers  in   Lady    Winchilsoa's   poetry, 

cxxvi. 
Fortune,  The  Decision  of,  174. 
Fragment,  xxx,  Ixxvii,  13. 
French  Book,  Written  before  a,  121. 
"(^neral  Dictionary,"  Birch,  Ixx,  Ixxi, 

Ixxii,  Ixxxviii. 
"  Generous  Husband,"  Johnson,  Ixii. 
"Gentleman's  Magazine,"  1,  Ixxiy,  414. 
Gildou,  Charles,  lii,  Iv,  Ixi. 
Gl(iss,  50. 

Gold  is  try'd  in  the  fire,  228. 
Gosso,    Edmund,    Ivi,    Ixxxii,     Ixxxiii, 

Ixxxvi,  427,  431. 
*' Gossip  in   a   Library,"  Gossc,  Ixxxii, 

Ixxxvi. 
Qoute  and  the  Spider,  The,  30. 
Greifc,  A  Song  on,  xliii,  cv,  18. 
Grosart,  A.  B.,  Ixxviii,  Ixxxiii. 
Hale,  Mrs.,  Ixxx. 
Hallelujah,  222. 
Harris,  John,  xlvi,  Ixx. 


Haselwood,  Family  of,  xix. 

Herbert,  Edw.  and  Eliz.,  xxxix,  55,  422. 

Hertford,  Countess  of,  xxxvlii,  xxxix,  81, 

42S. 
Hertford,  Earl  of,  xlvii,  1. 
"  History  of  Kent,"  Harris,  xItI,  Ixx. 
Hog,  theShe^,  and  the  Goat,  The^  182. 
Honey-suckle,  428. 
Hope,  Ixxviii,  136. 
Horace,  Poem  occanoned  by  Sight  of4tk 

Epi9tleof,9&. 
Hunt,  Leigh,  xxxtI,  Ixxx. 
Hurricane,  On  the,  Ixxxv,  crii,  252. 
Hymn,  cxxiii,  262. 

Ii^tutice  towards  Providence^  Man%  196. 
Introduction,  The,  4. 
Invention  of  Writin{f  Letter$,  In  Praiae 

of  the,  no. 

Invocation  to  Sleep,  An,  xliii,  16. 

James  the  Second,  xxiv-xxx  (pa«nm),  85, 

425,426. 
Jane  Shore,  Epilogue  to,  liv,  100. 
JealovMc  is  the  Ra>ge  of  a  if  an,  cxxriii, 

238. 
Jenkinson,  To  Edward,  108. 
Jervas,  Charles,  xli,  Ixxxvii,  109,428. 
Jester  and  the  Little  FUhea,TKe,  168. 
Johnson,  Charles,  Ixii. 
Jupiter  and  the  Farmer,  165. 
Ken,  Bishop,  xl. 
Killigrew,  Anne,  xxiii. 
King  and  the  Shepherd,  T^  162. 
King  of  Sweden,  On  a  Picture  of  the,  91. 
KingsmiU,    Anno,    Ancestry,    xyiii-xxii. 

Maid  of  Honour,  xxii-xxiv.  Marriage  to 

Mr.  Finch,  xxiv-xxvi.    See  Winchilsea, 

Lady. 
La  Fontaine,  Jean  de,  cvul-cx  (passim), 

cxxvii,  30, 155,  208. 
Leo,  Nathaniel,  ciii,  41. 
L'Estrange,  Sir  Roger,  cviii,  cix,  cxix, 

lft4,  166. 
Letter  to  Dafnis,  A,  19. 
Letter  to  the  same  Person,  A,  23. 
Life's  Proi;re««,lxxiii-lxxv,lxxviii,lxxxii, 

xciii,  cv,  136. 
"Literary  Womenof  England,"  Williams, 

xxxvii,  Ixxxi. 
"Lives  of  the  Poets,"  Gibber,  Ixxi. 
Longleat,  xxxvii,  xl,  cxxvi,  47,  53-5,  ^1. 
Lord  and  the  Bramble,  The,  185. 
Losse,  The,  xxx,  cv,  17. 
*'Lost  Lover,"  Manley,  Mrs.,  Ix,  Ixi. 
Love,  Death,  and  Reputation^  Ixxvii,  160. 
Lyon  and  the  Gnat,  The,  203. 
Maidstone,  Lord,  32,  418. 
Man  and  external  nature  in  Lady  Win- 

chilsea's  poetry,  cxxx. 


Index 


435 


Man  and  hia  Hone^  The,  206. 

Man  bitten  by  Fleaa,  The,  200. 

Mauley,  Mrs.,  Iz,  Ixi. 

Maousoripts,  Lady  Winchilsea's,  Ixxxiii- 

Izxxvii. 
Marrow,  Lady,  Letter  from,  xliv,  414. 
Mary  of  Modena,  xxii,  zxiii,  zzri,  zzx. 
Maxim  for  the  Lady,  A,  121. 
Measled,  430. 

Melinda  on  an  Ineipid  Beauty,  122. 
"Memoirs,"  Ballard,  Ixxi. 
**Meii, Women,  and  Books,"  Hnnt,  xxzvi, 

Ixzx. 
Mercury  and  the  Elephant,  S. 
Miller,  hi9  Son,  and  their  A$te,  A,  156. 
"Miscellany,"  Fenton,  Ixx. 
"MiaoelUny,"  GUdon,  lii.  It. 
"Miscellany  Poems,"  Lady  Winohilaea, 

Izxii,  IxxzTii. 
"Miscellanies,"  Steele,  Ixx,  Ixxxvii. 
Miter  and  the  Poet,  The,  xxxix,  cxii,  191. 
Moliftre  (Jean  Baptiste  Poqnelin),  Wiii. 
Mompesson,  Mrs.,  xxTii. 
Montaxn,    Lady    Mary    Wortley,    Ixx, 

Montaigne,  Michael  Eyqnem  de,  xct,  120, 

428. 
Mountains  in  Lady  Winchilsea*s  Poetry, 

cxxii. 
MuMct  at  PamaatuM,  From  ihie,  32. 
iftiMelman**  Dream,  The,  172. 
Myaelfe,  On,  14. 

Nightingale,  The,  cxxiii-cxxx,  267. 
NoctumtH  Reverie,  A,  xxxTi,  Ixxt,  Ixxvii, 

Ixxx,  Ixxxi,  oxxxii-cxxxiv,  268. 
North,  Christopher,  Ixxt. 
"Ode  on  Love,"  lii,  415. 
Ogle,  Dorothy,  xx-xxii,  38,  (as  Teresa) 

223,420. 
Ogle,  Sir  Thomas,  xx. 
Orania  (Frances  Goell,  wife  of  Richard 

Thomhill),96,  90. 
Orinda  (Mrs.  PhiUps),  xxxt,  Ix,  Ixxi, 

Ixxx,  7, 10, 11,  0S,  96. 
Otway,  Thomas,  ciii,  90,  420. 
Owl  Detcribing  Her  Young  Onea,   The, 

cxxrii,  178. 
Paokington,  Lady,  xxxrii,  422. 
"Parallel,  The,"  xlvi,  414. 
Parker,  E.,  PhUomarth,  Ixiv. 
Paasion  Vaincue,  La,  xoiii,  125. 
PaatorcU  between  Menalcaa  and  Damon, 

A,  215. 
Paatoral  DiaJogue,  A,  exTiii,  144. 
Peace,  Enquiry    after,    xxxtI,    Ixxviii, 

xciii,  czxxiv,  67. 
Petition  for  an  Absolute  Retreate,  The, 

XXX,  xxxvi,  Ixxv,  IxxtI,  xciii,  cxxiv,  68. 


Petrarc,  The  188th  Sonnet  of,  119. 
PhiUps,  John,  cxii,  192. 
Philomela  (Mrs.  Elis.  Bowe),  192. 
Philosopher,  the  Young  Man,  and  hia 

Statue,  The,  181. 
Phcenix,  The,  135. 
Pindarics,  Lady   Winohil8ea*8,    Izzril, 

Ixxviii,  CTi^VUi. 
Piso,  see  Roscommon,  Earl  of. 
Plantagenet,  Richard,  xIt,  xlyi. 
Poor  Man*a  Lamb,  The,  xeU  229. 
Pope,  Alexander,  xli,  iT-lviii,  Ixix-lzzii, 

IxxT,  Ixxxix-xciii  (paaaim),  102, 1(0. 
Preface,  The,  cxxi,  6. 
PreparcUion  to  Prayer,  A,  214. 
PreocUence  of  Ouatom,  The,  170. 
Prior,  Matthew,  xli,  liii,  Ixxxriii,  oiii-er, 

102,192. 
Prodigy,  The,  142. 
Paalm,  119th,  paraphraaed,  286. 
Paalm,  iSTth,  paraphraaed,  214. 
Paalm  Paraphraaed,  The  14tth,  227. 
Punch-Bowl,  A  Song  upon  a,  zzxr,  86. 
Racine,  Jean  Baptiste,  xer. 
RfUph^a  Reflectkma,  isa 
Randolph,  Mrs.,  lii,  96. 
"  Reflections  on  Marriage,"  Astell,  IziL 
Reformation,  cxix,  202. 
"Refusal,"  Gibber,  Ix,  IxlL 
Regnier,  Mathnrin,  xct,  122. 
Religions  Poems,  Lady  Winohilsea^s,  cr. 
Revolution  of  1688,  Effect  of  on  Ladsr 

Winchilsea*s  fortunes,  xxriii-xxx,  1^ 

H  {Fragment), 
"Rider's  Almanac,"    Quotations    from 

Lord    Winchil8ea*8  notes    in,  xliiii, 

xlix,  lii. 
Roscommon,  Earl  of  (as  Piso),  42,  416b 
Rowe,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  xxxix,  liii,  42S. 
Rowe,  Nicholas,  liii,  98. 
"Royal  and  Noble  Authors,"  Walpole, 

Ixxii,  Ixxrii. 
"  Royal  Mischief,  The,"  Manley,  Mrs.,  Iz. 
Saintsbury,  Ghx>rge,  Ixxxiii,  430. 
Sanson,  Guillaume,  xW,  28, 418. 
Satiric  Work,  Lady  Winchilsea's,  cxiv- 

cxxi,  10. 
"  Schoolmistress,"  Shenstone,  cxiii. 
Sea,  The,  in  Lady  Winchilsea^s  poetry, 

cxxii. 
"Serious  Proposal  to  the  Ladies,"  As- 

tell,  Ixi. 
Seward,  Anna,  Ixxii-lxxr. 
Shadwell,  Thomas,  Wiii,  481. 
Shelley,  Percy  Bysshe,  431. 
Shenstone,  William,  cxiii. 
Shepherd  and  the  Calm,  The,  Ixzylii,  188. 
Shepherd  Piping  to  the  Fiahea,  The,  173. 


436 


Index 


Shippen,WiU,m. 

Sigh,  A,  IxxzTiii,  xciii,  ct,  138. 

Sin«er,  Elizabeth.    See  Rowe,  Mrs. 

"  Sir  Patient  Fancy,"  Behn,  Iviii,  420, 427. 

Socrates^  The  Howe  of,  186. 

Solomon.  The  Second  Chapter  of  the  Wi§- 

dom  Of,  cvi,  235. 
Song,  *'By  Love  Per§u*d,^^  ozzx,  128. 
Song  for  a  Play,  A,  127. 
Song,  Honour,  A,  134. 
Song,  ^'Iffor  a  Woman,**  civ,  133. 
Song,  ''LeU  the  fool  9HU  be  true,"  xeiil, 

civ,  133. 
Song,  *^Love  thou  art  bett,**  131. 
Song,  Melinda  to  Alcander,  128. 
Song,  "  Miranda  hidet  her,**  129. 
Song,  Moral,  Ixxviii,  134. 
Song  on  Qreife,  xliii,  cy,  18. 
Song,  ^'Pertuademenot,**  ISO. 
Song,  ''Quickly  Delia,**  131. 
Song,  ''The  Nymph  in  vain,**  132. 
Song,  The  Phcenix,  135. 
Song,  "  *Ti9ttrange  this  heart,**  132. 
Song  upon  a  Punch-Bowl,  xciil,  36. 
Song,  "  Vain  Love,  why  doet  thou,**  ISO. 
Song,  "  WhiUt  Thirns,**  129. 
Songs,  Lady  Winchilsea^s,  ciii-^v,  416. 
**  Sonnet    to     Lady    Mary    Lowther/* 

Wordsworth,  Ixxy. 
Sonthey,  Bobert,  Ixxv. 
**  Specimens,"  Dyce,  Ixxvi. 
"Specimens,"  Southey,  Ixxy. 
Spleen,  The,  xlii-xliy,  lyi,  Ixxi,  Ixxii, 

ixxvi,  Ixxvii,  Ixxx,  Ixxxi,  cvii,  cxyiii, 

248,416. 
"Splendid  Shilling,  The  Philips,"  cxii. 
Steele,  Richard,  Ixzzvii. 
Storms    in    Lady  Winchilsea's  poetry, 

cxxiii. 
Strickland,  Agnes,  xxiii,  xzyi,  413. 
Stukeley,  Dr.,  xliii,  xlvi,  xlyii,  1,  Ixx. 
Swift,  Jonathan,  xli,  liv. 
Tapestry  at  Longleat,  Ixxvii,  47. 
Thanet,  Conntess  of  (Arminda),  xxviii, 

xxxvi,  67,  68,  424. 
Thanet,  Earl  of,  425;   see  Tofton,  Fami- 
ly of . 
Theanor,  See  Thynne,  Henry. 
"  Ttien  by  some  Fountain's  flow* ry  gide,** 

119. 
There's  no  Tomorrow,  164. 
Thornhill,  Richard,  98,  427. 
"  T/io'  we  of  small  proportion  see,**  118. 
"Three   Hours   after   Marria^."  Pope, 

Gay,  and  Arbuthnot,  Ivii,  Ixu-lxx. 


Thynne,  Henry    (Theanor),  xzxviii,  47, 

59,423. 
Thynne,  Hon.  Mr.  James,  xxxvii,  Ixxvii, 

56,422. 
Thynne,  Hon.  Mrs.  (Cleone),  59, 423. 
Thynne,  The  Family  of,  xxxvii-xl,  422. 
Tradesman  and  the  Scholar,  The,  194. 
Translations,  Lady  Winchilsea's,  xciv- 

xcvi. 
Tree,  The,  oxxiv,  266. 
Trees    in    Lady    Winchilsea's    poetry, 

cxxiv-cxxvi. 
Triumphs  of  Love  and  Innocence,  The, 

Ivi,  Ixix,  xoiv,  xcvi-ci,  11,  271,  417. 
"True  Widow,"  ShadweU,  431. 
Tofton,  Anne,  xxxvi,  Ixxxi. 
Tufton,  Lady  C,  xxxvi,  77,  79,  425. 
Tofton,  The  FamUy  of,  xxxvi,  425. 
Tonbridge  Wells,  xxvi,  xlii,  xliv,  cxix, 

142. 

Twysden,  The  Family  of,  xl,  61,  423. 

Unequal  Fetters,  The,  150. 

Universal  Deluge,  The,  Ixvi,  Ixvili. 

Utresia,    See  Worsley,  Lady. 

Vanbrogh,  Sir  John,  lix,  192. 

Verse  Criticism,  Lady  Winchilsea*8,  cxL 

Versification,  Lady  Winchilsea's, 
Ixxxviii-xciii,  416. 

VirtuoBo,  Shadwell,  IviiL 

Waldron,  Dr.,  cxx,  106,  428. 

Walpole,  Horace,  Ixxii,  Ixxvii. 

Ward,  T.  H.,  Ixxxii,  Ixxxiii. 

Weymooth,  Lord  Viscount,  56-58,  421. 

Williams,  Jane,  xxxvii,  Ixxxi. 

Winchilsea,  Countess  of  (Anne  Kings- 
mill),  Sketch  of  her  life,  xviii-li;  Prog- 
ress of  her  fame,  li-lxxxvii;  Study  of 
her  poems,  Ixxxviii-cxxxiv. 

Winchilsea,  Countess  of  (Elizabeth 
Heneage),  xxxi,  xl. 

Winchilsea,  Lord,  see  Finch. 

Winchilsea''s  Converting  the  Mount,  etc.. 
Upon  my  Lord,  33. 

Wit  and  the  Beau,  The,  xci,  158. 

W.  M.  (Author  of  "  Female  Wits"),  Ix. 

"  Woman's  Record,"  Hale,  Mrs.,  Ixxx. 

Women,  Position  of,  cxv-cxix. 

Wordsworth,  William,  Ixxii,  Ixxv-lxxx, 

cxxxiii. 
Worsley,  Lady,  xxix,  xxxviii,  liv,  52,  421, 

428,  (as  Ephelia)  38,  46. 

Wright,  Iviii-lx. 

Wycherley,  William,  420. 

Young  Rat  and  his  Dam,  etc.,  TJie, 
cxxviii,  187. 


m^.    M953 


x-srk . 


•814  .WTSIf  CJ 

Tlw  poMM  01  AiHM.  oaunACY441S 


3  6105  044  950  108 


■:.  ^-  \.  o 


*'.» 


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES 

CECIL  H.  GREEN  LIBRARY 

STANFORD,  CALIFORNIA  94305-6004 

|415)  723-1493 

All  books  may  be  recalled  after  7  days 


Ji 


DATE  DUE 


DOC  JAffW  1998 
MAI?'24  2005 

%
