P.J- 


\^ 


THE 

POEMS 

OF 

O     S     S     I     A     N, 

THE 

SON    OF     FINGAL. 

TRANSLATED 

By    JAMES    MACPHERSON,    Efq. 
A    NEW    EDITION, 

CAREFULLY  CORRECTED,  AND  GREATLY  IMPROVED. 


We  may  boldly  affign  OlTian  a  place  among  thofe,  wliofe  works  are  to  lafl  for  ages 

Br-AiR. 


PHILADELPHIA: 
Printed  by  THOMAS   LANG,  No  21,  Church-Alley. 


M  DCC  XC. 


PREFACE. 


WITHOUT  increafing  his  genius,  the  Au- 
thor may  have  improved  his  language, 
in  the  eleven  years,  that  the  following  poems 
have  been  in  the  hands  of  the  public.  Errors 
in  diclion  might  have  been  committed  at  twenty - 
four,  which  the  experience  of  a  riper  age  may 
remove  ;  and  fome  exuberances  in  imagery  may 
be  retrained,  with  advantage,  by  a  degree  of 
judgment  acquired  in  the  progrefs  of  time.  Im- 
prelfed  with  this  opinion,  he  ran  over  the  whole 
with  attention  and  accuracy  :  and,  he  hopes,  he 
has  brought  the  work  to  a'  flate  of  correclnefs, 
which  will  preclude  all  future  miprovements. 

The  eagernefs,  ^vith  which  thefe  Poems  have 
been  received  abroad,  are  a  recompence  for  the 
coldnefs  with  which  a  few  have  affecled  to  treat 
them  at  home.  All  the  polite  nations  of  Europe 
have  transferred  them  mto  their  refpeclive  lan- 
guages ;  and  they  fi^eak  of  him,  who  brought 
them  to  light,  in  terms  that  might  flatter  the  va- 
nity of  one  fond  of  fame.  In  a  convenient  in- 
difference for  a  literary  reputation,  the  Author 
hears  praife  without  being  elevated,  and  ribald- 
ry, without  being  depreffed.  He  has  frequently 
feen  the  lirlt  bellowed  too  precipitately  ;  and 
the  latter  is  fo  faithlefs  to  its  purpofe,  that  it  is 
often  the  only  index  to  merit  in  the  prefent  age. 

Though 


ii  PREFACE. 

Though  the  talle,  which  defines  genius  by 
the  points  of  the  compafs,  is  a  fubjeci:  fit  for 
mirth  in  itfelf,  it  is  often  a  fenous  matter  in  the 
fale  of  a  work.  When  rivers  define  the  hmits 
of  abilities,  as  well  as  the  boundaries  of  coun- 
tries, a  Writer  may  meafure  his  fuccefs,  by  the 
latitude  under  which  he  was  born.  It  was  to 
avoid  a  part  of  this  inconvenience,  that  the  Au- 
thor is  faid,  by  fome,  Avho  fpeak  without  any 
authority,  to  have  afcribed  his  own  productions 
to  another  name.  If  this  was  the  cafe,  he  was 
but  young  in  the  art  of  deception.  When  he 
placed  the  poet  in  antiquity,  the  Tranflator 
fhould  have  been  born  fouth  of  the  Tweed. 

These  obfervations  regard  only  the  frivolous 
in  matters  of  literature;  thefe,  however,  form 
a  majority  in  every  age  and  nation.  In  this 
countrv,  men  of  genuine  tafie  abound  ;  but 
tlieir  flill  voice  is  drowned  in  the  clamours  of  a 
multitude,  who  judge  by  faOiion  of  poetry,  as 
of  drels.  The  truth  is,  to  judge  aright  requires 
almoll;  as  much  genius  as  to  write  well  ;  and 
good  critics  are  as  rare  as  great  poets.  Though 
two  hundred  thoufand  Romans  ftpod  up,  when 
Virgil  came  into  the  theatre,  Varius  only  could 
correct  the  yEneid.  He  that  obtains  fame,  mull 
receive  it  through  mere  fafhion  ;  and  gratify  his 
vanity  with  the  applaufe  of  men,  of  whofe  judg- 
ment he  cannot  approve. 

The  following  Poems,  it  mufl  be  confelfed, 
are  more  calculated  to  pleafe  perfons  of  exqui- 
fite  feelings  of  heart,  than  thofe  who  receive  all 
^heir  impreflions  by  the  ear.     The  novelty  of 

cadence. 


PREFACE.  iii 

cadence,  in  what  is  called  a  profe  verfion,  tho' 
not  dellitute  of  harmony,  will  not,  to  common 
readers,  fupply  the  abfence  of  the  frequent  re- 
turns of  rhmie.  This  was  the  opinion  of  the 
Writer  himfelf,  though  he  yielded  to  the  judg- 
ment of  others,  in  a  mode,  which  prefented 
freedom  and  dignity  of  exprcllion,  inftead  of 
fetters,  which  cramp  the  tliought,  whilft  the 
harmony  of  language  is  preferved.  His  inten- 
tion was  to  publilh  in  verfe.  The  making  of 
poetry,  like  any  other  handicraft,  may  be  learn- 
ed by  induflry  ;  and  he  had  ferved  his  appren- 
ticefliip,  though  in  fecret,  to  the  mufes. 

It  is,  however,  doubtful,  whether  the  harmo- 
ny which  thefe  poems  might  derive  from  rhime, 
even  in  much  better  hands  than  thofe  of  the 
tranllator,  could  atone  for  the  fimplicity  and 
energy,  which  they  would  lofe.  The  determi- 
nation of  this  point  ihall  be  left  to  the  readers 
of  this  preface.  The  following  is  the  beginning 
of  a  poem,  tranllated  from  the  Norfe  to  the 
Gaelic  language  ;  and,  from  the  latter,  trans- 
ferred into  Englilh.  The  verfe  took  little  more 
time  to  the  writer  than  the  profe  ;  and  even  he 
himfelf  is  doubtful,  (if  he  has  fucceeded  in  ei- 
ther) which  of  them  is  the  moil  literal  verfion. 


FRAGMENT  of  a  NORTHERN  TALE. 

Where  Harold,  with  golden  hair,  fpread 
o'er  Lochlin*  his  high  commands  ;  where,  with 
juftice,  he  ruled  the  tribes,  who  funk,  fubdued,. 

beneath 

*  The  Gaelic  name  of  Scandinavia,  or  Scjii'jima, 


IV 


P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 


beneath  his  Tword  ;  abrupt  rifes  Gormalf  in 
fnow  !  The  tempefts  roll  dark  on  his  fides,  but 
calm,  above,  his  vail  forehead  appears.  White- 
iifuing  from  the  fkirt  of  his  (lorms,  the  troubled 
torrents  pour  down  his  fides.  Joining,  as  they 
roar  along,  they  bear  the  Torno,  in  foam,  to 
the  main. 

Grey  on  the  bank  and  far  from  men,  half- 
covered  by  ancient  pines,  from  the  wind,  a  lone- 
ly pile  exalts  its  head,  long-fliaken  by  the  llorms 
of  the  north.  To  this  fled  Sigurd,  fierce  in 
fight,  from  Harold  the  leader  of  armies,  when 
fate  had  brightened  his  fpear  with  renown ; 
when  he  conquered  in  that  rude  field,  where 
Luian's  warriors  fell  in  blood,  or  rofe,  in  terror, 
on  the  waves  of  the  main.  Darkly  fat  the  grey- 
haired  chief;  yet  forrow  dwelt  not  in  his  foul. 
But  when  the  warrior  thought  on  the  pall,  his 
proud  heart  heaved  again  his  fide  :  forth-flew 
his  fword  from  its  place  ;  he  wounded  Harold 
in  all  the  winds. 

One  daughter,  and  only  one,  but  bright  in 
form  and  mild  of  foul,  the  lalt  beam  of  the  fet- 
ting  line,  remained  to  Sigurd  of  all  his  race. 
His  fon,  in  Luian's  battle  llain,  beheld  not  his 
father's  flight  from  his  foes.  Nor  finiibed  feem- 
ed  the  ancient  line  !  The  fplendid  beauty  of 
bright-eyed  Fithon,  covered  ftill  the  fallen  king 
with  renown.  Her  arm  was  white  like  Gormal's 
fnow  ;  her  bofom  whiter  than  the  foam  of  the 
main,  when  roll  the  waves  beneath  the  wrath 
of  the  winds.     Like  two  liars  were  her  radiant 

eyes, 

+  The  mounlain  of  Sevo. 


PREFACE.  V 

eyes  ;  like  two  ftars  that  rife  on  the  deep,  when 
dark  tumult  embroils  the  night.  Plealant  are 
their  beams  aloft,  as  llately  they  afeend  the  ikies. 

Nor  Odin  forgot,  in  aught,  the  maid.  Her 
form  fcarce  equalled  her  lofty  mind.  Awe 
moved  around  her  ilately  Heps.  Heroes  loved 
— but  flirunk  away  in  their  fears.  Yet,  midft 
the  pride  of  all  her  charms,  her  heart  was  foft, 
and  her  foul  was  kind.  She  faw  the  mournful 
with  tearful  eyes.  Tranfient  darknefs  arofe  in 
her  breali.  Her  joy  was  in  the  chace.  Each 
morning,  when  doubtful  light  wandered  dimly 
on  Lulan's  waves,  fhe  roufed  the  re  founding 
woods,  to  Gormal's  head  of  fnow.  Nor  moved 
the  maid  alone,  &c. 


The  fame  verjijied. 

Where  fair-hair'd  Harold,  o'er  Scandinia  reign'd 
And  held,  with  juftice,  what  his  valour  gain'd, 
Sevo,  in  fnow,  his  rugged  fore-head  rears 
And,  o'er  the  warfare  of  his  ftorms,  appears 
Abrupt  and  vaft. — White-wandering  down  his  fide 
A  thoufand  torrents,  gleaming  as  they  glide, 
Unite  below ;  and  pouring  through  the  plain 
Hurry  the  troubled  Torno  to  the  main. 

Gre  V,  on  the  bank,  remote  from  human  kind, 
Bv  aged  pines,  half- fhe! ter^d  from  the  wind, 
A  homely  manfion  rofe,  of  antique  form, 
f'or  ages  batter'd  by  the  polar  ftorm. 
To  this  fierce  Sigurd  fled,    from  Norway's  lord, 
When  fortune  fettled  on  the  warrior's  fword. 
In  that  rude  field,   where  Suecia's  chiefs  were  flain, 
Or  forced  to  wander  o'er  the  Bothnia  main. 
Dark  was  his  life,  yet  undiflurb'd  with  woes, 
But  when  the  memory  of  defeat  arofe, 

His 


vi  PREFACE. 

His  proud  heart  ftruck  his  fide;  he  grafpt  the  fpear 
And  wounded  Harold  in  the  vacant  air. 

One  daughter  only,  but  of  form  divine. 
The  lafc  fair  beam  of  the  departing  line, 
Remain'd  of  Sigurd's  race.     His  warlike  fon 
Fell  in  the  ftiock,    which  overturn'd  the  throne. 
Nor  dt'folate  the  houfe  !   Fionia's  charms 
Suflain'd  the  glory,  which  they  loft  in  arms. 
White  was  her  arm,  as  Sevo's  lofty  fnow. 
Her  bofom  fairer,  than  the  waves  below. 
When  heaving  to  the  winds.      Her  radiant  eyes 
Like  two  bright  ftars  exulting  as  they  rife. 
O'er  the  dark  tumult  of  a  ftormy  night, 
And  gladd'ning  heav'n,  with  their  majeftic  light. 

In  nought  is  Odin  to  the  maid  unkind  ; 
Her  form  i'carce  equals  her  exalted  mind, 
-Awe  leads  her  facred  fteps  v/here'er  they  move, 
And  mankind  worfliip,  where  they  dare  not  love. 
But,  mix'd  with  foftnefs,  was  the  virgin's  pride, 
Her  heart  and  feelings,  which  her  eyes  deny'd. 
Her  bright  tears  ftartcd  at  another's  woes, 
While  tranfient  darknefs  on  her  foul  arofe. 

The  chace  flielov'd;  when  morn,  with  doubtful  beam 
Came  dimly  wandering  o'er  the  Bothnic  ftream, 
On  Sevo's  founding  fides,  flie  bent  the  bow. 
And  rouz'd  his  forefts  to  his  head  of  fnow. 
Nor  mov'd  the  maid  alone  :  &c. 


One  of  the  chief  improvements  in  this  edi- 
tion, is  the  care  taken,  in  arranging  the  poems 
in  the  order  of  time ;  fo  as  to  form  a  kind 
of  regular  hiftory  of  the  age  to  which  they  re- 
late. The  writer  has  now  refigned  them  for 
ever  to  their  fate.  That  they  have  been  well 
received  by  the  public,  appears  from  an  exten- 
five  fale  ;  that  they  fhall  continue  to  be  well 
received,  he  may  venture  to  prophefy,  without 

the 


PREFACE.  vii 

the  gift  of  that  infpiration,  to  which  poets  lay 
claim.  Through  the  medium  of  verfion  upon 
verfion,  they  retain,  in  foreign  languages,  their 
native  charafter  of  fimplicity  and  energy.  Ge- 
nuine poetry,  like  gold,  lofes  little,  when  pro- 
perly transfufed  ;  but  when  a  compofition  can- 
not bear  the  teft  of  a  literal  verfion,  it  is  a  coun- 
terfeit, which  ought  not  to  pafs  current.  The 
operation  muft,  however,  be  performed  with 
fkilful  hands.  A  tranflator,  who  cannot  equal 
his  original,  is  incapable  of  exprefling  its  beau- 
ties. 


London,  Aug.  15, 
1773. 


CONTENTS, 


Cath-ioda,  Part  Firft,.Page  9     Fingal,  Book  VI Page  197 

Part  Second,  ..17     L  a  t  h  m  o  n  , 207 

Part  Third,.  ..22     Dar-thula, 219 

Co  MALA, 27  Death  ofCuTHULLiN,...233 

Carric-thura, 35     Battle   of  Lora, 243 

Carthon, 49     Temora,  Book  I. 253 

OlNA-MORUL, 63  Book  II 27  I 

Colna-dona, 69  Book  III. 283 

Oithona, 75  Book  IV 295 

Croma, 83  Book  V. 307 

Calthon   and  Colm  al,  . . .  .91  Book  VI 317 

The  War  of  Caros,  ...... .99  Book   VII 327 

Cathlin  of  Clutha,.  . .  .107  Book   VIIF 3^9 

SuL-MALLAof  LUMON,.  ..  .1  14  CoNLATH    and     CuTHONA,.351 

War  of  Ikis-thona, 123     Berrathon, 357 

The  Songs  ofSELMA, 131  A  Di  ssertation  concerning 

Fingal,  Book  I. 141  the  ^ra   of  Ossi  an,  . .  .  .371 

Book  II 157  A  Dissertation  concerning 

Book  III 167  the  Poems  of  Ossi  AN,.  .  .385 

Book  iV. 177  A  critical  Dissertation  on 

Book  V. 1 87  the  PoEMjof  Ossian,...4I5 


C    A    T    H  -  L    O    D    A 


P  O  E  M, 


IN    THREE    PARTS. 


ARGUMENT, 

FINGAL,  when  very  young,  making  a  voyage  to  the  Orkney  illands,  was  driven, 
by  ftrefs  of  weather,  into  a  bay  of  Scandinavia,  near  the  refidence  of  Starno, 
king  of  Lochhn,  Starno  invites  Fingal  to  a  feafl.  Fingal,  doubting  the  fai'.h 
of  the  king,  and  mindful  of  a  former  breach  of  hofpitality,  refufes  to  go.— 
Starno  gathers  together  his  tribes  :  Fingal  rcfolves  to  defend  himfelf. —  Night 
coming  on,  Duth-maruno  propofes  to  Fingal,  to  obferve  the  motions  of  the 
enemy.— The  king  himfelf  undertakes  the  watch.  Advancing  towards  the  ene- 
my, he,  accidentally,  comes  to  the  cave  of  Turfhor,  where  Starno  had  confiaed 
Conban-carglas,  the  captive  daughter  of  a  neighbouring  chief. — Her  ftory  is 
imperfeft,  a  part  of  the  original  being  loft.— Fingal  comes  to  a  place  of  worfiiip, 
where  Starno  and  his  fon,  Swaran,  confulted  the  fpirit  of  Loda,  concerning  the 
iffue  of  the  war.—  The  rencounter  of  Fingal  and  Swaran. — Duan  firft  concludes 
■with  a  defcription  of  the  airy  hall  of  Cruth-loda,  fuppofed  to  be  the  Odin  of 
Scandinavia. 


C    A    T    H  -  L    O     D    A. 


DUAN*    FIRST. 

A  TALE  of  the  times  of  old ! 
Why,  thou  wanderer  unfeen !  thou  bender  of  the 
thiftle  of  Lora  ;  why,  thou  breeze  of  the  valley,  haft  thou 
left  mine  ear  ?  I  hear  no  diftant  roar  of  ftreams  !  no 
found  of  the  harp,  from  the  rock  !  Come,  thou  huntrefs 
of  Lutha,  Malvina,  call  back  his  foul  to  the  bard.  I  look 
forward  to  Lochlin  of  lakes,  to  the  dark,  billowy  bay  of 
U-thorno,  where  Fingal  defcends  from  Ocean,  from  the 
roar  of  winds.  Few  are  the  heroes  of  Morven,  in  a  land 
unknown  ! 

Starno  fent  a  dweller  of  Loda,  to  bid  Fingal  to  the 
feaft  ;  but  the  king  remembered  the  paft,  and  all  his  rage 
arofe.  "  Nor  Gormal's  moffy  towers,  nor  Starno,  fiiall 
Fingal  behold.  Deaths  wander,  like  fhadows,  over  his 
fiery  foul !  Bo  I  forget  that  beam  of  light,  the  white- 
handed  danghter  |  of  kings  ?  Go,  fon  of  Loda  ;  his  words 
;ire  wind  to  Fingal :   wind,  that,  to  and  fro,  drives  the 

thiftle, 

*  The  bards  diftinguifiied  thofe  compofitions,  in  which  the  narration  is  often 
interrupted,  by  odes  and  apoftrophes,  by  the  name  oi  Duan.  Since  the  extinction 
of  the  order  of  the  bards,  it  has  beea  a  general  name  for  all  ancient  compofitions 
in  verfe.  The  abrupt  manner  in  which  the  ftory  of  this  poem  besiins,  mav  ren- 
der it  obfcure  tofome  readers  ;  it  may  not  therefore  be  improper,  to  give  here  the 
iraditianal  preface,  which  is  generally  prefixed  to  it.  Two  years  after  he  took  to 
wite  Ros-crana,  the  daughter  of  Cormac,  king  of  Ireland,  Fiiv;al  undertook  an 
expedition  into  Oikncv,  to  vifit  his  friend  CathuUa,  kinj  of  Iniltore.  After 
(laying  a  few  days  at  Caric-thura,  the  refidence  of  CathuUa,  the  king  let  fail,  to 
return  to  Scotland  ;  but,  a  violent  ftorm  arifmg,  his  (hips  were  driven  into  a  bay 
of  Scandinavia,  near  Gormal,  the  feat  of  Starno,  king  of  Lochlin,  his  avowed 
enemy.  Starno,  upon  the  appearance  of  Grangers  on  his  coaft,  fummoned  tO'^e- 
ther  the  nei;^hbounng  tribes,  and  advanced,  in  a  hoftile  manner,  towards  the  bay 
of  U-thorno,  where  Fingal  had  taken  fhelter.  Upon  difcovering  wh®  the  ftran- 
gers  were,  and  fearing  the  valour  of  Fingal,  which  he  had,  more  than  once,  ex- 
perienced before,  he  rcfolved  to  accomplifli  by  treachery  what  he  was  afraid  he 
Ihould  fail  in  by  open  force.  He  invited,  therefore,  Fngal  to  a  feaft,  at  which  he 
intended  to  affaflinatc;  him.  The  king  prudently  declined  to  up,  and  Sta:no  betook 
himlelf  to  arms.     The  fequel  of  the  ftory  miy  be  learned  from  the  poem  iiMf. 

+  Agandecca,  the  dau',',hter  of  S'arno,  whom  her  father  killed,  on  account  o£ 
Hcr  difcovering  to  Fu-.^al,  a  plat  laid  agiiinfl.  his  life.  Her  iiov/  is  related  at  large, 
in  the  third  book  of  Fingal. 


12  CATH-LODA: 

thiflle,  ill  autumn's  dulliy  vale.  Duth-maruno'^,  arm  of 
death  !  Cromma-glas,  of  iron  fliields !  Struthmor,  dweller 
of  battle's  wing  !  Cormar,  whofe  iliips  bound  on  feas, 
carelefs  as  the  courfe  of  a  meteor,  on  dark-rolling  clouds  1 
Arife,  around  me,  children  of  heroes,  in  a  land  unknown! 
Let  each  look  on  his  fliield,  like  Trenmor,  the  ruler  of" 
wars.  "  Come  down,  thus  Trenmor  faid,  thou  dweller 
between  the  harps.  Thou  fhalt  roll  this  ftream  away,  or 
walte  with  me  in  earth." 

As-OUND  the  king  they  rife  in  wrath.  No  words  come 
forth  :  they  feize  their  fpears.  Each  foul  is  rolled  into 
itfelf.  At  length  the  fudden  clang  is  waked,  on  all  their 
echoing  fhields.  Each  takes  his  hill,  by  night ;  at  inter- 
vals, they  darkly  ftand.  Unequal  burfls  the  hum  of  fongs, 
between  the  roaring  wind  ! 

Broad  over  them  rofe  the  moon  ! 

In  his  arm_s,  came  tall  Duth-maruno  •,  he  from  Croma 
of  rocks,  flern  hunter  of  the  boar  !  In  his  dark  boat  he 
rofe  on  waves,  when  Crumthormof  awaked  its  woods. 
In  the  chace  he  fhone,  among  foes  :  No  fear  was  thine- 
Duth-maruno ! 

"  Son  of  daring  Comhal,  fliall  my  ileps  be  forv^^ard 
through  night  ,^  From  this  fhield  fhall  I  view  them,  over 
their  gleaming  tribes?  Starno,  king  of  lakes,  is  before  me, 
and  Swaran,  the  foe  of  (Irangers.  Their  words  are  not  in 
vain,  by  Loda's  ftone  of  power. — Should  Duth-maruno 
not  return,  his  fpoufe  is  lonely,  at  home,  where  meet  two 
roaring  ilreams,  on  Grathmo-craulo's  plain.  Around  are 
hills,  with  echoing  woods ;  the  ocean  is  rolling  near.  My 
fon  looks  on  fcreaming  fea-fowl,  a  youne,-  wanderer  on  the 

field. 

*  Dutli-maruno  is  a- name  very  famous  in  iradition.  Many  of  his  great  aflions 
are  haiided  down  ;  but  the  poems,  whirh  contained  the  detail  of  them,  are  long 
fince  loft.  He  lived,  it  is  fiippofed,  in  that  part  of  the  north  of  Scotland,  which  is 
over  aoainfl  Orkney.  Duth-maruno,  Cromnia-glas,  Struthmor,  and  Cormar,  arc 
mentioned,  as  attending  Comhal,  in  his  lad  battle  ag;ainft  the  tribe  of  Morni,  in  a 
poem,  wht-ch  is  flillpreferved.  I;  is  not  the  work  of  Oflian  ;  the  phrafeolooy  be- 
trays it  to  be  a  modern  compo'ition.  It  is  fomethino  like  thofe  trivial  coinpofitions, 
which  the  I;  ifh  bards  forged,  under  the  name  of  O-OTian,  in  the  fifteenth  ai^d  fix- 
teenth  centuries.  Duth-maruno  li2;aifies,  black  and  flcady;  Cromma-glas,  lending 
end /way  thy  ;  Slruihmor,  toartnfi  ftream  ;  Corrmr,  expat  at/ta. 

+  Crumthormoth,  one  of  the  Orkney  or  Shetland  iflands.  The  name  is  not  of 
Galic  original.  Jt  w*s  !libjc£l  to  its  own  petty  king,  who  is  mentioned  in  one  ef 
Offian's  poems. 


A     P  O  E  M.  i3 

field.  Give  the  head  of  a  boar  to  Can-dona  *,  tell  hlni 
of  his  father's  joy,  when  the  briftly  ftrength  of  I-thorno 
rolled  on  his  lifted  fpear.  Tell  him  of  my  deeds  in  war  1 
Tell  where  his  lather  fell  !" 

"^  Not  forgetful  of  my  fathers,"  faid  Fingal,  "  I  have 
bounded  over  the  feas.  Theirs  were  the  times  of  danger, 
in  the  days  of  old.  Nor  fettles  darknefs  on  me,  before 
foes,  though  youthful  in  my  locks.  Chief  of  Crathmo- 
craulo,  the  field  of  night  is  mine." 

Fingal  rufhed,  in  all  his  arms,  wide-bounding  over 
Turthor's  flream,  that  fent  its  fuilen  roar,  by  night,  rhro' 
Gormal's  mifly  vale.  A  moon-beam  glittered  on  a  rock  ; 
in  the  midft,  flood  a  flately  form  ;  a  form  with  floating 
locks,  like  Lochlin's  white-bofom'd  maids.  Unequal  are 
her  fteps,  and  fhort.  She  throws  a  broken  fong  on  wind. 
At  times  (he  toffes  her  white  arms :  for  grief  is  dv/eiling 
in  her  foul. 

*'  ToRCUL- 

*  Cean-daona,  /icad  of  the  people,  the  Ton  of  Duth-maruno.  He  became  after- 
wards famous,  in  the  expeditions  of  Oflian,  after  the  death  of  Fingal.  The  tradi- 
tional tales  concerning  him  are  very  numerous,  and,  from  th^  epithet,  in  them,  be- 
(lowed  on  him  [Candona  of  boars)  it  would  appear,  that  he  applied  himfeli  to  thar. 
kind  of  hunting,  which  his  father,  in  this  paragraph,  is  fo  anxious  to  recommend  to 
him.  As  I  have  mention. d  the  traditional  tales  of  the  Highlands,  it  may  not  be 
improper  here,  to  give  fome  account  of  them.  After  the  expulfioa  of  tiic  bards, 
from  the  houf.'s  of  the  chiefs,  they,  being  an  indolent  race  of  men,  owed  all  their 
fublillence  to  the  generolity  of  the  vulgar,  whom  they  diverted  with  repeating  the 
compofiiions  of  their  predecelToiS,  and  running  up  the  genealoa,ies  ot  their  enter- 
tainers to  the  family  of  their  chiefs.  As  thistubjcft  was,  hov.ever,  foon  eshaufted, 
they  were  obliged  to  have  rccourfe  to  invention,  and  form  {lories  having  no  foun- 
dation in  fad  ;  which  were  fwallowed,  with  great  credulity,  by  an  ignorant  multJ- 
lude.  By  frequent  repeating,  the  fable  grew  upon  their  hands,  and,  as  each  thre^v 
in  whatever  circumftance  he  thought  conducive  to  raife  the  admiration  of  his  hear- 
ers, the  flory  became,  at  laft,  fo  "devoid  of  all  probability,  that  even  the  vulgar 
ihcmfelves  did  not  belie%c  It.  They,  however,  liked  the  tales  fo  well,  that  the 
bards  found  their  advantage  in  turning  profefled  tale-makers.  They  then  launched 
out  into  the  wildelf  regions  of  fiftion  and  romance.  1  firmly  believe,  there  ait 
inoreftories  of  giants,  enchanted  caftles,  dwarfs,  anJ  palfreys,  in  the  Highlands  o- 
Scotland,  than  in  any  country  of  Europe.  Thefe  tales,  it  is  certain,  like  other 
lomantic  compofitioni;,  have  many  things  in  them  unnatural,  and,  conlequently, 
difguftful  to  true  talle  ;  but,  I  know  not  how  it  happens,  they  command  attention 
more  than  any  other  fictions  I  ever  met  with.  The  octrcme  Iciiii^tli  of  theic  pieces 
is  very  furphlinff,  fome  of  them  requiring  many  days  lo  repeal  ther.i;  t)Ut  fuch 
hold  they  take  of  the  memory,  that  few  circumfiances  arc  ever  omitted  by  thofe 
\v  ho  have  received  them  only  from  oral  tradition  :  What  is  Rill  more  aniazif.j:;,  the 
very  language  of  the  bards  is  ftill  preferved.  It  is  curious  to  fee,  that  the  dsfcrip- 
tionsof  magniUcence,  introduced  in  lb -fc  tales,  are  e/e;'.  fuperior  tu  jU  the  poir.p- 
ousonf-ntal  Hftionsof  tl)^kind. 


14  CATH-LODA: 

"  ToRcuL-TORNO,*  of  aged  locks  ^"  (lie  faid,  "  where 
now  are  thy  fteps,  by  Lulan  ?  Thou  haft  failed,  at  thine 
own  dark  ftreams,  father  of  Conban-cargla  !  But  I  behold 
thee,  chief  of  Lulan,  fporting  by  Loda's  hall,  when  the 
dark'ikirted  night  is  rolled  along  the  fky. — Thou,  fome- 
times,  hideft  the  moon,  with  thy  fliield.  I  have  feen  her 
dim,  in  heaven.  Thou  kindleft  thy  hair  into  meteors,  and 
failell  along  the  night.  Why  am  I  forgot  in  my  cave,  king 
of  fliaggy  boars  ?  Look,  from  the  hall  of  Loda,  on  thy 
lonely  daughter." 

"  Who  art  thou,"  faid  Fmgal,  "  voice  of  night  ?" 

She,  trembling,  turned  away. 

"  Who  art  thou,  in  thy  darknefs  ?" 

She  fhrunk  into  the  cave. 

The  king  loofed  the  thong  from  her  hands.  He  afked 
about  her  fathers. 

"  ToRCUL-TORNo,"  flic  faid,  "  once  dwelt  at  Lulan's- 
foamy  ftream :  he  dwelt — but,  now,  in  Loda's  hall,  he 
fliakes  the  founding  fliell.  He  met  Starno  of  Lochlin,  in 
war ;  long  fought  the  dark-eyed  kings.  My  father  fell,  in 
his  blood,  blue-ihielded  Torcul-torno  !  By  a  rock,  at  Lu- 
lan's  ftream,  I  had  pierced  the  bounding  roe.  My  white 
hand  gathered  my  hair,  from  off  the  rufhing  winds.  I 
heard  a  noife.  Mine  eyes  were  up.  My  foft  breaft  rofe  on 
high.  My  ftep  was  forward,  at  Lulan  to  meet  thee,  Tor- 
cul-torno !    It  was  Starno,  dreadful  king !    His  red  eyes 

rolled 

*  Torcul-torno,  according  to  tradition,  was  king  of  Crathlun,  a  diflrift  in  Swe- 
den. The  river  Lulan  ran  near  the  refidence  of  Torcul-torno.  There  is  a  river 
in  Sweden,  frill  called  Lula,  which  is  probably  the  fame  with  Lulan.  The  war 
between  Starno  and  Torcul-torno,  which  terminated  in  the  death  of  the  latter, 
had  its  rife  at  a  hunting  parly.  Starno  being  invited,  in  a  friendly  manner,  by 
Torcul-torno,  both  kings,  with  their  followers,  went  to  the  mountains  of  Stivamore 
to  hunt.  A  boar  ruthed  from  the  wood  before  the  kings,  and  Torcul-torno  killed 
it,  Starno  thought  this  beViaviour  a  breach  upon  the  privilege  of  guefts,  who  were 
always  kencured,  as  tradition  expicfTcs  it,  with  the  danger  of  the  chace.  A  quarrel 
arofe,  the  kings  came  to  battle  with  all  their  attendants,  and  the  party  of  Torcul- 
tonio  were  toialiy  defeated,  and  he  himfelf  flain.  Starno  purfued  his  viftory,  hid 
wafie  thodiflritt  of  Crathlun,  and,  coming  to  the  refidence  of  Torcul-torno,  car- 
ried off,  by  force,  Conban-carglas,  the  beautiful  daughter  of  his  enemy.  Her  he 
confined  m  a  cave,  near  the  palace  of  Gormal,  wheie,  on  account  of  her  cruel, 
treatment,  fhe  became  diffracted. 

The  paragraph,  juftnow  before  us,  is  the  fong  of  Conban-carglas,  at  the  time 
ihe  was  difcovered  by  Fingal.  It  is  in  Lyric  meafure,  and  fet  to  mulic,  which  is 
'.vild  and  fimple,  and  fo  inimitabi);  Juited  to  the  iituation  of  the  unhappy  lady,  that 
?e-3ir  C2D  hear  it  withoaftesrJ, 


A    P  O  E  M.  15 

r6lled  on  me  in  love.  Dark  waYed  his  diaggy  brow,  above 
his  gathered  fmile.  Where  is  my  father,  faid  I ;  he  that 
was  mighty  in  war  ?  Thou  art  left  alone  among  foes,  O 
daughter  of  Torcul-torno  !  He  took  my  hand.  He  raifed 
the  fail.  In  this  cave  he  placed  me  dark.  At  times,  he 
oomes,  a  gathered  mill.  He  lifts,  before  me,  my  father's 
fliield.  But  often  paffes  a  beam  *  of  youth,  far  diltant  from 
my  cave.  The  fon  of  Starno  moves,  in  my  fight.  He 
dwells  lonely  in  my  foul." 

"  Maid  ofLulan,"  faid  Fingal,  "  white-handed  daugh- 
ter of  grief!  a  cloud,  marked  with  ftreaks  of  fire,  is  rolled 
along  thy  foul.  Look  not  to  that  dark-robed  moon ;  look 
not  to  thofe  meteors  of  heaven.  My  gleaming  fteei  is  around 
thee,  the  terror  of  thy  foes  !  It  is  not  the  Heel  of  the  feeble, 
nor  of  the  dark  in  foul  1  The  maids  are  not  fliut  in  ourf 
caves  of  dreams.  They  tofs  not  their  white  arms  alone. 
They  bend,  fair  within  their  locks,  above  the  harps  of 
Selma.  Their  voice  is  not  in  the  defart  wild.  We  melt 
along  the  pleafmg  found !" 


Fingal,  again,  advanced  his  fleps,  wide  through  the 
bofom  of  night,  to  where  the  trees  of  Loda  fh»ok  amid 
fqually  winds.  Three  flones,  with  heads  of  mofs,  are 
there;  a  ftream,  with  foaming  courfe:  and  dreadful,  rolled 
around  them,  is  the  dark-red  cloud  of  Loda.  High  from 
its  top  looked  forward  a  ghoft,  half-formed  of  the  fhadowy 
fmoke.  He  poured  his  voice  at  times,  amidll  the  roaring 
ftream.  Near,  bending  beneath  a  blafted  tree,  two  heroes 
received  his  words  :  Swaran  of  lakes,  and  Starno,  foe  of 
ftrangers.  On  their  dun  fhields,  they  darkly  leaned:  their 
fpears  are  forward  through  night.  Shrill  founds  the  blall 
of  darknefs  in  Starno's  floating  beard. 

They  heard  the  tread  of  Fingal.    The  warriors  rofe  in 

arms. 

*  By  the  beam  of  youth,  it  afterwards  appears,  that  Conbao-carglas  means  Swaran, 
tke  fon  of  Starno,  with  whom,  during  her  confinement,  Ihc  had  fallen  in  love. 

+  From  this  contraft,  which  Fineal  draws,  between  his  own  nation,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,  wc-  may  learn,  that  the  former  were  much  lefs  barbarous 
than  the  latter.  This  diftinttion  is  fo  much  obferved  throughout  the  poems  of  Of- 
fian,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  he  followed  the  real  manners  of  both  nations 
in  his  own  time.  At  the  clofe  of  the  fpecch  of  Fingal,  there  is  a  great  part  of  the 
original  loft. 


i6  CAT  H-LOD  A; 

?.rms.  "  Swaraii,  lay  that  wanderer  low,"  faid  Starno,  in 
his  pride.  "  Take  the  fhield  of  thy  father.  It  is  a  rock 
in  war."— -Swaran  threw  his  gleaming  fpear.  It  ftood  fixed 
in  Loda's  tree.  Then  came  the  foes  forward,  withfwords. 
They  mixed  their  rattling  fteel.  Through  the  thongs  of 
Swaran's  fhield  ruilied  the  blade  *  of  Luno.  The  fhield 
fell  rolling  on  earth.  Cleft,  the  helmet  f  fell  down.  Fingal 
ftopt  the  lifted  Heel.  Wrathful  flood  Swaran,  unarmed. 
He  rolled  his  filent  eyes ;  he  threw  his  fword  on  earth. 
Then,  flowly  flalking  over  the  ftream,  he  whiffled  as  he 
v/c-nt. 

Nor  unfeen  of  his  father  is  Swaran.  Starno  turns  away 
in  wrath.  His  fhaggy  brows  wave  dark,  above  his  gather- 
ed rage.  He  flrikes  Loda's  tree,  with  his  fpear.  He  raifes 
the  hum  of  fongs.  They  come  to  the  hoft  of  Lochlin, 
each  in  his  own  dark  path;  like  two  foam-covered  flreams, 
from  two  rainy  vales  ! 

To  Torthur's  plain  Fingal  returned.  Fair  rofe  the  beam 
of  the  eafl.  It  flione  on  the  fpolls  of  Lochlin,  in  the  hand 
of  the  king.  From  her  cave  came  forth,  in  her  beauty, 
the  daughter  of  Torcul-torno.  She  gathered  her  hair  from, 
wind.  She  wildly  raifed  her  fong.  The  fong  of  Lulan  of 
fliells,  where  once  her  father  dwelt.  She  faw  Starno's 
bloody  fhield.  Gladnefs  rofe,  a  light,  on  her  face.  She 
fav^  the  cleft  helmet  of  Swaran  §.  She  fhrunk,  darkened, 
from  FingaL — "  Art  thou  fallen,  by  thy  hundred  flreams, 
O  love  of  the  mournful  maid.'* 

U-THORNO,  that  rifed  in  waters  !  on  whofe  fide  are  the 
meteors  of  night !  I  behold  the  dark  moon  defcending, 
behind  thy  refounding  woods.  On  thy  top  dwells  the 
mifty  Loda  :  the  houfe  of  the  fpirits  of  men  !  In  the  end 
of  his  cloudy  hall,  bends  forward  Cruth-loda  of  fwords. 

His 

*  The  fword  of  t'inira!,  fo  called  from  its  maker,  Luno  of  Lochlin. 

+  The  helmet  of  Swaran.  The  behaviour  of  Fingal  is  always  confident  with  that 
generofiiy  of  fpirit  which  belongs  to  a  hero.  He  takes  no  advantage  of  a  foe  dil- 
armed. 

^  Conban-carglas,  from  feeing  the  helmet  of  Swaran  bloody  in  the  hands  of 
Fingal,  conjeftured  that  that  hero  was  killed.  A  part  of  the  original  is  loft.  It 
appears,  however,  from  the  fequel  of  the  poem,  that  the  daughter  of  Torcul-torno 
did  not  longfurvive  hcrfurpri/e,  occafioned  by  the  fuppofed  death  of  her  lover. 
The  defcription  of  the  airy  ha!!  of  Loda  (which  is  fuppofed  to  be  the  fame  with 
that  of  Odin,  the  deity  of  Scandinavia)  is  more  pifturefqtic  and  defcriptive,  than 
any  in  the  Edda,  or  ttiicr  works  of  the  ncrlhern  Scaldcrs, 


A    POEM.  17 

His  form  is  dimly  feen,  amid  his  wavy  mifl:.  His  right- 
hand  is  on  his  ihield.  In  his  left  is  the  half-viewiefs  fhell. 
The  roof  of  his  dreadful  hall  is  marked,  with  nightly  fires  1 
Thk  race  of  Cruth-loda  advance,  a  ridge  of  formlefs 
{hades.  He  reaches  the  founding  (hell,  to  thofe  who  flione 
in  war.  But,  between  him  and  the  feeble,  his  fhield 
rifes,  a  darkened  orb.  He  is  a  fetting  meteor  to  the  weak 
in  arms.  Bright,  as  a  rainbow  on  fir  earns,  came  Lulan's 
whice-bofomed  maid. 


C    A    T    H  -  L    O    D    A. 


DUAN     SECOND. 


ARGUMENT. 


fINGAL  returning,  with  day,  devolves  the  command  on  Duth-maruno,  who 
engages  the  enemy,  and  drives  them  over  the  flream  of  Tarthor.  Having  re- 
called his  people,  he  congratulates  Duth-maruno  en  his  fuccefs,  but  difcovers, 
that  that  hero  had  been  mortally  wounded  in  the  aclion. —  Duth-maruno  dies. 
Ullin,  the  bard,  in  honour  of  the  dead,  introduces  the  epifode  of  Colgormand 
Strina-dona,  which  concludes  this  dudn. 

"  "IXrHERE  art  thou,  fon  of  the  king,"  faid  dark- 
V  V  haired  Duth-maruno?  "  Where  haft  thou  failed, 
young  beam  of  Selma  ?  He  returns  not,  from  the  bofom 
of  night !  Morning  is  fpread  on  U-thorno.  In  his  mift  is 
the  fun,  on  his  hill.  Warriors,  lift  the  lliields,  in  my 
prefence.  He  mAift  not  fall,  like  a  fire  from  heaven,  whofe 
place  is  not  marked  on  the  ground.  He  comes,  like  an 
eagle,  from  the  fkirt  of  his  fqually  wind !  In  his  hand  are 
the  fpoils  of  foes.    King  of  Selma,  our  fouls  were  fad  ! 

"  Near  us  are  the  foes,  Duth-maruno.    They  come 

forward,  like  waves  in  mift,  when  their  foamy  tops  are 

feen,  at  times,  above  the  low-failing  vapour.   The  traveller 

C  "  Ihrinks 


38  C  A  T  H  -  L  O  D  A  : 

flirlnks  on  his  journey ;  he  knows  not  whither  to  fly.  No 
trembhng  travellers  are  we  !  Sons  of  heroes,  call  forth  the 
fteel.  Shall  the  fword  of  Fingal  arife,  or  fliall  a  warrior 
lead  ?" 

*  The  deeds  of  old,  faid  Duth-maruno,  are  like  paths 
to  our  eyes,  O  Fingal.  Broad-fliielded  Trenmor,  is  flill 
feen,  amidil  his  own  dim  years.  Nor  feeble  was  the  foul 
of  the  king.  There,  no  dark  deed  wandered  in  fecret. 
From  their  hundred  dreams  came  the  tribes,  to  grafly 
Colglancrona.  Their  chiefs  were  before  them.  Each  llrove 
to  lead  the  war.  Their  fwords  were  often  half-unfteathed. 
Red  rolled  their  eyes  of  rage.  Separate  they  ftood,  and 
hummed  their  furly  fongs.  "  Why  fliould  they  yield  to 
each  other?  their  fathers  were  equal  in  war."  Trenmor 
was  there,  with  his  people,  {lately  in  youthful  locks.  He 
faw  the  advancing  foe.  The  grief  of  his  foul  arofe.  He 
bade  the  chiefs  to  lead,  by  turns:  they  led,  but  they  were 
rolled  away.  From  his  own  mofly  hill,  blue-fliielded 
Trenmor  came  down.  He  led  wide-fkirted  battle,  and  the 
ftrangers  failed.  Around  him  the  dark-browed  warriors 
came:  they  (truck  the  fhield  of  joy.  Like  a  pleafant  gale, 
the  words  of  power  rulhed  forth  from  Selma  of  kings.  But 
the  chiefs  led,  by  turns,  in  war,  till  mighty  danger  rofe: 
then  v/as  the  hour  of  the  king  to  conquer  in  the  field.'* 

"  Not 

*  In  this  fhort  epifode  we  have  a  very  probable  account  given  us,  of  the  origin 
of  monarchy  in  Caledonia.  The  Ca'el  or  Gauls  who  poilelTed  the  countries  to  the 
north  of  the  Firth  of  Edinburgh,  were,  oriynally,  a  number  of  diftinft  tribes,  or 
elans,  each  l'ubjec\  to  its  own  chief,  who  was  free  and  independent  of  any  other 
power.  When  the  Romans  invaded  them,  the  common  danger  might,  peihaps, 
have  induced  thofe  regull  to  join  together,  but,  as  they  were  unwilling  to  yield  ta 
the  command  of  one  of  their  own  number,  their  battles  were  i!l-condu8ed,  and, 
confenu'jntly,  unluccefsful.  Trenmor  was  the  firfl  who  reprefented  to  the  chiefs, 
the  bid  confcquences  of  carrying  on  their  wars  in  this  irregular  manner,  and  advifcd, 
that  they  themfeives  (houid  alternately  lead  in  battle.  They  did  fo,  but  they  were 
ij'ifuccefsful.  When  it  came  to  Trenmoi's  turn,  he  totally  defeated  the  enemv, 
by  his  fiiperior  valour  and  condu£l,  which  gained  him  fucli  an  intereft  among  ths 
tribes,  that  he,  ana  his  family  after  him,  were  regarded  askings;  or,  to  ufe  the 
ptxn's  expreiTion,  the  words  of  power  rnjlicd  forth  from  Selma  of  kings.  The  regal 
authority,  however,  except  in  time  of  war,  was  but  inconfiderable;  ior  every  chief, 
within  his  own  diftrift,  was  abfolute  and  independent.  From  the  fcene  of  the  bat- 
tle in  this  epifode,  (which  was  in  the  valley  of  Crona,  a  little  to  the  north  of 
Agricola's  wall)  1  fhould  fuppofe,  that  the  enemies  of  the  Caledonians  were  the 
Rorr.ans,  or  provincial  Britons. 


A     P  O  E  M.  19 

"  Not  unknown,"  fald  Cromma-glas  *  of  ililelds,  "  are 
the  deeds  of  our  fathers.  But  who  fiiall  now  lead  the  war, 
before  the  race  of  kings  ?  Mill  fettles  on  thefe  four  dark 
hills :  within  it  let  each  warrior  {Irike  his  fliield.  Spirits 
may  defcend  in  darknefs,  and  mark  us  for  the  war." 

TiiLY  went,  each  to  his  hill  of  mill.  Bards  marked 
the  founds  of  the  fliields.  Loudeft  rung  thy  bofs,  Duth- 
maruno.    Thou  mull  lead  in  vv^ar  ! 

Like  the  murmur  of  waters,  the  race  of  U-thorno  came 
down.  Starno  led  the  battle,  and  Swaran  of  flormy  ifles. 
They  looked  forward  from  iron  fhields,  like  Cruth-loda 
liery-eyed.  when  he  looks  from  behind  the  darkened  moon, 
and  ftrews  his  hgns  on  night.  The  foes  met  by  Turthor's 
flrcam.  They  heaved  like  ridgy  waves.  Their  echoing 
flrokes  are  mixed.  Shadowy  death  flies  over  the  hofts. 
They  were  clouds  of  hail,  with  fqually  winds  in  their  fldrts. 
Their  fliowers  are  roaring  together.  Below  them  fwells 
the  dark-rolling  deep. 

Strife  of  gloomy  U-thorno,  why  fhould  I  mark  thy 
wounds !  Thou  art  with  the  years  that  are  gone !  thou 
faded  on  my  foul ! 

Starno  brought  forward  his  Mrt  of  war,  and  Swaran 
his  own  dark  wing.  Nor  a  harmlefs  fire  is  Duth-maruno's 
fword.  Lochlin  is  rolled  over  her  llrcams.  The  wrathful 
kings  are  lod  in  thought.  They  roll  their  filent  eyes,  over 
the  flight  of  their  land.    The  horn  of  Fingal  was  heard  ; 

the 

*  In  tradiiion,  this  CronnTia-glas  m^ilses  a  jj,ical  figure  in  that  battle  which  Com- 
hal  loft,  tcecther  with  his  life,  to  the  tribe  of  Moini.  I  have  juft  now,  in  my 
hands,  an  Irifn  compoliticn,  of  a  vciy  modern  date,  as  appears  from  the  lanc-uage, 
in  which  all  the  traditions,  coiiceming  that  decifive  cngageinent,  are  jumbled  to- 
gethei.  Injuflice  to  the  merit  of  the  poem,  I  Ihould  have  here  prefented  to  the 
reader  a  tranflation  of  it,  did  not  the  bard  mention  fome  circumftances  very  lidi- 
culou:;,  and  others  altogether  indccei  t.  Morna,  the  wife  oF  Comhal,  had  a  prin- 
cipal hand  .v.  all  the  tranfacfions  previous  to  the  defeat  and  death  of  her  hufband  j 
{he,  to  ul'e  the  words  of  the  bard,  w^io  was  the  guiding  Jtar  of  the  women  of  Erin, 
The  bard,  it  is  hon^d,  mifreprefented  the  ladies  of  his  country,  for  Morna's  beha- 
viour was,  according  to  him,  fo  void  of  al!  decency  and  virtue,  that  it  cannot  be  fup- 
poftd,  they  had  chofenhcr  for  theii  guiding  far .  The  poem  confiUs  of  many  ftan- 
zas.  The  language  is  fioui alive,  and  the  numbers  harmonious;  but  the  piece  is  fo 
full  of  anachronifn";s,  and  fo  unequal  in  its  compnfition,  that  the  author,  moft  un- 
doubtedly, was  either  mad,  or  diunk,  when  he  wrote  it.  It  is  v/orthy  of  bung 
remarked,  that  Comhal  is,  in  this  poem,  very  often  called,  tcnihal  va  iCAlbiv,  or 
Comlial  of  Albion,  which  fufBciently  demonftrates,  that  the  allegations  of  Keating 
and  O'Flaherty,  concerning  Ficn  Mac-Ccvmal,  arc  but  of  late  i^!^•enlicn. 


20  CATH-LODA: 

the  fons  of  woody  Albion  returned.     But  many  lay,  by 
Turthor's  llream,  filent  in  their  blood. 

Chief  of  Crathmo,  faid  the  king,  Diith-maruno,  hunter 
of  boars !  not  harmlefs  returns  my  eagle,  from  the  field  of 
foes !  For  this  white-bofomed  Lanul  fliall  brighten,  at  her 
ftreams ;  Candona  ihali  rejoice,  as  he  wanders  in  Crath- 
mo's  fields. 

CoLooRM  *,  replied  the  chief,  was  the  firfl  of  my  race 
in  Albion  ;  Colgorm,  the  rider  of  ocean,  thro'  its  watry 
vales.  He  flew  his  brother  in  I-thorno  -j- :  he  left  the  land 
of  his  fathers.  He  chofe  his  place,  in  filence,  by  rocky 
Crathmo-craulo.  His  race  came  forth,  in  their  years;  they 
came  forth  to  war,  but  they  always  fell.  The  wound  of 
my  fathers  is  mine,  king  of  echoing  ifles  ! 

He  drew  an  arrow  from  his  fide !  He  fell  pale  in  a  land 
imknown.  His  foul  came  forth  to  his  fathers,  to  their 
flormy  ille.  There  they  purfued  boars  of  mifl,  along  the 
fkirts  of  winds.  The  chiefs  ftood  filent  around,  as  the 
flones  <y{  Loda,  on  their  hill.  The  traveller  fees  them, 
through  the  twilight,  from  his  lonely  path.  He  thinks 
them  the  ghofts  of  the  aged,  forming  future  wars. 

Night  came  down,  on  U-thorno.  Still  ftood  the  chiefs 
in  their  grief.  The  blaft  whiftled,  by  turns,  thro'  every 
warrior's  hair.  Fiiigal,  at  length,  broke  forth  from  the 
thoughts  of  his  foul.  He  called  Ullin  of  harps,  and  bade 
the  fong  to  rife.  "  No  falling  fire,  that  is  only  feen,  and 
then  retires  in  night ;  no  departing  meteor,  was  he  that  is 
laid  fo  low.  He  was  like  the  flrong-beaming  fun,  long 
rejoicing  on  his  hill.  Call  the  names  of  his  fathers,  from 
their  dwellings  old !" 

I-THORNo§,  faid  the  bard,  that  rifeft  midfl  ridgy  feas! 

Why 

*  The  family  of  Duth-marunn,  it  appears,  came  originally  from  Scandinavia,  or, 
at  leaf!,  from  fome  of  the  northern  ifles,  fuhjeft,  in  chief,  to  the  kings  of  Lochlin. 
The  Highland  fenachies,  who  never  mifftrd  to  make  their  comments  on,  and  ad- 
ditions  to,  the  works  of  Offian,  have  uivn  us  a  long  lift  of  the  anceftors  of  Duth- 
maruno,  and  a  particular  account  of  ihtir  attions,  many  of  which  are  of  the  mar- 
x'cllous  kind.  One  of  the  tale  makers  of  the  north  has  chofen  for  his  hero,  Starn- 
TT.or,  the  father  ol  Duih-maiuno,  and,  confidering  the  adventures  thro'  which  he 
hr:s  led  him,  the  pierce  is  neither  difagreeable,  nor  abounding  with  that  kind  of 
fiflion,  which  (hocks  credibility. 

t  An  ifland  of  Scandinavia. 

^  This  epifode  is,  in  the  original,  extremely  beautiful.   It  is  fet  to  that  wild  kind 

of 


A    P  O  E  M.  21 

Why  is  thy  head  fo  gloomy,  in  the  ocean's  mid  ?  From 
thy  vales  came  forth  a  race,  fearlefs  as  thy  ftrong  winged 
eagles ;  the  race  of  Colgorm  of  iron  fnields,  dwellers  of 
Loda's  hall. 

In  Tormoth's  refounding  ifle,  arofe  Liirthan,  ftreamy 
hill.  It  bent  its  woody  head  over  a  filent  vale.  There,  at 
foamy  Cruruth's  fource,  dwelt  Rm-mar,  hunter  of  boars! 
His  daughter  was  fair  as  a  fun-beam,  white-bofomed  Stri- 
na-dona ! 

Many  a  king  of  heroes,  and  hero  of  iron  fhields;  many 
n  youth  of  heavy  locks,  came  to  Rurmar's  echoing  hall. 
They  came  to  woo  the  maid,  the  (lately  huntrefs  of  Tor- 
moth  wild.  But  thou  lookeft  carelefs  from  thy  fteps,  high- 
bofomed  Strina-dona ! 

It  on  the  heath  Ihe  moved,  her  breafi:  was  whiter  than 
the  down  of  Cana*;  if  on  the  fea-beat  fliore,  than  the  foam 
of  the  rolling  ocean.  Her  eyes  were  two  (lars  of  light. 
Her  face  was  heaven's  bow  in  fliovv^ers.  Her  dark  hair 
flowed  round  it,  like  the  ftreamirig  clouds.  Thou  wert 
the  dweller  of  fouls,  white-handed  Strina-dona ! 

Colgorm  came,  in  his  fhip,  and  Corcul-furan,  king 
of  fliells.  The  brothers  came,  from  I-thorno,  to  woo  the 
fun-beam  of  Tormoth  wild.  She  faw  them  in  their  echoing 
fteel.  Her  foul  was  fixed  on  blue-eyed  Colgorm.  Ul- 
lochlin's  f  nightly  eye  looked  in,  and  faw  the  toiTmg  arms 
of  Strina-dona. 

Wrathful  the  brothers  frowned.  Their  flaming  eyes, 
in  filence,  met.  They  turned  away.  They  fl:ruck  their 
fhields.  Their  hands  were  trembling  on  their  fwords.  They 
ruftied  into  the  flrife  of  heroes, for  long-haired  Strina-dona. 

CORCUL- 

of  mufic,  which  fome  of  tlie  Highlanders  ciiflin;j_uifii,  by  the  tide  o^  FonGi-marra, 
or  the  Song  oj  maniaids.  Some  part  of  the  air  is  abfolutely  infernal,  but  there  are 
many  returns  in  the  meafuie,  which  are  inexpreflibly  wild  and  beautiful.  From 
the  genius  of  the  mafic,  I  fhould  think  it  came  originally  from  Scandinavia,  for 
the  fictions  delivered  down  concerning  the  Oi-marra,  (who  are  reputed  the  authors 
of  the  mufic)  exa6ily  correfpond  with  the  notions  of  the  northern  nations,  concern- 
ing their  di)  cc,  or  goddejfes  of  death. — Of  all  the  names  in  this  epifode,  there  is  none 
of  a  Galic  original,  except  Strina-dona,  which  figr.ifies,  ihr  Jirife  of  heroes. 

*  The  Cana  is  a  certain  kind  of  grafs,  which  grov;s  plentiful  in  the  heathy  rco- 
raffes  of  the  north.  Its  ftalk  is  of  the  reedy  kind,  and  it  carries  a  tuft  of  down,  very 
much  refembling  cotton.  It  is  exceflively  white,  and,  confequently,  often  intro- 
duced by  the  bards,  in  their  fimiies  concerning  the  beauty  of  women. 

f  Ul-lochlin,  the  guide  to  Lochlin;  the  name  of  a  P.ar. 


22 


CATH-LOD  A 


CoRCUL-suRAN  fell  ill  blood.  On  his  ifle,  raged  the 
ftrength  of  his  father.  He  turned  Colgorm  from  I-thorno, 
to  wander  on  all  the  winds.  In  Crathmo-craulo's  rocky- 
field,  he  dwelt  by  a  foreign  llream.  Nor  darkened  the 
king  alone  ;  that  beam  of  light  was  near,  the  daughter  of 
echoing  Tormoth,  white-armed  Strina-dona  *. 

*  Tlie  continuation  of  this  epifode  is  juft  now  in  my  hands;  but  the  language  is 
fo  different  from,  and  the  ideas  fo  unworthy  of,  OfTian,  that  I  have  rejefled  it,  as 
an  jnierpoldtion  by  a  modern  baid. 


CATH-LOD    A. 


D  U  A  N      THIRD. 


ARGUMENT. 

OSSIAN,  after  fome  general  refleftlons,  defcribes  the  fituation  of  Fingal,  and  the 
pofition  of  the  army  of  Lochlin. — The  converfation  of  Starno  and  Swaran. — The 
cpilode  of  Coraian-trunar  and  Foinar-bragal. — Starno,  from  his  own  example, 
recommends  to  Swaran,  to  furprize  Fingal,  who  had  retired  alone  to  a  neigh- 
bouring hill'.  Upon  Swaran  s  refufal,  Starno  undertakes  the  enterprize  himfelf. 
is  overcome,  and  taken  prifoner,  by  Fingal. — He  is  difmifled,  after  a  fevere  re- 
primand for  his  cruelty. 

WHENCE  is  the  dream  of  years  ?  Whither  do  they 
roll  along  ?  Where  have  they  hid,  in  mift,  their 
many-coloured  fides  ? 

I  LOOK  into  the  times  of  old,  but  they  feem  dim  to 
Offian's  eyes,  like  reflected  moon-beams,  on  a  diltant  lake- 
Here  rife  the  red  beams  of  war !  There,  filent,  dwells  a 
feeble  race  !  They  mark  no  years  with  their  deeds,  as  flow 
they  pafs  along.  Dweller  between  the  fliields !  thou  that 
av>^akeft  the  failing  foul !  defcend  from  thy  wall,  harp  of 
Cona,  with  thy  voices  three!  Come,  with  that  which 
kindles  the  pad :  rear  the  forms  of  old,  on  their  own  dark- 
brown  years ! 

U-THORNO, 


A    P  O  E  M. 


^3 


*  U-THo  RNO,  hill  of  ftormsjl  behold  my  race  on  thy  fide, 
Fingal  is  bending,  in  nip;ht,  over  Duth-maruno's  tomb. 
Near  him  are  the  fteps  of  hid  heroes,  hunters  of  the  boar. 
By  Turthor's  flream  the  hod  of  Lochlin  is  deep  in  fhades. 
The  wrathful  kings  flood  on  two  hills  ;  they  looked  for- 
ward from  their  bofly  fliields.  They  looked  forward  to 
the  ilars  of  night,  red  wandering  in  the  weft.  Cruth-loda 
bends  from  high,  like  a  formlefs  meteor  in  clonds.  He 
i'ends  abroad  the  winds,  and  marks  them,  with  his  figns. 
Suirno  forefaw,  that  Morven's  king  was  not  to  yield  in  war. 

He  twice  ftruck  the  tree  in  wrath.  He  rufhed  before 
his  fon.  He  hummed  a  furly  fong ;  and  heard  his  hair  in 
v-ind.  Turned  I  from  one  another,  they  flood,  like  two 
oaks,  which  different  winds  had  bent ;  each  hangs  over 
its  ov^n  round  rill,  and  fliakes  its  boughs  in  the  courfe  of 
blafls. 

"  Annir,"  faid  Starno  of  lakes,  "  was  a  fire  that  con- 
fumed  of  old.  He  poured  death  from  his  eyes,  along  the 
flriving  fields.    His  joy  was  in  the  fall  of  men.    Blood,  to 

him, 

*  The  bards,  who  were  always  ready  to  fiipply  what  they  thought  deficient  in 
the  poems  of  Offian,  have  inferttd  a  great  many  incidents  between  the  fecond  and 
ihiid  duan  of  Cath-loda,  Th.-ir  interpolations  are  fo  eafily  diftinguiflied  fiom  the 
genuine  remains  of  Oflian,  that  it  took  me  very  little  time  to  mark  them  out,  and 
totally  to  rtjcft  them.  If  the  modern  Scotch  and  Iiilli  bards  have  ihewn  any  judg- 
ment, it  is  in  afcrihing  their  own  compcfitions  to  names  of  antiquity,  for,  by  that 
means,  they  thf  mlelves  have  efcaped  that  contempt,  which  the  authors  of  fuch  fu- 
tile perform  jucps  muft,  neceffarily,  have  met  with  from  people  of  true  taflc.  I  was 
icd  into  this  oblervation,  by  an  Lifh  poem,  juft  now  before  m.e.  It  concerns  a  de- 
fcem  made  by  Swaian,  king;  of  Loihlin,  on  Ireland,  and  is  the  woik,  fdys  the  tia- 
ditional  prel.ce  prefixed  to  it,  of  OJj'ian  Mac-Fion.  It  however  appears,  from  fe- 
vrral  pious  ejaculations,  that  it  was  rather  the  compofition  of  fome  good  prieft,  in 
the  fiiteenih  or  lixteenth  century,  for  he  fpcaks  with  great  devotion,  of  pilgiiniage, 
and  more  particularly,  oi  \.\\t.  blue-eyrd  davgliters  of  the  ccnvuit.  Rclipious,  how- 
ever, as  this  poet  was,  he  was  not  altogether  decent,  in  the  fcenes  he  intiodaces 
beiwer  n  Swaran  and  the  wife  of  Congcullion,  both  of  whom  he  reprefents  as  giants. 
It  happening  unfortunately,  that  Congcnllion  was  only  of  a  moderate  fiature,  his 
wife,  without  hefitation,  preferred  Swaian,  as  a  more  adequate  match  for  her  owu 
gigantic  fize.  From  this  fatal  preference  pioceeded  fo  much  mifchief,  that  the  good 
poet  altogether  loll  fight  of  his  principal  atfion,  and  he  ends  the  piece,  with  an  ad- 
vice to  men,  in  the  choice  of  their  wives,  v.hich,  however  good  it  may  be,  I  fhall 
leave  concealed  in  the  ohlcurity  of  the  oii,L,inal. 

+  The  fuily  attitude  of  Si^irpo  and  Swaran  is  well  adapted  to  their  fierce  and  un- 
complying difpofitions.  Their  charatlers,  at  iinl  fight,  feem  little  d\fFerem;  but, 
upon  examination,  we  find  that  the  poet  has  dexteroufly  dilfinguiihed  between  them. 
Thry  were  both  dark,  flubborn  haughty  and  rcfcrved ;  but  Starno  was  cunning, 
revengeful,  and  cruel,  to  the  hiohefl  degree;  the  tlifpofition  of  Swaran,  though 
Cavage,  was  lefs  bloody,  and  fomcwhat  linttui od  with  genexofity.  It  is  doing-  ia 
juflicc  to  Oflian,  to  f-y,  that  he  has  npt  a  great  varieiy  of  charatters. 


24  CATH-LODA: 

him,  was  a  fumraer  flream,  that  brings  joy  to  withered 
vales,  from  its  own  mofly  rock.  He  came  forth  to  the 
lake  Luth-cormo,  to  meet  the  tall  Corman-trunar^  he  from 
Urlor  of  dreams  ,dweller  of  battle's  wing. 

"  The  chief  of  Urlor  had  come  to  Gormal,  with  his 
dark-bofom'd  fhips.  He  faw  the  daughter  of  Annir,  white- 
armed  Foina-bragal.  He  faw  her!  Norcarelefs  rolled  her 
eyes,  on  the  rider  of  ftormy  waves.  She  fled  to  his  fhip 
in  darknefs,  like  a  moon-beam  through  a  nightly  vale. 
Annir  purfued  along  the  deep ;  he  called  the  winds  of 
heaven.  Nor  alone  was  the  king!  Starno  was  by  his  fide. 
Like  U-thorno's  young  eagle,  I  turned  my  eyes  on  my 
father. 

'*  We  rufhed  into  roaring  Urlor.  With  his  people  came 
tall  Corman-trunar.  We  fought ;  but  the  foe  prevailed. 
In  his  wrath  my  father  flood.  He  lopped  the  young  trees 
with  his  fword.  His  eyes  rolled  in  his  rage.  I  marked  the 
foul  of  the  king,  and  I  retired  in  night.  From  the  field 
I  took  a  broken  helmet :  a  fhield  that  was  pierced  with 
fteel :  pointlefs  was  the  fpear  in  my  hand.  I  went  to  find 
the  foe. 

"  On  a  rock  fat  tall  Corman-trunar,  befide  his  burning 
oak;  and  near  him,  beneath  a  tree,  fat  deep-bofomed 
Foina-bragal.  I  threw  my  broken  fhield  before  her.  I 
fpoke  the  words  of  peace.  *'  Befide  his  rolling  fea,  lies 
Annir  of  many  lakes.  The  king  was  pierced  in  battle  ; 
and  Starno  is  to  raifc  his  tomb.  Me,  a  fon  of  Loda,  he  fends 
to  white-handed  Foina,  to  bid  her  fend  a  lock  from  her 
hair,  to  reft  with  her  father,  in  earth.  And  thou,  king  of 
roaring  Urlor,  let  the  battle  ceafe,  till  Annir  receive  the 
fhell,  from  fiery-eyed  Cruth-loda." 

"  *BuRSTiNG  into  tears,  Ihe  rofe,  and  tore  a  lock  from 
her  hair  ;  a  lock  which  wandered,  in  the  blaft,  along  her 
heaving  breaft,  Corman-trunar  gave  the  fhell ;  and  bade 
me  to  rejoice  before  him.     I  refted  in  the  fhade  of  night ; 

and 

*  Offian  is  very  partial  to  the  fair  fex.  Even  the  daughter  of  the  cruel  Annir, 
the  fifter  of  the  revengeful  and  bloody  Starco,  partakes  not  cf  thofe  difagreeable 
charafters  fo  peculiar  to  her  family.  She  is  altogether  tender  and  delicate.  Ho- 
mer,  of  all  ancient  poets,  ufes  the  fex  with  the  lead  ceremony.  His  cold  contempr 
is  even  worfe,  than  the  downright  abufe  of  the  moderns;  for  to  draw  abufe  implies 
the  Dofleffion  of  fome  merit. 


A    P  O  E  M.  25 

and  hid  my  face  In  my  helmet  deep.  Sleep  defcended  on 
the  foe.  I  rofe,  like  a  flalking  ghoft.  I  pierced  the  fide  of 
Corman-trunar.  Nor  did  Foina-bragal  efcape.  She  rolled 
her  white  bofom  in  blood. 

"  Why,  then,  daughter  of  heroes,  didfl  thou  wake  my 
rage  ? 

"  Morning  rofe.  The  foe  were  fled,  like  the  departure 
of  mill.  Annir  flruck  his  boify  fliield.  He  called  his 
dark-haired  fon.  I  came,  ftreaked  with  wandering  blood. 
Thrice  rofe  the  fliout  of  the  king,  like  the  burfling  forth 
of  a  fquall  of  a  wind,  from  a  cloud,  by  night.  We  re- 
joiced, three  days,  above  the  dead,  and  called  the  hawks 
of  heaven.  They  came,  from  all  their  winds,  to  feail  on 
Annir's  foes.  Swaran !  Fingal  is  alone*,  on  his  hill  of 
night.  Let  thy  fpear  pierce  the  king  in  fecret ;  like  An- 
nir, my  foul  ihall  rejoice." 

"  Son  of  Annir,"  faid  Swaran,  "  I  fiiall  not  flay  in 
fhades.  I  move  forth  in  light ;  the  hawks  rulh  from  ail 
their  winds.  They  are  wont  to  trace  my  courfe  ;  it  is  not 
harmlefs  through  war," 

Burning  rofe  the  rage  of  the  king.  He  thrice  raifed 
his  gleaming  fpear  :  but,  ftarting,  he  fpared  his  fon,  and 
ruflied  into  the  night.  By  Turthor's  fliream  a  cave  is 
dark,  the  dwelling  of  Conban-carglas.  There  he  laid  the 
helmet  of  kings,  and  called  the  m.aid  of  Lulan ;  but  fhe 
was  diftant  far,  in  Loda's  refounding  hall. 

Swelling  in  his  rage,  he  flrode,  to  where  Fingal  lay 
alone.  The  king  was  laid  on  his  Ihield,  on  his  own  fecrec 
hill. 

Stern  hunter  of  fliaggy  boars  !  no  feeble  maid  is  laid 
before  thee — No  boy,  on  his  ferny  bed,  by  Turthor's  mur- 
muring fliream.  Here  is  fpread  the  couch  of  the  mighty, 
from  which  they  rife  to  deeds  of  death  !  Hunter  of  Hiaggy 
boars,  awaken  not  the  terrible  ! 

Starno  came  murmuring  on.     Fingal  arofe  in  arms. 

*'  Who  art  thou,  fon  of  night  ?"    Silent  he  threw  the 

D  fpear. 

*  Fingal,  accoidiiig  lo  ihe  cunom  of  the  Caledonian  kings,  had  retired  to  a  hill 
aloi»e,  as  he  himlelf  wa:;  to  relume  the  command  of  the  army  the  next  day.  Starno 
might  have  feme  intelligence  of  the  king's  retirinj^,  which  occalions  his  requeft  to 
Swaran,  to  flab  him ;  as  he  forcliw,  by  his  art  in  divinationjilint  he  could  uet  over- 
come him  in  onen  battle. 


26  C  A  T  H .  L  O  D  A: 

fpear.  They  mixed  their  gloomy  flrife.  The  fhield  of 
Starno  fell,  cleft  in  twain.  He  is  bound  to  an  oak.  The 
early  beam  arofe.  It  was  then  Fingal  beheld  the  king. 
He  rolled  a  while  his  filent  eyes.  He  thought  of  other  days, 
when  white-bofomed  Agandecca  moved  like  the  mufic  of 
fongs.  He  loofed  the  thong  from  his  hands.  Son  of  An- 
nir,  he  faid,  retire.  Retire  to  Gormal  of  Ihells  ;  a  beam 
that  was  fet  returns.  I  remember  thy  white-bofomed 
daughter  :  dreadful  king,  away  !  Go  to  thy  troubled 
dwelling,  cloudy  foe  of  the  lovely !  Let  the  ftranger  Ihun 
thee,  thou  gloomy  in  the  hall ! 
A  TALE  of  the  times  of  old  ! 


COM  ALA: 


C       O      M      A      L       A 


A 


DRAMATIC     POEM 


ARGUMENT. 

THIS  poem  is  valuable  on  account  of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  antiquity  of  Oflian'* 
compefitions.  The  Caracul  mcntionecl  here  is  the  fame  with  Caracalla  the  fon 
of  3everus,  who  in  the  year  211  commanded  an  expedition  againft  the  Caledo- 
nians. The  variety  of  the  meafurc  ftiews  that  the  poem  was  originally  fet  to 
mufic,  and  perhaps  prefented  before  the  chiefs  upon  folemn  occafions.  Tradi- 
tion has  handed  down  the  ftory  more  complete  than  it  is  in  the  poem.  "  Co- 
jnala,  the  daughter  of  Sarno  king  of  Iniflorc  or  Orkney  iflands,  fell  in  love  with 
Fingal  the  fon  of  Comhal  at  a  feaft,  to  which  her  father  had  invited  him,  [Fin- 
gal,  B.  III.]  upon  his  return  from  Lochlin,  after  the  death  of  Agandecca.  Her 
paflion  was  fo  violent,  that  fhe  followed  him,  difguifed  like  a  youth,  who  wanted 
to  be  employed  in  his  wars.  She  was  foon  difcovered  by  Hidallan  the  fon  of 
Xamor,  oneof  Fingal's  heroes,  whofc  love  fhe  had  flighted  fomc  time  before. 
Her  romantic  paflion  and  beauty  recommended  her  fo  much  to  the  king,  that  he 
had  refolved  to  make  her  his  wife ;  when  the  news  was  brought  him  of  Caracul's 
expedition.  He  marched  to  flop  the  progrefs  of  the  enemy,  and  Comala  attended 
iiim.  He  left  her  on  a  hill,  within  fight  of  Caracul's  army,  when  he  himfelf 
went  to  battle,  having  previoufly  promifed,  if  he  furvived,  to  return  that  night," 
The  fcquel  of  the  flory  may  be  gathered  from  the  poem  itfelf. 


C      O       M      A      L      A: 

■    '  ■'  ■  ■■  '  '  — =' 

A 

DRAM  AT  I  C     POEM. 

THE   PERSONS. 


C  DAUGHTEKS   OF  MoRNI. 

HIDALLAN.  DERSAGRENA,       S 


FINGAL.  MELILCOMA 

HIDALLAN.  DERSAi 

COMALA.  BARDS 


Dersagrena. 

THE  chace  is  over.    No  noife  on  Ardven  but  the  tor- 
rent's roar!  Daughter  of  Morni,  come  from  Crona's 
banks.    Lay  down  the  bow  and  take  the  harp.     Let  the 
night  come  on  with  fongs,  let  our  joy  be  great  on  Ardven. 
Melilcoma*. 
Night  comes  apace,  thou  blue-eyed  maid ;  grey  night 
grows  dim  along  the  plain.  I  faw  a  deer  at  Crona's  ftream^^_^- 
a  mofly  bank  he  feemed  through  the  gloom,  but  foon  he  «m 
bounded  away.    A  meteor  played  round  his  branching*ji^ 
horns!  the  awful  faces | of  other  times  looked  from  the ^>*^;^ 
clouds  of  Crona! 

Dersagrena  \\.  '■  ^ 

These  are  the  figns  of  Fingal's  death.  The  king  of 
fhields  is  fallen !  and  Caracul  prevails.  Rife,  Comala§, 
from  thy  rock ;  daughter  of  Sarno,  rife*  |n  tears.  The 
youth  of  thy  love  is  low  j  his  ghoft  is  on  our  hills. 

Melilcoma. 

*  Mt\ncoma,—fo/t-rollingeye. 

t  Apparent  dircefacies,  inimicaqueTrojx  ■■       ^ 

Numina  magna  dcum.  VIRG.  > 

— dreadful    founds  I  hear, 

And  the  dire  form  of  hoftile  gods  appear,         DRYD. 
\  Derfagrena,  the  brightnefs  of  a  fun-beam, 
%  Comala,  tk',  maid  of  tlu  pleafant  brow. 


30  C    O    M    A    L    A: 

Melilcoma. 
There  Comala  fits  forlorn!  two  grey  dogs  near  fliake 
their  rough  ears,  and  catch  the  flying  breeze.  Her  red 
cheek  rells  upon  her  arm,  the  mountain  wind  is  in  her 
hair.  She  turns  her  blue  eyes  toward  the  field  of  his  pro- 
mife.     Where  art  thou,  O  Fingal,  the  night  is  gathering 

^Wnd?  CoMALA. 

O  Carun  *  of  the  flreams!  why  do  I  behold  thy  waters 
rolling  in  blood  ?  Has  the  noife  of  the  battle  been  heard; 
and  lleeps  the  king  of  Morven?  Rife,  moon,  thou  daugh- 
ter of  the  fky  !  look  from  between  thy  clouds  ;  rife,  that  I 
may  behold  the  gleam  of  his  Heel,  on  the  field  of  his  pro- 
mife.  Or,  rather,  let  the  meteor  that  lights  our  fathers 
through  the  night,  come,  with  its  red  beam,  to  fliew  me 
the  way  to  my  fallen  hero.  Who  will  defend  me  from 
forrow  ?  Who,  from  the  love  of  Hidallan  ?  Long  fliall 
Comala  look  before  flie  can  behold  Fingal  in  the  midft  of 
his  hoft ;  bright  as  the  coming  forth  of  the  morning,  in 
the  cloud  of  an  early  fhower. 

Hidallan  f. 

Dwell,  thou  mill  of  gloomy  Crona,  dwell  on  the  path 
of  the  king.  Hide  his  fteps  frdm  mine  eyes,  let  me  re- 
member my  friend  no  more.  The  bands  of  battle  are 
fcattered,  no  crowding  tread  is  round  the  noife  of  his 
fleel.  O  Carun,  roll  thy  flreams  of  blood,  the  chief  of 
the  people  is  low.  n^^.  .r  . 

^      ^  COMALA. 

Who  fell  on  Carun's  founding  banks,  fon  of  the  cloudy 
night  ?   Was  he  white  as  the  fnow  of  Ardven  ?  Blooming 


*  Carun  or  Cara'on,  a  winding  river. — This  river  retains  ftill  the  name  of  Carron, 
sad  falls  into  the  Forth  fome  miles  to  the  North  of  Falkirk. 

'Gentcfque  alias  cum  pelkret  armis 

Sedil/us,  aut  vifias  vilemfervaret  m  vfum 

Snvitii,  hie  contcnta  fuos  defender c  jines 

Rmia  fecurigeris  pratendit  mcEJiia  Scotis: 

llicjpe  progrejfus pofita,  Caronis  ad  undam 

Terminus  Aujoniifignat  divortia  regni.  BUCHANAN. 

+  Hidallan  was  lent  by  Fingal  to  give  notice  to  Comala  of  his  return ;  he,  to  re- 
venge himfeif  on  her  for  flighting  his  love  fome  time  before,  told  her  that  the  king 
•was'  killed  in  battle.  He  even  pretended  that  he  carried  his  body  from  the  field 
to  be  buried  in  her  prefencej  and  this  circumftancc  makes  it  probable  that  the 
poem  was  prcfented  of  old. 


A    DRAMATIC    POEM.  31 

as  the  bow  of  the  fliower  ?  Was  his  hair  like  the  mift  of 
the  hill,  foft  and  curling  in  the  day  of  the  fun  ?  Was  he 
like  the  thunder  of  heaven  in  battle  ?  Fleet  as  the  roe  of 
the  defart  ?  -rj 

HlDALLAN. 

O  THAT  I  might  behold  his  love,  fair-leaning  from  her 
rock !  Her  red  eye  dim  in  tears,  her  blufliing  cheek  half 
hid  in  her  locks !  Blow,  O  gentle  breeze,  lift  thou  the 
heavy  locks  of  the  maid,  that  I  may  behold  her  white  arm, 
her  lovely  cheek  in  her  grief. 

COMALA. 

And  Is  the  fon  of  Comhal  fallen,  chief  of  the  mournful 
tale  ?  The  thunder  rolls  on  the  hill !  The  lightning  flies 
on  wings  of  fire  !  They  frighten  not  Comala  ;  for  Fingal 
is  low.  Say,  chief  of  the  mournful  tale,  fell  the  breaker 
of  the  fliields  ?  TT 

HlDALLAN. 

The  nations  are  fcattered  on  the  hills !  they  fhall  hear 
the  voice  of  the  king  no  more.   ^ 

CoMALA. 

Confusion  purfue  thee  over  thy  plains  !  Ruin  overtake 
thee,  thou  king  of  the  world !  Few  be  thy  fleps  to  thy 
grave ;  and  let  one  virgin  mourn  thee :  let  her  be  like 
Comala,  tearful  in  the  days  of  her"youth.  Why  haft  thou 
told  me,  Hidallan,  that  my  hero  fell  ?  I  might  have  hoped 
a  little  while  his  return  ;  I  might  have  thought  I  faw  him 
on  the  diftant  rock  ;  a  tree  might  have  deceived  me  with 
his  appearance  j  the  wind  of  the  hill  might  have  been  the 
found  of  his  horn  in  mine  ear.  O  that  I  were  on  the  banks 
of  Carun !  that  my  tears  might  be  warm  on  his  cheek ! 

HlDALLAN. 

He  lies  not  on  the  banks  of  Carun  :  on  Ardven,  heroes 
raife  his  tomb.  Look  on  them,  O  moon,  from  thy  clouds; 
be  thy  beam  bright  on  his  breaft,  that  Comala  may  behold 
him  in  the  light  of  his  armour. 

Comala. 
Stop,  ye  fons  of  the  grave,  till  I  behold  my  love !  He 
left  me  at  the  chace  alone.     I  knew  not  that  he  went  to 

war. 


32  C    O    M    A    L    A : 

war.  He  faid  he  would  return  with  the  night ;  the  king 
of  Morven  is  returned !  Why  didfl  thou  not  tell  me  that 
he  would  fall,  O  trembling  dweller  of  the  rock  *  !  Thou 
faweft  him  in  the  blood  of  his  youth  ;  but  thou  didft  not 
tellComala!  Mblilcoma. 

What  found  is  that  on  Ardven?  Who  is  that,  bright  in 
the  vale,  who  comes  like  the  ftrength  of  rivers,  when 
their  crouded  waters  glitter  to  the  moon  ? 

COMALA. 

Who  is  it  but  the  foe  of  Comala,  the  fon  of  the  king  of 
the  world !  Ghoft  of  Fingal !  do  thou,  from  thy  cloud, 
dired  Comala's  bow.  Let  him  fall  like  the  hart  of  the  de- 
fart.  It  is  Fingal,  in  the  crowd  of  his  ghofls.  Why  doft 
thou  come,  my  love,  to  frighten  and  pleafe  my  foul  ? 
Fingal. 

Raise,  ye  bards,  the  fong,  raife  the  wars  of  the  ftreamy 
Carun  !  Caracul  has  fled  from  our  arms^along  the  fields  of 
his  pride.  He  fets  far  difhant  like  a  meteor,  that  inclofes  a 
fpirit  of  night,  when  the  winds  drive  it  over  the  heath,  and 
the  dark  woods  are  gleaming  around.  I  heard  a  voice,  or 
was  it  the  breeze  of  my  hills?  Is  it  the  huntrefs  of  Ardven, 
the  white-handed  daughter  of  Sarno  ?  Look  from  thy 
rocks,  my  love ;  let  me  hear  the  voice  of  Comala ! 

CoMALA. 

Take  me  to  the  cave  of  thy  reft,  O  lovely  fon  of  death! 

Fingal. 
Come  to  the  cave  of  my  reft.     The  ftorm  is  paft,  the 
fun  is  on  our  fields.    Come  to  the  cave  of  my  reft,  huntrefs 
of  echoing  Ardven ! 

Comala. 
He  is  returned  with  his  fame !  I  feel  the  right  hand  of 
his  wars!   But  I  muft  reft  befide  the  rock  till  my  foul 
returns  from  my  fear !    O  let  the  harp  be  near !  raife  the 
fong,  ye  daughters  of  Morni ! 

Dersagrena. 

*  By  the  iwelUmfthtrock  fiie  meansadruid.  It  is  probable  that  fome  of  the  or- 
der of  the  diuids  remained  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Fingal ;  and  that 
Comala  hadconfulted  one  of  them  concerii3a'>;  the  cveat  of  the  war  with  Garacul. 


A    DRAMATIC    POEM.  33 

Dersagrena^ 
CoMALA  has  flain  three  deer  on  Ardven,  the  fire  afcends 
on  the  rock;  go  to  the  feafl  of  Comala,  king  of  the  woody 
Morven !  t- 

FlNGAL. 

Raise,  ye  fons  of  fong,  the  wars  of  the  ftreamy  Carim; 

that  my  white-handed  maid  may  rejoice :  while  I  behold 

the  fealt  of  my  love.  -r, 

■'  Bards. 

Roll,  ftreamy  Carun,  roll  in  joy,  the  fons  of  battle  fled[ 
The  fteed  is  not  feen  on  our  fields;  the  wings  *  of  their 
pride  fpread  in  other  lands.  The  fun  will  now  rife  in  peace, 
and  the  fhadows  defcend  in  joy ;  the  voice  of  the  chace 
be  heard  ;  the  fhields  hang  in  the  hall.  Our  delight  will 
be  in  the  war  of  the  ocean,  our  hands  fliall  grov/  red  in 
the  blood  of  Lochlin.  Roll,  ftreamy  Carun,  roll  in  joy, 
the  fons  of  battle  fled  ! 

Melilcoma. 

Descend,  ye  light  mifts  from -high!  Ye  moon-beams, 
lift  her  foul.  Pale  lies  the  maid  at  the  rock !  Comala  is  no 
more !  t 

riNGAL. 

Is  the  daughter  of  Sarno  dead ;  the  white-bofomed  maid 
of  my  love  ?  Meet  me,  Comala,-  on  my  heaths,  when  I  fit 
alone  at  the  ftreams  of  my  hills  ! 

HiDALLAN. 

Ceased  the  voice  of  the  huntrefs  of  Ardven!  Why  did 
I  trouble  the  foul  of  the  maid?  When  iliall  I  fee  thee,  with 
joy,  in  the  chace  of  the  dark-brown  hinds  ? 

FiNGAL. 

Youth  of  the  gloomy  brow!  no  more  fhalt  thou  feaft  vsx 
my  halls.  Thou  fhalt  not  purfue  my  chace,  my  foes  fhall 
not  fall  by  thy  fword  f.  Lead  me  to  the  place  of  her  reft 
that  I  may  behold  her  beauty.  Pale  flie  lies  at  the  rock, 
the  cold  winds  lift  her  hair.  Her  bow-ftr ing  founds  in  the 
blaft,  her  arrow  was  broken  in  her  fall.  Raife  the  praife 
E  of 

*  Perhaps  the  poet  alludes  to  the  Roman  enpje. 

t  The  fequel  ol  the  {lory  of  Hidallan  is  introduced  in  another  poem, 


34  C    O    M    A    L    A. 

of  the  daughter  of  Sarno !  give  her  name  to  the  winds  of 
^^^^^^'  Bards. 

See!  meteors  gleam  around  the  maid!  See,  moon-beams 
lift  her  foul !  Around  her,  from  their  clouds,  bend  the  awful 
faces  of  her  fathers ;  Sarno  -f-  of  the  gloomy  brow !  the 
red-rolling  eyes  of  Fidallan !  When  fhall  thy  white  hand 
arife  ?  When  fhall  thy  voice  be  heard  on  our  rocks  ?  The 
maids  fliall  feek  thee  on  the  heath,  but  they  Ihall  not  find 
thee.  Thou  Ihalt  come,  at  times,  to  their  dreams,  to  fettle 
peace  in  their  foul.  Thy  voice  fhall  remain  in  their  ears, 
they  fhall  think  with  joy  on  the  dreams  of  their  reft.  Me- 
teors gleam  around  the  maid,  and  moon-beams  lift  her 
foul! 

f  Sarno,  the  father  of  Comala,  died  foon  after  the  flight  of  his  daughter.     Fi- 
dallan was  the  firft  king  that  reigned  inlniftore. 


C  A  R  R  I  C 


C  A  R  R  I  C-T  H  U  R  A: 


P  O  E  M. 


ARGUMENT. 

FINGAL,  returning  from  an  expedition  which  he  had  made  into  the  Roman  pro- 
,  vir.ce,  refolved  to  vifit  Cathulla  king  of  Iniftore,  and  brother  to  Com^la,  whofe 
ilory  is  related  at  large,  in  the  preceding  dramatic  poem.  Upon  his  coming  ja 
fight  of  Carric-thura,  the  palace  of  Cathulla,  he  obferved  a  flame  on  its  top, 
\vhich,  in  thofe  days,  was  a  fignal  of  diftrefs.  The  wind  drove  them  into  a  bay, 
at  fome  diftance  from  Carric-thura,  and  he  was  obliged  to  pafs  the  night  on  the 
ftiore.  Next  day  he  attacked  the  army  of  Frothal  king  of  Sora,  who  had  befieged 
Cathulla  in  his  palace  of  Carric-thura,  and  took  Frothal  himfelf  prifoner,  after 
he  had  engaged  him  in  (ingle  combat.  The  deliverance  of  Carric-thura  is  the 
fubjeft  of  the  poem,  but  feveral  other  epifodes  are  interwoven  with  it.  It  ap- 
pears from  tradition,  that  this  poem  was  addreffed  to  a  Culdee,  or  one  of  the 
firft  Chriflian  miffionaries,  and  that  the  ftory  of  the  Spirit  of  Loda,  fuppofed  to 
be  the  ancient  Odin  of  Scandinavia,  was  introduced  by  Oflian  in  pppofition  to 
the  Culdee's  doftrine.  Be  this  as  it  will,  it  lets  us  into  Offian's  notions  of  a 
fuperior  beingj  and  fhews  that  he  was  not  addifted  to  the  fuperftition  which 
pievailed  all  the  world  over,  before  the  introduftion  of  Chriflianity. 


CARRIC-THURA 


POEM. 

HAST  *  thou  left  thy  bkie  courfe  in  heaven,  golden- 
haired  fon  of  the  Iky!  The  weft  has  opened  its  gates; 
the  bed  of  thy  repofe  is,  there.  The  waves  come  to  behold 
thy  beauty.  They  lift  their  trembling  heads.  They  fee 
thee  lovely  in  thy  lleep;  they  flirink  away  with  fear.  Refl: 
in  thy  Ihadowy  cave,  O  fun !    let  thy  return  be  in  joy. 

But  let  a  thoufand  lights  arife  to  the  found  of  the  harps 
of  Selma :  let  the  beam  fpread  in  the  hall,  the  king  of 
fhells  is  returned  !  The  ftrife  of  Crona  is  paft  f ,  like  founds 
that  are  no  more.  Raife  the  fong,  O  bards,  the  king  is 
returned,  with  his  fame! 

Such  were  the  words  of  Ullin,  when  Fingal  returned 
from  war:  when  he  returned  in  the  fair  blufliing  of  youth, 
with  all  his  heavy  locks.  His  blue  arms  were  on  the  hero; 
like  a  light  cloud  on  the  fun,  when  he  moves  in  his  robes 
of  mift,  and  fliews  but  half  his  beams.  His  heroes  follow 
the  king  :  the  feall  of  fhells  is  fpread.  Fingal  turns  to  his 
bards,  and  bids  the  fong  to  raife. 

Voices  of  echoing  Cona !.  he  faid,  O  bards  of  other 
times  !  Ye,  on  whofe  fouls  the  blue  hofts  of  our  fathers 
rife!  ftrike  the  harp  in  my  hall;  and  let  me  hear  the  fong. 
Pleafant  is  the  joy  of  grief!  it  is  like  the  lliower  of  fpring, 
when  it  foftens  the  branch  of  the  oak,  and  the  young  leaf 
rears  its  green  head.  Sing  on,  O  bards,  to-morrow  we 
lift  the  fail.     My  blue  courfe  is  through  the  ocean,  to 

Carric- 

*  Tlie  fong  of  Ullin,  with  which  the  poem  opens,  is  in  a  lyric  meafure.  It 
was  ulual  with  Fingal,  v.hen  he  returned  from  his  expeditions,  to  fend  his  baids 
finging  before  him.  This  fpecics  of  triumph  is  called,  by  Ofhan,  the  fong  of  vic- 
tory, 

t  Oflian  has  celebrated  ihefnfe  of  Crona,  in  a  particular  poem.  This  poem  is 
connefled  with  it,  but  it  was  impoffible  for  the  tranflator  to  procure  that  part  whick 
relates  to  Crona  with  any  degree  of  purity. 


38  CARRIC-THURA: 

Carrlc-thura's  walls ;  the  mofly  walls  of  Sarno,  where  Co- 
mala  dwelt.  There  the  noble  Cathulla,  fpreads  the  feaft 
of  fliells.  The  boars  of  his  woods  are  many  ;  the  found 
of  the  chace  fhall  arife  ! 

Cronnan  *,  fon  of  the  king  !  faid  Ullin,  Minona, 
graceful  at  the  harp!  raife  the  tale  of  Shilric,  to  pleafe  the 
king  of  Morven.  Let  Vinvela  come  in  her  beauty,  like 
the  fhowery  bow,  when  it  fliews  its  lovely  head  on  the  lake, 
and  the  fetting  fun  is  bright.  She  comes,  O  Fingal !  her 
voice  is  foft  but  fad. 

Vinvela. 

My  love  is  a  fon  of  the  hill.   H^purfues  the  flying  deer. 

His  grey  dogs  are  panting  around  him ;  his  bow-ftring 

founds  in  the  wind.    Doft  thou  reft  by  the  fount  of  the 

rock,  or  by  the  noife  of  the  mountain-ftream  ?  The  rufhes 

are  nodding  to  the  wind,  the  mift  flies  over  the  hill.   I  will 

approach  my  love  unfeen  ;  I  will  behold  him  from  the 

rock.    Lovely  I  faw  thee  firft  by  the  aged  oak  of  Brannofj 

thou  wert  returning  tall  from  the  chace;  the  faireft  among 

thy  friends.  o 

•^  Shilric. 

What  voice  is  that  I  hear?  that  voice  like  the  fummer- 
wind !  I  fit  not  by  the  nodding  ruflies ;  I  hear  not  the 
fount  of  the  rock.  Afar,  Vinvela  ||,  afar,  I  go  to  the  wars 
of  Fingal.  My  dogs  attend  me  no  more.  No  more  I  tread 
the  hill.  No  more  from  on  high  I  fee  thee,  fair-moving 
by  the  ft:ream  of  the  plain  ;  bright  as  the  bow  of  heaven  j 
as  the  moon  on  the  weftern  wave. 
Vinvela. 

Then  thou  art  gone,  O  Shilric!  I  am  alone  on  the  hill! 
The  deer  are  feen  on  the  brow  j  void  of  fear  they  graze 

along. 

*  One  {hould  think  that  the  parts  of  Shilric  and  Vinvela  were  reprefented  by 
Cronrisn  and  Minona,  whofe  very  names  denote  that  they  were  fingers,  who  per- 
formed in  pubHc.  Cronnan  fignifies  a  mournful  found,  Minona,.  or  yixn- brm,  foft 
air.  All  the  dramatic  poems  of  Offian  appear  to  have  been  prefented  before  Fin- 
gal upon  folenin  occafions. 

+  Bran,  or  Kranno,  {I'^m.^czz.vwuntain  fir  earn:  it  is  here  fome  river  known  by 
that  name,  in  the  days  of  Offian,  There  are  feveral  fmall  rivers  in  the  north  of 
Scotland  ftill  retaining  the  name  of  Bran  J  in  particular  one  which  falls  into  the 
Tav  at  Dunkeld. 

II  Bhin-bheul,  a  woman  with  a  melodious  voice,  Bh  in  the  Galic  language  has  the 
fame  found  with  the  v  in  Endifli. 


A    P  O  E  M.  39 

along.  No  more  they  dread  the  wind ;  no  more  the  ruft- 
ling  tree.  The  hunter  is  for  removed  ;  he  is  in  the  field 
of  graves.  Strangers !  fons  of  the  waves !  fpare  my  lovely 
Shil"c!  Sh>lr.c. 

If  fall  I  muft  in  the  field,  raife  high  my  grave,  Vinvela. 
Grey  flones  and  heaped-up  earth,  fhall  mark  me  to  future 
times.  When  the  hunter  Ihall  fit  by  the  mound,  and  pro- 
duce his  food  at  noon,  "  Some  warrior  refts  here,"  he  will 
fay;  and  m.y  fame  fliall  live  in  his  praife.  Remember  me, 
Vinvela,  when  low  on  earth  I  lie  ! 
Vinvela. 

Yes  !  I  will  remember  thee;  alas !  my  Shilric  will  fall! 
What  fliall  I  do,  my  love !  when  thou  art  for  ever  gone  ? 
Through  thefe  hills  I  will  go  at  noon :  I  will  go  through 
the  filent  heath.  There  I  will  fee  the  place  of  thy  reft,  re- 
turning from  the  chace.  Alas  !  my  Shirlic  v/ill  fall ;  but 
I  will  remember  Shilric. 

And  I  remember  the  chief,  faid  the  king  of  woody 
Morven  ;  he  confumed  the  battle  in  his  rage.  But  now 
my  eyes  behold  him  not.  I  met  him,  one  day,  on  the  hill ; 
his  cheek  was  pale ;  his  brow  was  dark.  The  figh  was 
frequent  in  his  breaft :  his  fteps  were  towards  the  defart. 
But  now  he  is  not  in  the  crowd  of  my  chiefs,  when  the 
founds  of  my  fhields  arife.  Dwells  he  in  the  narrow  houfe*, 
the  chief  of  high  Carmora  |  ? 

Cronnan  !  faid  Ullin  of  other  times,  raife  the  fong  of 
Shilric ;  when  he  returned  to  his  hills,  and  Vinvela  was 
no  more.  He  leaned  on  her  grey  moffy  ftone;  he  thought 
Vinvela  lived.  He  faw  her  fair  moving  ||  on  the  plain ;  but 
the  bright  form  lafted  not :  the  fun-beam  fled  from  the 
field,  and  flie  was  feen  no  more.  Hear  the  fong  of  Shilric, 
it  is  foft  but  fad ! 

I  SIT  by  the  moffy  fountain  ;  on  the  top  of  the  hill  of 
winds.  One  tree  is  ruftling  above  m.e.  13ark  waves  roll 
over  the  heath.    The  lake  is  troubled  below.     The  deer 

defcend 

*  The  grave. 

t  Carn-mor,  high  reeky  hill. 

0  The  diilinftion  -which  the  ancient  Scots  made  between  good  and  bad  fpirits, 
vas,  that  the  former  appeared  fometimcs,  in  the  day-time,  in  lonely  unfrequentcii 
places,  but  the  latter  never  but  by  night,  and  in  a  dilmal  gloomy  fcene. 


40 


CARRIC-THURA: 


defcend  from  the  hilL  No  hunter  at  a  diflance  is  feen. 
It  is  mid-day:  but  all  is  fdent.  Sad  are  my  thought*  alone. 
Didft  thou  but  appear,  O  my  love,  a  wanderer  on  the 
heath !  thy  hair  floating  on  the  wind  behind  thee ;  thy 
bofom  heaving  on  the  fight ;  thine  eyes  full  of  tears  for 
thy  friends,  whom  the  mid  of  the  hill  had  concealed!  Thee 
I  would  comfort,  my  love,  and  bring  thee  to  thy  father's 
houfe ! 

B'JT  is  it  flie  that  there  appears,  like  a  beam  of  light  on 
the  heath  ?  Bright  as  the  moon  in  autumn,  as  the  fun  in  a 
fummer-rtorm,  corned  thou,  O  maid,  over  rocks,  over 
mountains  to  me  ?  She  fpeaks  :  but  how  weak  her  voice ! 
like  the  breeze  in  the  reeds  of  the  lake. 

"  Return  EST  thou  fafe  from  the  war  ?  Where  are  thy 
friends,  my  love?  I  heard  of  thy  death  on  the  hill;  I  heard 
and  mourned  thee,  Shilric !"  Yes,  my  fair,  I  return;  but 
I  alone  of  my  race.  Thou  flialt  fee  them  no  more  :  their 
graves  I  raifed  on  the  plain.  But  why  art  thou  on  the 
defart  hill?    Why  on  the  heath  alone? 

"  Alone  I  am,  O  Shilric !  alone  in  the  winter-houfe. 
With  grief  for  thee  1  fell.    Shilric,  I  am  pale  in  the  tomb,'* 

She  fleets,  fhe  fails  away,  as  mifl:  before  the  wind!  and, 
wilt  thou  not  flay,  Vinvela  ?  Stay  and  behold  my  tears  ! 
Fair  thou  appeared,  Vinvela !  fair  thou  wad,  when  alive ! 

By  the  mody  fountain  I  \Vill  fit ;  on  the  top  of  the  hill 
of  winds.  When  mid-day  is  filent  around,  O  talk  with 
me,  Vinvela!  come  on  the  light-winged  gale!  on  the  breeze 
of  the  defart,  come!  Let  me  hear  thy  voice,  as  thou  paflTed, 
when  mid-day  is  filent  around ! 

Such  was  the  fong  of  Cronnan,  on  the  night  of  Selma*s 
joy.  B-lfmorning  rofe  in  the  ead;  the  blue  waters  rolled 
in  light.  Fingal  bade  his  fails  to  rife ;  the  winds  came 
rudling  from  their  hills.  Inidore  rofe  to  fight,  and  Carric- 
thura's  moify  towers !  But  the  fign  of  didrefs  was  on  their 
top :  the  warning  flame  edged  with  fmoke.  The  king  of 
Morven  druck  his  bread  :  he  aflumed,  at  once,  his  fpear. 
His  darkened  brow  bends  forward  to  the  coad :  he  looks 
back  to  the  lagging  winds.  His  hair  is  difordered  on  his 
back.    The  filence  of  the  king  is  terrible ! 

Night 


A    POEM.  41 

Night  came  down  on  the  fea ;  Rotha's  bay  received 
the  fhip.  A  rock  bends  along  the  coaft  with  all  its  echoing 
wood.  On  the  top  is  the  circle  *  of  Loda,  the  mcfly  ftone 
of  power  !  A  narrow  plain  fpreads  beneath,  covered  with 
grafs  and  aged  trees,  which  the  midnight  winds,  in  their 
wrath,  had  torn  from  the  fliaggy  rock.  The  blue  courfe  of 
a  ftream  is  there !  the  lonely  blaft  of  ocean  purfues  the 
thiftle's  beard.  The  flame  of  three  oaks  arofe  :  the  feafl 
is  fpread  around  :  but  the  foul  of  the  king  is  fad,  for  Car- 
ric-thura's  chief  diftrefl. 

The  wan,  cold  m.oon  rofe,  in  the  eaft.  Sleep  defcended 
on  the  youths  !  Their  blue  helmets  glitter  to  the  beam  ; 
the  fading  fire  decays.  But  fleep  did  not  reft  on  the  king: 
he  rofe  in  the  midft  of  his  arms,  and  flowly  afcended  the 
hill  to  behold  ihe  flame  of  Sarno's  tower. 

The  flame  was  dim  and  diftant ;  the  moon  hid  her  red 
face  in  the  eaft.  A  blaft  came  from  the  mountain  ;  on  its 
wings  was  the  fpirit  of  Loda.  He  came  to  his  place  in  his 
terrors! ,  and  fliook  his  dufky  fpear.  His  eyes  appear  like 
flames  in  his  dark  face ;  his  voice  is  like  diftant  thunder. 
Fingal  advanced  his  fpear  in  night,  and  raifed  his  voice 
on  high. 

Son  of  night,  retire:  call  thy  winds  and  fly!  Why  doft 
thou  come  to  my  prefence,  with  thy  fliadowy  arms  ?  Do  I 
fear  thy  gloomy  form,  fpirit  of  difmal  Loda  ?  AVeak  is  thy 
fliield  of  clouds  :  feeble  is  that  meteor,  thy  fv/ord.  The 
blaft  rolls  them  together ;  and  thou  thyfelf  art  loft.  Fly 
from  my  prefence,  fon  of  night !  call  thy  winds  and  fly  ! 

Dost  thou  force  me  from,  my  place,  replied  the  hollow 
voice  ?  The  people  bend  before  me.  I  turn  the  battle  in 
the  field  of  the  brave.  I  look  on  the  nations  and  they  va- 
nifh:  my  noftrils  pour  the  blaft  of  death.  I  come  abroad 
on  the  winds  :  the  tempefts  are  before  my  face.  But  my 
dwelling  is  calm,  above  the  clouds ;  the  fields  of  my  reft 
are  pleafant. 

Dwell  in  thy  pleafant  fields,  faid  the  king:  Let  Com- 

hal's  fon  be  forgot.    Do  my  fteps  afcend,  from  my  hills, 

F  into 

*  The  circle  of  Loda  is  fuppcfcd  to  be  a  place  of  worfliip  among  the  Scandinavi- 
ans, as  the  fpirit  of  Loda  is  thought  to  be  the  fame  with  their  god  Odin. 

t  He  is  defcribed,  in  a  fimile,  in  the  po;m  concerning  the  death  of  Cuchullin. 


42  CARRIC-THURA: 

Into  ihy  peaceful  plains  ?  Do  I  meet  thee,  with  a  fpear, 
on  thy  cloud,  fpiiit  of  difmal  Loda ?  Why  then  dofl  thou 
frown  on  me  ?  why  fhake  thine  airy  fpear  ?  Thou  frown- 
efl  in  vain  :  I  never  fled  from  the  mighty  in  war.  And 
ihaM  the  fons  of  the  wind  frighten  the  king  of  Morven  ? 
No  :  he  knows  the  weaknefs  of  their  arms  ! 

Fly  to  thy  land,  replied  the  form:  receive  the  wind  and 
fly  !  The  blafts  are  in  the  hollow  of  my  hand:  the  courfe 
of  the  ftorm  is  mine.  The  king  of  Sora  Is  my  fon,  he 
bends  at  the  ilone  of  my  power.  His  battle  is  around 
Carric-thura ;  and  he  will  prevail !  Fly  to  thy  land,  fon 
of  Comhal,  or  feel  my  flaming  wrath  ! 

He  lifted  high  his  fhadowy  fpear!  He  bent  forward  his 
dreadful  height.  Fingal,  advancing,  drew  his  fword;  the 
blade  of  dark-brown  Luno  *.  The  gleaming  path  of  the 
fteel  winds  thro'  the  gloomy  ghoft.  The  form  fell  fhape- 
lefs  Into  air,  like  a  column  of  fmoke,  which  the  HafFof  the 
boy  difturbs,  as  it  rifes  from  the  half-extinguifhed  furnace. 

The  fpirit  of  Loda  fnrieked,  as,  rolled  Into  himfelf,  he 
rofe  on  the  wind.  Inlflore  fhook  at  the  found.  The  waves 
heard  it  on  the  deep.  They  flopped,  in  their  courfe,  with 
fear:  the  friends  of  Fingal  flarted,  at  once;  and  took  their 
heavy  fpears.  They  miffed  the  king  :  they  rofe  Iii  rage  ; 
all  their  arms  refound  ! 

The  moon  came  forth  In  the  eafl.  Fingal  returned  In 
the  gleam  of  his  arms.  The  joy  of  his  youth  was  great  j 
their  fouls  fettled,  as  a  fea  from  a  florm.  Ullin  ralfed  the 
ibngof  gladnefs.  The  hills  of  Iniftore  rejoiced.  The  flame 
of  the  oak  arofe  ;  and  the  tales  of  heroes  are  told. 

But  Frothal,  Sora's  wrathful  king,  fits  In  fadnefs  be- 
neath a  tree.  The  hofl  fpreads  around  Carric-thura.  He 
'looks  tov/ards  the  wails  with  rage.  He  longs  for  the  blood 
of  CathuJla,  who,  once,  overcame  him  in  war.  When 
Annir  reigned  f  in  Sora,  the  father  of  fea-borne  Frothal, 
n  ilorm  arofe  on  the  fea,  and  carried  Frothal  to  Iniftore. 
Three  days  he  feafled  in  Sarno's  halls,  and  faw  the  flow- 
rolling  eyes  of  Comala.     He  loved  her,  in  the  flame  of 

youth, 

*  The  famous  fword  of  Finoa!,  jr.ade  by  Lun,  or  Luno,  a  fmith  or  Lochlin, 
+  Annir  was  alfo  the  father  of  Erragon,  who  was  king  after  tlie  death  of  his 

brother  Frothal.     The  death  gf  Erragon  in  the  fubje6t  of  cke  battle  cfLora^  a  poem 

in  this  collettion. 


A    P  O  E  M.  43 

youth,  and  niflied  to  feize  the  white-armed  maid.  Gathulla 
met  the  chief.  The  gloomy  battle  rofe.  Frothal  was  bound 
in  the  hall  ;  three  days  he  pined  alone.  On  the  fourth, 
Sarno  fent  him  to  his  fhip,  and  he  returned  to  his  land. 
But  wrath  darkened  in  his  foul  againil  the  noble  Cathull?.. 
When  Annir's  ftone  *  of  fame  arofe,  Frothal  came  in  his 
ftrength.  The  battle  burned  round  Carric-thura,  and 
Sarno's  moiTy  walls. 

Morning  rofe  on  Iniflore.  Frothal  ftruck  his  darlc- 
brown  fhield.  His  chiefs  flarted  at  the  found  ;  they  flood, 
but  their  eyes  were  turned  to  the  fea.  They  faw  Fingal 
coming  in  his  ftrength  ;  and  firft  the  noble  Thubar  fpoke. 
"  Who  comes  like  the  ftag  of  the  defart,  with  all  his  herd 
behind  him  ?  Frothal,  it  is  a  foe !  I  fee  his  forward  fpear. 
Perhaps  it  is  the  king  of  MorveVi,  Fingal  the  firft  of  men. 
His  deeds  are  well  known  in  Lochlin ;  the  blood  of  his  foes 
is  in  Starno's  halls.  Shall  I  afk  the  peace  |  of  kings  ?  His 
fword  is  the  bolt  of  heaven !" 

Son  of  the  feeble  hand,  faid  Frothal,  fliall  my  days  be- 
gin in  a  cloud  ?  Skall  I  yield  before  I  have  conquered, 
chief  of  ftreamy  Tora  ?  The  people  would  fay  in  Sora, 
Frothal  flew  forth  like  a  meteor  ;  but  a  darknefs  has  met 
him,  and  his  fame  is  no  more.  No,  Thubar  ;  I  will  never 
yield  ;  my  fame  fliall  furround  me  like  light.  No  :  I  v/ill 
never  yield,  chief  of  ftreamy  Tora  ! 

He  went  forth  with  the  ftream  of  his  people,  but  they 
met  a  rock :  Fingal  ftood  unmoved  :  broken,  they  rolled 
back  from  his  fide.  Nor  did  they  fafely  fly  ;  the  fpear  of 
the  king  purfued  their  fteps.  The  field  is  covered  with 
heroes.    A  rifmg  hill  preferved  the  foe. 

Frothal  faw  their  flight.  The  rage  of  his  bofom  rofe. 
He  bent  his  eyes  to  the  ground,  and  called  the  noble  Thu- 
bar. "  Thubar  !  my  people  are  fled.  My  flame  has  ceafed 
to  arife.  I  will  fight  the  king ;  I  feel  my  burning  foul  I 
Send  a  bard  to  demand  the,  combat.  Speak  not  againft 
Frothal's  words  ! — But,  Thubar!  I  love  a  maid;  flie  dwells 
by  Thano's  ftream,  the  white-bofomed  daughter  of  Her- 


*  That  is,  after  the  death  of  Annir.     To  erefl  the  flone  of  one's  fame,  was, 
other  words,  to  fay  that  the  perfon  was  dead, 
+  HQnourable  terms  of  peace. 


44  C  ARRIC-THURA: 

man,  Utha  with  foft-roUing  eyes.  She  feared  the  low-laid 
Comala  ;  her  fecret  fighs  rofe,  when  I  fpread  the  fail.  Tell 
to  Utha  of  harps,  that  my  foul  delighted  in  her  !" 

Such  were  his  words,  refolved  to  fight.  The  foft  figh 
of  Utha  was  near  !  She  had  followed  her  hero,  in  the  ar- 
mour of  a  man.  She  roiled  her  eye  on  the  youth,  in  fe- 
cret, from  beneath  her  fteel.  She  faw  the  bard  as  he  went ; 
the  fpear  fell  thrice  from  her  hand  !  Her  loofe  hair  flew  on 
the  wind.  Her  white  bread  rofe,  with  fighs.  She  raifed 
her  eyes  to  the  king.    She  would  fpeak,but  thrice  flie  failed. 

FiNGAL  heard  the  words  of  the  bard  ;  he  came  in  the 
ftrength  of  his  fleel.  They  mixed  their  dreadful  fpears  : 
they  raifed  the  gleam  of  their  arms.  But  the  fword  of  Fin- 
gal  defcended  and  cut  Frothal's  fliield  in  twain.  His  fair 
fide  is  expofed  ;  half-bent,  he  forefees  his  death.  Darknefs 
gathered  on  Utha's  foul.  The  tear  rolled  down  her  cheek. 
She  ruflied  to  cover  the  chief  with  her  fliield  ;  but  a  fallen 
oak  met  her  Iteps.  She  fell  on  her  arm  of  fnow  ;  her 
fliield,  her  helmet  flew  wide.  Her  white  bofom  heaved  to 
the  fight :  her  dark-brown  hair  is  fpread  on  earth. 

FiNGAL  pitied  the  white-armed  maid  !  he  fl:ayed  the 
uplifted  fword.  The  tear  was  in  the  eye  of  the  king,  as, 
bending  forward,  he  fpoke — "  King  of  flireamy  Sora !  fear 
not  the  fword  of  Fingal.  It  was  never  fliained  with  the 
blood  of  the  vanquiflied  ;  it  never  pierced  a  fallen  foe. 
Let  thy  people  rejoice  by  thy  native  fl:reams.  Let  the 
maids  of  thy  love  be  glad.  Why  fliouldefl:  thou  fall  in  thy 
youth,  king  of  ft:reamy  Sora  ?"  Frothal  heard  the  words 
of  Fingal,  and  faw  the  rifing  maid  ;  they  *  fl:ood  in  filence, 
in  their  beauty  :  like  two  young  trees  of  the  plain,  when 
the  uiower  of  fpring  is  on  their  leaves,  and  the  loud  winds 
ere  laid. 

jJaughter  of  Herman,  faid  Frothal,  didfl:  thou  come 
from  Tora's  llreams — didfl:  thou  come,  in  thy  beauty,  to 
behold  thy  warrior  low  ?  But  he  was  low  before  the  migh- 
ty,  maid  of  the  flow-rolling  eye  !  The  feeble  did  not  over- 
come the  fon  of  car-borne  Annir  ?  Terrible  art  thou,  O 
king  of  Morven  !  in  battles  of  the  fpear  :  but,  in  peace, 
thou  art  like  the  fun,  when  he  looks  thro'  a  filent  fliower  ; 

the 

*  F/othal  and  Utha, 


A    P  O  E  M.  4^ 

the  flowers  lift  their  fair  heads  before  him  ;  the  gales  fhake 
their  ruflling  wings.  O  that  thou  wert  in  Sora  !  that  my 
feafl:  were  fpread  !  The  future  kings  of  Sora  would  fee  thy 
arms  and  rejoice — They  would  rejoice  at  the  fame  of  their 
fathers^  who  beheld  the  mighty  Fingal  ! 

"  Son  of  Annir,"  replied  the  king,  "  the  fame  of  Sora's 
race  fhall  be  heard  !  When  chiefs  are  ilrong  in  war,  then 
does  the  fong  arife.  But  if  their  fwords  are  ftretched  over 
the  feeble :  if  the  blood  of  the  weak  has  ftained  their  arms ; 
the  bard  Ihall  forget  them  in  the  fong,  and  their  tombs 
ihall  not  be  known.  The  flranger  fhall  come  and  build 
there,  and  remove  the  heaped-up  earth.  An  half-worn 
fword  fliall  rife  before  him  ;  bending  above  it,  he  will  fay, 
"  Thefe  are  the  arms  of  the  chiefs  of  old,  but  their  names 
are  not  in  fong."  Come  thou,  O  Frothal,  to  the  feafl  of 
Iniftore  ;  let  the  maid  of  thy  love  be  there ;  let  our  faces 
brighten  with  joy  1" 

FiNGAL  took  his  fpear,  moving  in  the  fleps  of  his  might. 

The  gates  of  Carric-thura  are  opened  wide.     The  feaft  of 

fhells  is  fpread.    The  foft  found  of  mufic  arofe.     Gladnefs 

brightened  in  the  hall.    The  voice  of  UUin  was  heard  ; 

the  harp  of  Selma  was  ftrung.    Utha  rejoiced  in  his  pre- 

fence,  and  demanded  the  fong  of  grief  ;  the  big  tear  hung 

in  her  eye,  when  the  foft  *  Crimora  fpoke.      Crimora 

the  daughter  of  Rinval,  who  dwelt  at  Lotha's  |  roaring 

ftream !    The  tale  was  long,  but  lovely  ;  and  pleafed  the 

blufhins;  Utha.  ^ 

°  Crimora§. 

Who  Cometh  from  the  hill,  like  a  cloud  tinged  with 
the  beam  of  the  weft  ?  Whofe  voice  is  that,  loud  as  the 
wind,  but  pleafant  as  the  harp  of  Carril  [|  ?  It  is  my  love 
in  the  light  of  fteel ;  but  fad  is  his  darkened  brow !  Live 

the 

*  There  is  a  propriety  in  introducing  this  epifode,  as  the  fituations  of  Crimora 
and  Utha  were  fo  fmiilar. 

+  Lotha  was  the  ancient  name  of  one  of  the  great  rivers  in  the  north  of  Scotland, 
The  only  one  of  them  that  flill  retains  a  name  of  a  like  found  is  Lochy,  in  Inver- 
nefsfliue  ;  but  whether  it  is  the  river  mentioned  here,  the  tranflator  will  not  pre- 
tend  to  fay. 

^  Cri-mora,  a  woman  of  a  great  foul. 

II  Perhaps  the  Carril  mentioned  here  is  the  fame  with  Cariil  the  fon  of  Kinfe- 
na,  Cuchullin's  bard.  The  name  iifeli  is  proper  to  any  bard,  as  it  fignifics  a 
Jp'ightly  and  harmonious  found. 


46  CARRIC-THURA: 

the  mighty  race  of  Fingal  ?  or  what  darkens  In  Connars 
foul  *  ?  ^ 

CONNAL. 

They  live.  They  return  from  the  chace,  like  a  ftream 
of  light.  The  fun  is  on  their  fliields.  Like  a  ridge  of  fire 
they  defcend  the  hill.  Loud  is  the  voice  of  the  youth  ! 
The  war,  my  love,  is  near  !  To-morrow  the  dreadful  Dar- 
go  comes  to  try  the  force  of  our  race.  The  race  of  Fingal 
he  defies  ;  the  race  of  battle  and  wounds  ! 
Crimora. 

CoNNAL,  I  faw  his  fails  like  grey  mill  on  the  dark- 
brown  wave.  They  llowly  came  to  land.  Connal,  many 
are  the  warriors  of  Dargo  ! 

CoNNAL. 

Bring  me  thy  father's  fhield  ;  the  bolTy,  iron  flileld  of 
Rinval  ;  that  Ihield  like  the  full-orbed  moon,  when  flie 
moves  darkened  through  heaven. 
Crimora. 

That  fhield  I  bring,  O  Connal  ;  but  it  did  not  defend 

my  father.    By  the  fpear  of  Gormar  he  fell.    Thou  may'fl 

fall,  O  Connal  !  ^ 

'  Connal. 

Fall  I  may!  But  raife  my  tomb, Crimora !  Grey  flones, 
a  mound  of  earth,  Ihall  fend  my  name  to  other  times. — 
Bend  thy  red  eye  over  my  grave,  beat  thy  mournful  heav- 
ing bread.  Though  fair  thou  art,  my  love,  as  the  light  ; 
more  pleafant  than  the  gale  of  the  hill;  yet  I  will  not  here 
remain.  Raife  my  tomb,  Crimora  ! 
Crimora. 

Then  give  me  thofe  arms  that  gleam ;  that  fword,  and 
that  fpear  of  fheel.  I  iliall  meet  Dargo  with  Connal,  and 
aid  him  in  the  fight.  Farewel,  ye  rocks  of  Ardven  !  ye 
deer!  and  ye  ftreams  of  the  hill  !  We  fliall  return  no 
more.     Our  tombs  are  diftant  far  ! 

"  And  did  they  return  no  more,"  faid  Utha's  burfting 
figh.     "  Fell  the  mighty  in  battle,  and  did  Crimora  live  ? 

Her 

*  Connal  the  fan  of  Diaran,  was  one  of  the  moft  famous  heroes  of  Fingal  ;  he 
was  flain  in  a  battle  againft  Dargo  a  Briton  ;  but  whether  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy, 
or  that  of  his  miftrefs,  tradition  does  not  determine. 


A     P  O  E  M. 


47 


Her  fteps  were  lonely  ;  her  foul  was  fad  for  Connal. 
Was  he  not  young  and  lovely  ;  like  the  beam  of  the  fet- 
ting  fun  ?"  Ullin  faw  the  virgin's  tear  ;  he  took  the  foftly- 
trembling  harp  :  the  fong  was  lovely,  but  fad,  and  filence 
was  in  Carric-thura. 

Autumn  is  dark  on  the  mountains;  grey  mifl  re'fts  on 
the  hills.  The  whirlwind  is  heard  on  the  heath.  Dark 
rolls  the  river  through  the  narrow  plain.  A  tree  ftands 
alone  on  the  hill,  and  marks  the  flumbering  Connal.  The 
leaves  whirl  round  with  the  wind,  and  ftrew  the  grave  of 
the  dead.  At  times  are  feen  here  the  ghofts  of  the  depart- 
ed, when  the  mufmg  hunter  alone  ftalks  flowly  over  the 
heath. 

Who  can  reach  the  fource  of  thy  race,  O  Connal?  who 
recount  thy  fathers?  Thy  family  grew  like  an  oak  on  the 
mountain,  which  meeteth  the  wind  with  its  lofty  head. 
But  now  it  is  torn  from  the  earth.  Who  fhall  fupply  the 
place  of  Connal  ?  Here  was  the  din  of  arms ;  here  the 
groans  of  the  dying.  Bloody  are  the  wars  of  Fingal !  O 
Connal !  it  was  here  thou  didil  fall.  Thine  arm  was  like 
a  (form ;  thy  fword  a  beam  of  the  Iky ;  thy  height  a  rock 
on  the  plain  ;  thine  eyes,  a  furnace  of  fire.  Louder  than 
a  llorm  was  thy  voice,  in  the  battles  of  thy  fteel.  War- 
riors fell  by  thy  fword,  as  the  thiftle  by  the  ftaff  of  a  boy. 
Dargo  the  mighty  came  on,  darkening  in  his  rage.  His 
brows  were  gathered  into  wrath.  His  eyes  like  two  caves 
in  a  rock.  Bright  rofe  their  fwords  on  each  fide ;  loud 
was  the  clang  of  their  fteel. 

The  daughter  of  Rinval  was  near  ;  Crimora  bright  in. 
the  armour  of  man ;  her  yellow  hair  is  loofe  behind,  her 
bow  is  in  her  hand.  She  followed  the  youth  to  the  vv-ar, 
Connal  her  much-beloved.  She  drew  the  ftring  on  Dar- 
go ;  but,  erring,-  (he  pierced  her  Connal.  He  falls,  like 
an  oak  on  the  plain  ;  like  a  rock  from  the  fnaggy  hill. 
What  fhall  fhe  do,  haplefs  maid  !  He  bleeds,  her  Connal 
dies  !  All  the  night  long  Ihe  cries,  and  all  the  day,  "  O 
Connal,  my  love,  and  my  friend  1"  With  grief  the  fad 
mourner  dies  !  Earth  here  inclofes  the  lovelieil  pair  on  the 
hill.  The  grafs  grows  between  the  ftones  of  the  tomb  ; 
I  often  fit  in  the  mournful  fhade.    The  wind  fighs  through 


48  CARRIC-THURA. 

the  grafs ;  their  memory  rufhes  on  my  mind.  Undiflurb- 
ed  you  now  fleep  together  ;  in  the  tomb  of  the  mountain 
you  reft  alone ! 

"  And  foft  be  their  reft,"  faid  Utha,  "  haplefs  children 
of  ftreamy  Lotha  !  I  will  remember  them  with  tears,  and 
my  fecret  fong  ftiall  rife  ;  when  the  wind  is  in  the  groves 
of  Tora,  when  the  ftream  is  roaring  near.  Then  ftiall 
they  come  on  my  foul,  with  all  their  lovely  grief !" 

Three  days  feafted  the  kings  :  on  the  fourth  their 
white  fails  arofe.  The  winds  of  the  north  drove  Fingal 
to  Morven's  woody  land.  But  the  fpirit  of  Loda  fat,  in 
his  cloud,  behind  the  fliips  of  Frothal.  He  hung  forward 
with  all  his  blafts,  and  fpread  the  white-bofomed  fails. 
The  wounds  of  his  form  were  not  forgot  ;  he  ftill  fear- 
ed *  the  hand  of  the  king  ! 

*  The  ftory  of  Fingal  and  the  fpirit  of  Loda,  fuppofed  to  be  the  famous  Odin, 
is  the  mod  extravagant  fiftion  in  all  Offian's  poems.     It  is  not,  however,  without 

Erecedents  in  the  beft  poets  ;  and  it  muft  be  faid  for  OlTian,  that  he  fays  nothing 
ut  what  perfeftly  agreed  with  the  notions  of  the  times,  concerning  ghofls.  They 
thought  the  fouls  of  the  dead  were  material,  and  confequently  fufceptible  of  pain. 
Whether  a  proof  could  be  drawn  from  this  palTage,  that  Offian  had  no  notion  of 
a  divinity,  I  (hall  leave  to  others  to  determine :  it  appears,  however,  that  he  was 
of  opinion,  that  fuperior  beings  ought  to  take  no  notice  of  what  paffed  among  men. 


CARTHON: 


C     A     R     T     H     O     N 


POEM- 


ARGUMENT. 

THIS  poem  is  compleat,and  the  fubjeftof  it,  as  of  mod  of  Offian's  cotnpoGtions, 
tragical.  In  the  time  of  Comhal  the  fon  of  Trathal,  aad  father  of  the  celebrated 
Fingal,  Clefsammor  the  fon  of  Thaddu  and  brother  of  Morna,  Ftngal's  mother, 
ivas  dfiven  by  a  ftorm  into  the  river  Clyde,  on  the  banks  of  which  flood  Balclu- 
tha,  a  town  belonging  to  the  Britons  between  the  walls.  He  was  hofpitably  re- 
ceived by  Reuthamir,  the  principal  man  in  the  place,  who  gave  him  Moina  his 
only  daughter  in  marriage.  Rcuda,  the  fon  of  Cormo,  a  Briton  who  was  in 
love  with  Moina,  came  to  Reuthamir's  houfe,  and  behaved  haughtily  towards 
Clefsammor.  A  quarrel  enfued,  in  which  Reuda  was  killed ;  the  Britons,  who 
attended  him,  preffed  fo  hard  on  Clefsammor,  that  he  was  obliged  to  throw  him- 
felf  into  the  Clyde,  and  fwim  to  his  fiiip.  He  hoifted  fail,  and  the  wind  being 
favourable,  bore  him  out  to  fea.  He  often  endeavoured  to  return,  and  carry  off 
his  beloved  Moina  by  night;  but  the  wind  continuing  contrary,  he  was  forced 
to  defift. 

Moina,  who  had  been  left  with  child  by  her  hufband,  brought  forth  a  fon, 
and  died  foon  after. — Reuthamirnamed  the  child  Carthon,  i.  e.  the  murmur  of 
waves,  from  the  ftorm  which  carried  off  Clefsammor  his  father,  who  was  fuppo- 
fed  to  have  been  call;  away.  When  Carthon  was  three  years  old,  Comhal  the 
father  of  Fingal,  in  one  of  his  expeditions  againfi:  the  Britons,  took  and  burnt 
Balclutha.  Reuthamir  was  killed  in  the  attack :  and  Carthon  was  carried  fafe 
away  by  his  nurfe,  who  fled  farther  into  the  country  of  the  Britons.  Carthon, 
coming  to  man's  eftate,  was  refolved  to  revenge  the  fall  of  Balclutha  on  Com- 
hal's  pofterity.  He  fet  fail,  from  the  Clyde,  and,  falling  on  the  coaft  of  Mor- 
ven,  defeated  two  of  Fingal's  heroes,  who  came  to  oppofe  his  progrefs.  He 
was,  at  lad,  unwitringly  killed  by  his  father  Clefsammor,  in  a  fingle  combat. 
This  ftoiy  is  the  foundation  of  the  prefent  poem,  which  opens  on  the  night  pre- 
ceding the  death  of  Carthon,  fo  that  what  pafled  before  is  introduced  by  way  of 
cpifode.    The  poem  is  addrefled  to  Malvina  the  daughtsr  of  Tofcar. 


C     A     R     T     H     O     N: 


P  O  E  M. 

A  TALE  of  the  times  of  old !  the  deeds  of  days  of 
other  years ! 

The  murmur  of  thy  ftreams,  O  Lora,  brings  back  the 
memory  of  the  palt.  The  found  of  thy  woods,  GarmaU 
lar,  is  lovely  in  my  ear.  Doft  thou  not  behold,  Malvina, 
a  rock  with  its  head  of  heath  ?  Three  aged  pines  bend 
fi-om  its  face ;  green  is  the  narrow  plain  at  its  feet ;  there 
the  flower  of  the  mountain  grows,  and  fliakes  its  white 
head  in  the  breeze.  The  thidle  is  there  alone,  Ihedding  its 
aged  beard.  Two  flones,  haif-funk  in  the  ground,  Ihew 
their  heads  of  mofs.  The  deer  of  the  mountain  avoids 
the  place,  for  he  beholds  a  dim  ghoft  ftanding  there  *. 
The  mighty  lie,  O  Malvina,  in  the  narrow  plain  of  the  rock. 

A  TALE  of  the  times  of  old!  the  deeds  of  days  of 
other  years. 

Who  comes  from  the  land  of  ftrangers,  with  his  thou- 
fands  around  him  ?  The  fun-beam  pours  its  bright  ftream 
before  him ;  his  hair  meets  the  wind  on  his  hills ;  his 
face  is  fettled  from  war.  Re  is  calm  as  the  evening  beam 
that  looks,  from  the  cloud  of  the  weft,  on  Cona's  filent 
vale.  Who  is  it  but  Comhars  fon  f ,  the  king  of  mighty 
deeds !  He  beholds  his  hills  with  joy,  he  bids  a  thouland 
voices  rife.  "  Ye  have  fled  over  your  fields,  ye  fons  of  the 
diftant  land !  The  king  of  the  world  fits  in  his  hall,  and 
hears  of  his  people's  flight.  He  lifts  his  red  eye  of  pride; 
he  takes  his  father's  fword.  Ye  have  fled  over  your  fields, 
fons  of  the  difl;ant  land  1" 

Such  were  the  words  of  the  bards,  when  they  came  to 

Selma's 

*  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  times,  that  deer  faw  the  ghofts  of  the  dead.  To 
this  day,  when  beafls  fuddenly  flart  without  any  apparent^caufe,  the  vulgar  think 
that  they  fee  the  fpirits  ot  the  deceafed. 

+  Fingal  returns  here,  from  an  expedition  againft  the  Romans,  which  was  cele- 
brated by  Offian  in  a  poem  called  tkepife  ofCrotia. 


52  CARTHON: 

Selma's  halls.  A  thoufand  lights  *  from  the  ftranger's 
land  rofe,  in  the  midft  of  the  people.  The  feafl  is  fpread 
around  ;  the  night  paffed  away  in  joy.  Where  is  the  no- 
ble Clefsammor  f ,  faid  the  fair-haired  Fingal  ?  Where  is 
the  brother  of  Morna,  in  the  hour  of  my  joy  ?  Sullen  and 
dark  he  paffes  his  days  in  the  vale  of  echoing  Lora  :  but, 
behold,  he  comes  from  the  hill,  like  a  fteed  in  his  flrength, 
who  finds  his  companions  in  the  breeze ;  and  toffes  his 
bright  mane  in  the  wind.  Blefl  be  the  foul  of  Clefsammor; 
why  fo  long  from  Selma  ? 

"  Returns  the  chief,  faid  Clefsammor,  in  the  midft  of 
his  fame  ?  Such  was  the  renown  of  Comhal  in  the  battles 
of  his  youth.  Often  did  we  pafs  over  Carun  to  the  land 
of  the  Ilrangers :  our  fwords  returned,  not  unftained  with 
blood  ;  nor  did  the  kings  of  the  world  rejoice.  Why  do 
I  remember  the  times  of  our  war?  My  hair  is  mixed  with 
grey.  My  hand  forgets  to  bend  the  bow  :  I  lift  a  lighter 
fpear.  O  that  my  joy  would  return,  as  when  I  firft  beheld 
the  maid ;  the  white-bofomed  daughter  of  flrangers, 
Moina  ||,  with  the  dark-blue  eyes  !" 

Tell,  faid  the  mighty  Fingal,  the  tale  of  thy  youthful 
days.  Sorrow,  like  a  cloud  on  the  fun,  fhades  the  foul  of 
Clefl'ammor.  Mournful  are  thy  thoughts,  alone,  on  the 
banks  of  the  roaring  Lora.  Let  us  hear  the  forrow  of  thy 
youth,  and  the  darknefs  of  thy  days  ! 

"  It  was  in  the  days  of  peace,"  replied  the  great  Clefs- 
ammor, "  I  came,  in  my  bounding  fliip,  to  Balclutha's  § 
walls  of  towers.  The  winds  had  roared  behind  my  fails, 
and  Clutha's^  ftreams  received  my  dark-bofomed  fhip. 
Three  days  I  remained  in  Reuthamir's  halls,  and  faw  his 
daughter,  that  beam  of  light.  The  joy  of  the  ihell  went 
round,  and  the  aged  hero  gave  the  fair.    Her  breafts  were 

like 

*  Probably  wax-lights ;  which  are  often  mentioned  as  carried,  among  other 
booty,  from  the  Roman  province. 

+  CleOamh-mor,  mighty  deeds. 

II  Mo\m, /oft  in  temper  a?id pcrfen.  We  find  the  Britifh  names  in  this  poem 
derived  from  the  Galic,  which  is  a  proof  that  the  ancient  language  of  the  whole 
ifland  was  one  and  the  fame. 

^  Balclutha,  i.  e.  the  town  of  Clyde,  probably  the  Aldutk  of  Bede. 

H  Ciutha,  or  Cluath,  the  Galic  name  of  the  river  Clyde,  the  fignification  of  the 
\vord  is  bending,  in  allufion  to  the  winding  courle  of  that  liver.  From  Ciutha  is 
derived  its  Latin  name,  Glotta. 


A    P  O  E  M.  53 

like  foam  en  the  wave,  and  her  eyes  like  ftars  of  light : 
her  hair  was  dark  as  the  raven's  wing:  her  foul  was  gene- 
rous and  mild.  My  love  for  Moina  was  great :  my  heart 
poured  forth  in  joy. 

"  The  fon  of  a  ftranger  came ;  a  chief  who  loved  the 
white-bofomed  Moina.  His  words  were  mighty  in  the 
hall;  he  often  half-unfheathed  his  fword.  Where,  faid  he, 
is  the  mighty  Comhal,  the  reftlefs  wanderer  *  of  the  heath? 
Comes  he,  with  his  hoft,  to  Balclutha,  fmce  Clefsammor 
is  fo  bold?  My  foul,  I  replied,  O  warrior!  burnc  in  a 
light  of  its  own.  I  (land  without  fear  in  the  midft  ©f 
thoufands,  though  the  valiant  are  difcant  far.  Stranger ! 
thy  words  are  mighty,  for  Clefsammor  is  alone.  But  my 
fword  trembles  by  my  fide,  and  longs  to  glitter  in  riy 
hand.  Speak  no  more  of  Comhal,  fon  of  the  winding 
Clutha! 

"  The  llrength  of  his  pride  arofe.  We  fought;  he  fell 
beneath  my  fword.  The  banks  of  Clutha  heard  his  fall ; 
a  thoufand  fpears  glittered  around.  I  fought :  the  llran- 
gers  prevailed  :  I  plunged  into  the  ftream  of  Clutha.  My 
white  fails  rofe  over  the  waves,  and  I  bounded  on  the  dark- 
blue  fea.  Moina  came  to  the  fhore,  and  rolled  the  red  eye 
of  her  tears  :  her  loofe  hair  flew  on  the  wind  ;  and  I  heard 
her  mournful,  diflant  cries.  Often  did  I  turn  my  fhip!  but 
the  winds  of  the  eaft  prevailed.  Nor  Clutha  ever  fmce 
have  I  feen,  nor  Moina  of  the  dark-brown  hair.  She  fell 
in  Balclutha,  for  I  have  feen  her  ghoft.  I  knew  her  as  Ihe 
came  through  the  dulky  night,  along  the  murmur  of  Lora. 
She  was  like  the  new  moon,  feen  through  the  gathered 
mift ;  when  the  Iky  pours  down  its  flaky  fnow,  and  the 
world  is  filent  and  dark." 

Rais£|,  ye  bards,  faid  the  mighty  Fingal,  the  pralfe  of 

unhappy 

*  The  word  in  the  original  here  rendered  rejilefs  wanderer  is  Scuta,  which  is 
the  true  origin  of  the  ScotioS.\\\z  Romans:  an  opprobrious  name  impofed  by  the 
Britons,  on  the  Caledonians,  on  account  of  the  continual  incurfions  into  their 
country. 

T  The  title  of  this  poem,  in  the  original,  is  Duan  na  nlaoi.  i.  e.  The  Poem  of 
the  Hymns:  probably  on  account  of  its  many  digrefTions  from  the  fubjeft,  all  which 
are  in  a  lyric  meafure,  as  this  fong  of  Fingal.  Fingal  is  celebrated  by  the  Irifh 
hiftorians  for  his  wifdom  in  making  laws,  his  poetical  genius,  and  his  foreknow- 
ledge of  events.  O'FIaherty  goes  fo  far  as  to  fay,  that  Fingal's  laws  were  extant  in 
bii  own  time. 


54  C   A  R   T   H   O  N: 

unhappy  Moina.  Call  her  ghoft,  with  your  fongs,  to  our 
hills ;  that  ihe  may  reft  with  the  fair  of  Morven,  the  fun- 
beams  of  other  days,  the  delight  of  heroes  of  old.  I  have 
feen  the  walls  of  Balclutha,  but  they  were  defolate.  The 
fire  had  refounded  in  the  halls  :  and  the  voice  of  the  peo- 
ple is  heard  no  more.  The  ftream  of  Clutha  was  removed 
from  its  place,  by  the  fall  of  the  walls.  The  thiftle  fhook, 
there,  its  lonely  head :  the  mofs  whiftled  to  the  wind  : 
the  fox  looked  out,  from  the  windows  ;  the  rank  grafs  of 
the  wall  waved  round  its  head.  Defolate  is  the  dwelling 
of  Moina  ;  filence  is  in  the  houfe  of  her  fathers.  Raife 
the  fong  of  mourning,  O  bards,  over  the  land  of  ftrangers. 
They  have  but  fallen  before  us ;  for,  one  day,  we  muft  fall. 
Why  doft  thou  build  the  hall,  fon  of  the  winged  days  ? 
Thou  lookeft  from  thy  towers  to-day ;  yet  a  few  years, 
and  the  blaft  of  the  defart  comes  ;  it  howls  in  thy  empty 
court,  and  whiftles  round  thy  half-worn  fhield.  And  let  the 
blaft  of  the  defart  come  !  we  fhall  be  renowned  in  our  day! 
The  mark  of  my  arm  fhall  be  in  battle  ;  my  name  in  the 
fong  of  bards.  Raife  the  fong  ;  fend  round  the  fhell :  let 
joy  be  heard  in  my  hall.  When  thou,  fun  of  heaven, 
fhalt  fail  ! — if  thou  fhalt  fail,  thou  mighty  light !  if  thy 
brightnels  is  for  a  feafon,  Hke  Fingal; — our  fame  fhall  fur- 
vive  thy  beams  ! 

Such  was  the  fong  of  Fingal,  in  the  day  of  his  joy. 
His  thoufand  bards  leaned  forward  from  their  feats,  to 
hear  the  voice  of  the  king.  It  was  like  the  mufic  of  harps 
on  the  gale  of  the  fpring.  Lovely  were  thy  thoughts,  O 
Fingal  !  why  had  not  OlTian  the  ftrength  of  thy  foul  ? 
But  thou  ftandeft  alone,  my  father !  Who  can  equal  the 
king  of  Selma  ? 

The  night  pafTed  away  in  fong ;  morning  returned  in 
joy.  The  mountains  fhewed  their  grey  heads  ;  the  blue 
face  of  ocean  fmiled.  The  white  wave  is  feen  tumbling 
round  the  diftant  rock ;  a  mift  rofe,  flowly,  from  the  lake. 
It  came,  in  the  figure  of  an  aged  man,  along  the  filent 
plain.  Its  large  limbs  did  not  move  in  fteps;  for  a  ghoft 
fupported  it  in  mid  air.  It  came  towards  Selma's  hall, 
and  diffolved  in  a  fliower  of  blood. 

The  king  alone  beheld  the  fight  j  he  forefaw  the  death 

of 


A    P  O  E  M.  g^ 

of  the  people.  He  came,  in  filence,  to  his  hall,  and  took 
his  father's  fpear.  The  mail  rattled  on  his  breaft.  The 
heroes  rofe  around.  They  looked  in  filence  on  each  other, 
marking  the  eyes  of  Fingal.  They  faw  battle  in  his  face  ; 
the  death  of  armies  on  his  fpear.  A  thoufand  ihields,  at 
once,  are  placed  on  their  arms ;  they  drew  a  thoufand 
fwords.  The  hall  of  Sehna  brightened  around.  The  clang 
of  arms  afcends.  The  grey  dogs  howl  in  their  place.  No 
word  is  among  the  mighty  chiefs.  Each  marked  the  eyes 
of  the  king,  and  half-affumed  his  fpear. 

Sons  of  Morven,  begun  the  king,  this  is  no  time  to  fill 
the  fhell.  The  battle  darkens  near  us  ;  death  hovers  over 
the  land.  Some  ghoft,  the  friend  of  Fingal,  has  forewarned 
us  of  the  foe.  The  fons  of  the  ftranger  come  from  the 
darkly-rolling  fea  ;  for,  from  the  water,  came  the  fign  of 
Morven's  gloomy  danger.  Let  each  aflume  his  heavy  Ipear, 
each  gird  on  hip  father's  fword.  Let  the  dark  helmet  rife 
on  every  head ;  the  mail  pour  its  lightening  from  every 
fide.  The  battle  gathers  like  a  ftorm  ;  foon  fhall  ye  hear 
the  roar  of  death. 

The  hero  moved  on  before  his  hoft,  like  a  cloud  before 
a  ridge  of  green  fire ;  when  it  pours  on  the  iky  of  night, 
and  mariners  forefee  a  ftorm.  On  Cona's  rifmg  heath 
they  flood:  the  white-bofomed  maids  beheld  them  above 
like  a  grove ;  they  forefaw  the  death  of  the  youth,  and 
looked  towards  the  fea  with  fear.  The  white  wave  de- 
ceived them  for  diftant  fails ;  the  tear  is  on  their  cheek  I 
The  fun  rofe  on  the  fea,  and  we  beheld  a  diftant  fleet. 
Like  the  mift  of  ocean  they  came;  and  poured  their  youth 
upon  the  coaft.  The  chief  was  among  them,  like  the  ftag 
in  the  midft  of  the  herd.  His  fhield  is  ftudded  with  gold; 
ftately  ftrode  the  king  of  fpears.  He  moved  towards  Sel- 
ma ;  his  thoufands  moved  behind. 

Go,  with  a  fong  of  peace,  faid  Fingal ;  go,  UUin,  to 
the  king  of  fwords.  Tell  him  that  we  are  mighty  in  v/ar; 
that  the  ghofts  of  our  foes  are  many.  But  renowned  are 
they  who  have  feafted  in  my  halls !  they  fhew  the  arms  ♦ 

of 

*  It  was  a  cuftom  amon^  the  ancient  Scots,  to  exchange  arms  with  their  guefie, 
and  thofe  arms  were  preferved  long  in  the  different  families,  as  monuracnu  of  the 
friendfliip  which  fubfifted  between  their  anceftors. 


56  C   A   R   T   H   O   N: 

of  my  fathers  in  a  foreign  land:  the  fons  of  the  flrangers 
wonder,  and  blefs  the  friends  of  Morven's  race ;  for  our 
names  have  been  heard  afar:  the  kings  of  the  world  Ihook 
in  the  midfl  of  their  hoft. 

Ullin  went  with  his  fong.  Fingal  refted  on  his  fpear: 
he  faw  the  mighty  foe  in  his  armour ;  he  bleft  the  ftran- 
ger's  fon.  "  How  {lately  art  thou,  fon  of  the  fea!  faid  the 
king  of  woody  Morven.  Thy  fword  is  a  beam  of  fire  by 
thy  fide :  thy  fpear  is  a  pine  that  d!efies  the  florm.  The 
varied  face  of  the  moon  is  not  broader  than  thy  lliield. 
Ruddy  is  thy  face  of  youth  !  foft  the  ringlets  of  thy  hair ! 
But  this  tree  may  fall ;  and  his  memory  be  forgot !  The 
daughter  of  the  ilranger  will  be  fad,  looking  to  the  roll- 
ing fea- :  the  children  will  fay,  "  We  fee  a  fhip  ;  perhaps 
it  is  the  king  of  Balclutha."  The  tear  ftarts  from  their 
mother's  eye.  Her  thoughts  are  of  him  who  fleeps  in 
Morven  !'* 

Such  were  the  words  of  the  king,  when  Ullin  came  to 
the  mighty  Carthon :  he  threw  down  his  fpear  before  him ; 
he  raifed  the  fong  of  peace.  "  Come  to  the  feafl  of  Fin- 
gal, Carthon,  from  the  rolling  fea!  partake  of  the  feail 
of  the  king,  or  lift  the  fpear  of  war  !  The  ghofts  of  our 
foes  are  many :  but  renowned  are  the  friends  of  Morven ! 
Behold  that  field,  O  Carthon;  many  a  green  hill  rifes 
there,  with  moffy  ftones  and  ruftling  grafs :  thefe  are  the 
tombs  of  Fingai's  foes,  the  fons  of  the  rolling  fea!'* 

"  Dost  thou  fpeak  to  the  weak  in  arms !"  faid  Car- 
thon, "  bard  of  the  woody  Morven  ?  Is  my  face  pale  for 
fear,  fon  of  the  peaceful  fong  ?  Why,  then,  doft  thou 
think  to  darken  my  foul  with  the  tales  of  thofe  who  fell  ? 
My  arm  has  fought  in  battle ;  my  renown  is  known  afar. 
Go  to  the  feeble  in  arms,  bid  them  yield  to  Fingal.  Have 
not  I  feen  the  fallen  Balclutha?  and  fliall  I  feafl  with 
Comhal's  fon  ?  Comhal !  who  threw  his  fire,  in  the  midfl 
of  my  father's  hall !  I  was  young,  and  knew  not  the  caufe 
why  the  virgins  wept.  The  columns  of  fmoke  pleafed 
mine  eye,  when  they  rofe  above  my  walls !  I  often  looked 
back,  with  gladnefs,  when  my  friends  fled  along  the  hill. 
But  when  the  years  oi'  my  youth  came  on,  I  beheld  the 
mofs  of  my  fallen  walls:  my  figh  arofe  with  the  morning, 

and 


A     P  O  E  M.  57 

and  my  tears  defcended  with  night.  Shall  I  not  fight,  I 
faid  to  my  fwul,  againft  the  children  of  my  foes  ?  And  I 
will  fight,  O  bard !  I  feel  the  ftrength  of  my  foul.'* 

His  people  gathered  around  the  hero,  and  drew,  at 
once,  their  fhining  fwords.  He  (lands,  in  the  midft,  like 
a  pillar  of  fire  ;  the  tear  half-flarting  from  his  eye  ;  for  he 
thought  of  the  fallen  Balclutha  ;  the  crouded  pride  of  his 
foul  arofe.  Sidelong  he  looked  up  to  the  hill,  where  our 
heroes  {hone  in  arms  ;  the  fpear  trembled  in  his  hand  : 
bending  forward,  he  leemed  to  threaten  the  king. 

Shall  I,  faid  Fingal  to  his  foul,  meet,  at  once,  the 
youth  ?  Shall  I  Hop  him,  in  the  midll  of  his  courfe,  be- 
fore his  fame  fliall  arife  ?  But  the  bard,  hereafter,  may  fay, 
when  he  fees  the  tomb  of  Carthon  ;  Fingal  took  his  thou- 
fands  to  battle,  before  the  noble  Carthon  fell.  No  :  bard 
of  the  times  to  come  !  thou  ri:ialL  not  leffen  Fingal's  fame. 
My  heroes  will  fight  the  youth,  and  Fingal  behold  the  war. 
If  he  overcomes,  I  rufh,  in  my  itrength,  like  the  roaring 
flream  of  Cona.  Who,  of  my  chiefs,  will  meet  the  fon  of 
the  rolling  fea  ?  Many  are  his  warriors  on  tne  coafl ;  and 
ftrong  is  his  afhen  fpear  ! 

Cathul*  rofe,  in  his  flrength,  the  fon  of  the  mighty 
Lormar:  three  hundred  youths  attend  the  chief,  theracef 
of  his  native  ilreams.  Feeble  was  his  arm  againil  Car- 
thon :  he  fell  ;  and  his  heroes  fled.  Connal}|  refumedthe 
battle  ;  but  he  broke  his  heavy  fpear  :  he  lay  bound  on 
the  field :  Carthon  purfued  his  people. 

Clessammor  !  faid  the  king§  of  Morven,  where  is  the 
fpear  of  thy  ftrength  ?  Wilt  thou  behold  Connal  bound  ; 
thy  friend,  at  the  ftream  of  Lora  ?  Rife,  in  the  light  of 
thy  fteel,  companion  of  valiant  Comhal.  Let  the  youth  of 
Balclutha  feel  the  ftrength  of  Morven's  race.  He  rofe  in 
the  ftrength  of  his  fteel,  ftiaking  his  grifly  locks.  He  fit- 
ted the  fliield  to  his  fide  ;  he  rufhed,  in  the  pride  of  valour. 
H  Gar-THon 

*  Cath-'huil,  the  eye  ef  battle. 

t  It  appeais,  from  t  >is  pa{rag;c,  that  danfliip  was  eftabllfhcd,  in  the  days  of  Fin- 
gal, though  not  on  the  fame  footing  with  theprefent  tribes  in  the  north  of  Scotland. 

11  This  Connal  is  very  much  celebrated,  in  ancient  poetry,  for  his  wifdom  and 
valour :  there  is  a  fmall  tribe  flill  fubfifting,  in  the  North,  who  pretend  they  are 
defcended  from  him. 

^  Fingal  did  not  then  know  that  Carthon  was  the  fon  of  Clefbimmor, 


58  CARTHON: 

Carthon  flood,  on  a  rock  :  he  faw  the  hero  rufhing 
on.  He  loved  the  dreadful  joy  of  his  face  ;  his  ftrength, 
in  the  locks  of  age  !  "  Shall  I  lift  that  fpear,  he  faid, 
thst  never  flrikes,  but  once,  a  foe  ?  or  fhall  I,  with  the 
words  of  peace,  preferve  the  warrior's  life  ?  Stately  are  his 
fleps  of  age  !  lovely  the  remnant  of  his  years  !  Perhaps  it 
is  the  hufoand  of  Moina  ;  the  father  of  car-borne  Carthon. 
Often  have  I  heard,  that  he  dwelt  at  the  echoing  ftream 
of  Lora." 

Such  were  his  words,  when  Clefsammor  came,  and  lift- 
ed high  his  fpear.  The  youth  received  it  on  his  fhield, 
and  fpoke  the  words  of  peace.  "  Warrior  of  the  aged 
locks  !  Is  there  no  youth  to  lift  the  fpear  ?  Haft  thou  no 
fon,  to  raife  the  fliield  before  his  father,  to  meet  the  arm 
of  youth  ?  Is  the  fpoufe  of  thy  love  no  more  ?  or  weeps 
file  over  the  tombs  of  thy  fons  ?  Art  thou  of  the  kings  of 
men  ?  What  will  be  the  fame  of  my  fword  fhouldft  thou 
fail  ?" 

It  will  be  great,  thou  fon  of  pride !  begun  the  tall 
Clefsammor.  I  have  been  renowned  in  battle  ;  but  I  ne- 
ver told  my  name*  to  a  foe.  Yield  to  me,  fon  of  the 
wave  ;  then  {halt  thou  know,  that  the  mark  of  my  fword 
is  in  many  a  field.  "  I  never  yielded,  king  of  fpears!'* 
replied  the  noble  pride  of  Carthon  :  "  I  have  alfo  fought 
in  war  ;  I  behold  my  future  fame.  Defpife  me  not,  thou 
chief  of  men  ;  my  arm,  my  fpear  is  ftrong.  Retire  among 
thy  friends,  let  younger  heroes  fight."  Why  doft  thou 
wound  my  foul,  replied  Clefsammor  with  a  tear?  Age  does 
not  tremble  on  my  hand  ;  I  ftill  can  lift  the  fword.  Shall 
I  fly  in  Fingal's  fight ;  in  the  fight  of  him  I  love  ?  Son  of 
the  fea !  1  never  fled :  exalt  thy  pointed  fpear. 

They  fought,  like  two  contending  winds,  that  flrive  to 
roll  the  wave.  Carthon  bade  his  Ij^ear  to  err ;  he  ftill 
thought  that  the  foe  was  the  fpoufe  of  Moina.  He  broke 
Clefsammor's  beamy  fpear  in  twain  :  he  feized  his  fhining 
fword.     But,  as  Carthon  was  binding  the  chief,  the  chief 

drew 

*  To  tell  one's  name  to  an  enemy  was  reckoned,  in  thofe  days  of  lieroifm,  a 
manih'O  evalion  of  fighting  him  ;  for,  if  it  was  once  known,  that  friendfhip  fubfift- 
ed,  of  old,  between  the  anceflors  of  the  combatants,  the  battle  immediately  ceafedj 
and  the  ancient  amity  of  their  forefathers  was  renewed,  A  man  who  tells  his  nai'ie 
io  his  cncmj,  was  of  old  an  ignoininiou$  term  for  a  coward. 


A    POEM.  59 

flrew  the  dagger  of  his  fathers.    He  hw  the  foe's  unco- 
vered fide  ;  and  opened,  there,  a  wound. 

FiNGAL  faw  Clefsammor  low  :  he  moved  in  the  found 
of  his  fteel.  The  hofl  flood  filent,  in  his  prefcnce ;  they 
turned  their  eyes  to  the  king.  He  came,  like  the  fallen 
noife  of  a  florm,  before  the  winds  arife;  the  hunter  hears 
it  in  the  vale,  and  retires  to  the  cave  of  the  rock.  Carthon 
flood  in  his  place :  the  blood  is  rufning  down  his  fide  : 
he  faw  the  coming  down  of  the  king  ;  his  hopes  of  fame 
arofe  *  ;  but  pale  was  his  cheek :  his  hair  flew  loofe,  his 
helmet  fhook  on  high  :  the  force  of  Carthcn  failed  ;  but 
his  foul  was  flrong. 

FiNGAL  beheld  the  hero's  blood  ;  he  flopt  the  uplifted 
fpear.  "  Yield,  king  of  fwords,"  faid  Comhal's  fon  ;  "  I 
behold  thy  blood.  Thou  haft  been  mighty  in  battle  ;  and 
thy  fame  ihall  never  fade."  "  Art  thou  the  king  fo  far 
renowned  ?"  replied  the  car-borne  Carthon.  "  Art  thou 
that  light  of  death,  that  frightens  the  kings  of  the  world  ? 
But  why  fhould  Carthon  afe  ?  for  he  is  like  the  ftream  of 
his  hills  ;  ftrong  as  a  river,  in  his  courfe  ;  fwift  as  the 
eagle  of  heaven.  O  that  I  had  fought  with  the  king,  that 
my  fame  might  be  great  in  fong  !  that  the  hunter,  be- 
holding my  tomb,  might  fay.  He  fought  with  the  mighty 
Fingal.  But  Carthon  dies  unknown  ;  he  has  poured  out 
his  force  on  the  weak." 

"  But  thou  flialt  not  die  unknov/n,"  replied  the  king 
of  woody  Moirven :  "  my  bards  are  many,  O  Carthon  ; 
their  fongs  defcend  to  future  times.  The  children  of  years 
to  come  fhall  hear  the  fame  of  Carthon  ;  when  they  fit 
round  the  burning  oakf ,  and  the  night  is  fpent  in  fongs  of 
old.  The  hunter,  fitting  in  the  heath,  fhall  hear  the  rufl- 
ling  blaft ;  and,  raifmg  his  eyes,  behold  the  rock  where 
Carthon  fell.  He  fliall  turn  to  his  fon,  and  fhew  the  place 
v/here  the  mighty  fought;  "  There  the  king  of  Balclutha 
fought,  like  the  llrength  of  a  thoufand  llreams." 

Joy 

*  This  expreffion  admits  of  a  double  meaning,  either  that  Carthon  hoped  to  ac- 
(^uire  glory  by  killing  Fingal;  or  to  be  rendered  famous  by  falling  by  his  hand. 
The  laft  is  the  moft  probable,  as  Carthon  is  already  wounded. 

+  In  the  north  of  Scotland,  till  very  lately,  tliey  burnt  a  lar^e  trunk  of  an  oak 
at  their  feftivals  ;  it  was  called  tke  trunk  ofthcfeajl.  Time  had,  fo  much,  confe- 
cratcd  the  cullom,.  that  the  vulgar  thought  it  a  kind  of  facrilege  to  difufeit. 


6o  C    A    R    T    H    O   N: 

Joy  rofe  in  Cartlion's  face :  he  lifted  his  heavy  eyes. 
He  gave  his  fword  to  Fingal,  to  lie  within  his  hall,  that 
the  memory  of  Balclutha's  king  might  remain  in  Morven. 
The  battle  ceafed  along  the  field ;  the  bard  had  fung  the 
fong  of  peace.  The  chiefs  gathered  round  the  falling  Car- 
thon;  they  heard  his  words,  with  fighs.  Silent  they 
leaned  on  their  fpears,  while  Balclutha's  hero  fpoke.  His 
hair  fighed  in  the  wind,  and  his  voice  was  fad  and  low. 

"  King  of  Morven,"  Carthon  faid,  "  I  fall  in  the  midft 
of  my  courfe.  A  foreign  tomb  receives,  in  youth,  the  lall 
of  Reuthamir's  race.  Darknefs  dwells  in  Balclutha  :  the 
fhadows  of  grief  in  Crathmo.  But  raife  my  remembrance 
on  the  banks  of  Lora ;  where  my  fathers  dwelt.  Per- 
haps the  huiband  of  Moina  will  mourn  over  his  fallen 
Carthon."  His  words  reached  the  heart  of  Clefsammor  : 
he  fell,  in  filence,  on  his  fon.  The  hod  flood  darkened 
around:  no  voice  is  on  the  plain.  Night  came:  the  moon, 
from  the  eaft,  looked  on  the  mournful  field:  but  ftill  they 
flood,  like  a  ftlent  grove  that  lifts  its  head  on  Gormal, 
when  the  loud  winds  are  laid,  and  dark  autumn  is  on  the 
plain. 

Three  days  they  mourned  above  Carthon  ;  on  the 
fourth  his  father  died.  In  the  narrow  plain  of  the  rock 
they  lie  ;  a  dim  gholl  defends  their  tomb.  There  lovely 
Moina  is  often  feen  ;  when  the  fun-beam  darts  on  the  rock, 
and  all  around  is  dark.  There  fhe  is  feen,  Malvina  ;  but 
not  like  the  daughters  of  the  hill.  Her  robes  are  from  the 
flranger's  land ;  and  ilie  is  dill  alone. 

FiNGAL  was  fad  for  Carthon;  he  commanded  his  bards 
to  mark  the  day,  when  fhadowy  autum.n  returned :  And 
often  did  they  m.ark  the  day,  and  fing  the  hero's  praife. 
"  Who  comes  fo  dark  from  ocean's  roar,  like  autumn's 
firadowy  cloud?  Death  is  trembhng  in  his  hand!  his  eyes 
are  flames  of  fire !  Who  roars  along  dark  Lora's  heath  ? 
Who  but  Carthon,  king  of  fwords  ?  The  people  fall!  See! 
how  he  flrides,  like  the  fullen  ghofl  of  Morven !  But 
there  he  lies,  a  goodly  oak,  which  fudden  blafls  overturned! 
When  fhak  thou  rife,  Balclutha's  joy  !  When,  Carthon, 
fnak  thou  arife  ?  Who  comes  fo  dark  from  ocean's  roar, 
like  autumn's  fhadowy  cloud  ?"   Such  were  the  words  of 

the 


A    P  O  E  M.  61 

the  bards,  in  the  day  of  their  mourning :  Offian  often 
joined  their  voice ;  and  added  to  their  fong.  My  foul 
has  been  mournful  for  Carthon ;  he  fell  in  the  days  of  his 
youth.  And  thou,  O  Clefsammor  !  where  is  thy  dwelling 
in  the  wind  ?  Has  the  youth  forgot  his  wound  ?  Flies  he, 
on  clouds,  with  thee  ?  I  feel  the  fun,  O  Malvina ;  leave 
me  to  my  reft.  Perhaps  they  may  come  to  my  dreams ;  I 
think  I  hear  a  feeble  voice!  The  beam  of  heaven  delights 
to  fliine  on  the  grave  of  Carthon:  I  feel  it  warm  around! 
O  THOU  that  roUeft  above,  round  as  the  fhield  of  my 
fathers !  Whence  are  thy  beams,  O  fun  !  thy  everlafting 
light  ?  Thou  comeft  forth,  in  thy  awful  beauty  ;  the  ftars 
hide  themfelves  in  the  fky ;  the  moon,  cold,  and  pale, 
fmks  in  the  weftern  wave.  But  thou  thyfelf  mxoveft  alone: 
who  can  be  a  companion  of  thy  courfe !  The  oaks  of  the 
mountains  fall :  the  mountains  themfelves  decay  with 
years;  the  ocean  fln^inks  and  grows  again:  the  moon  her- 
felf  is  loft  in  heaven ;  but  thou  art  for  ever  the  fame ; 
rejoicing  in  the  brightnefs  of  thy  courfe.  When  the 
world  is  dark  with  tempefts :  Vv^hen  thunder  rolls,  and 
lightning  flies ;  thou  lookeft  in  thy  beauty,  from  the  clouds, 
and  laugheft  at  the  ftorm.  But  to  Offian  thou  lookeft  in 
vain ;  for  he  beholds  thy  beams  no  more ;  whether  thy 
yellow  hair  flows  on  the  eaftern  clouds,  or  thou  trembleft 
at  the  gates  of  the  weft.  But  thou  art,  perhaps,  like  me, 
for  a  feafon  ;  thy  years  will  have  an  end.  Thou  flialt  flecp 
in  thy  clouds,  carelefs  of  the  voice  of  the  morning.  Exult 
then,  O  fun,  in  the  ftrength  of  thy  youth  !  Age  is  dark 
and  unlovely;  it  is  like  the  glimmering  light  of  the  moon, 
when  it  iliines  through  broken  clouds,  and  the  mift  is  on 
the  hills ;  the  blaft  of  the  north  is  on  the  plain,  the  tra- 
veller ihrinks  in  the  midft  of  his  journey. 


OINA. 


OINA-MORUL: 


P  O  E  M. 


ARGUMENT. 

AFTER  an  addrefs  to  Malvina,  the  daughter  of  Tofcar,  Oflian  proceeds  to  relate 
his  own  expedition  to  Fuarfed,  anifland  of  Scandinavia.  Mal-orchol,  king  of 
Fuarfed,  being  hard  prefled  in  war,  by  Ton-thormod,  chief  of  Sar-dronlo,  (who 
had  demanded,  in  vain,  the  daughter  of  Mal-orchol  in  marriage)  Fingal  fent 
Oflian  to  his  aid,  Offian,  on  the  day  after  his  arrival,  came  to  battle  with  Ton- 
thormod,  and  took  him  prifoner.  Mal-orchol  ofiers  his  daughter  Oina-Morul 
to  Offian  :  but  he,  difcovering  herpaffion  for  Ton-thormod,  generoufly  furren- 
ders  her  to  her  lover,  and  brings  about  a  reconciliation  between  the  two  kings. 


OINA-MORUL 


POEM. 

AS  flies  the  unconftant  fun,  over  Larmon's  gralTy  hill; 
fo  pafs  the  tales  of  old,  along  my  foul,  by  night ! 
When  bards  are  removed  to  their  place :  when  harps  are 
hung  in  Selma's  hall ;  then  comes  a  voice  to  Offian,  and 
awakes  his  foul !  It  is  the  voice  of  years  that  are  gone ! 
they  roll  before  me,  with  all  their  deeds!  I  feize  the  tales, 
as  they  pafs,  and  pour  them  forth  in  fong.  Nor  a  troubled 
dream  is  the  fong  of  the  king,  it  is  like  the  rifmg  of 
mufic  from  Lulha  of  the  firings.  Lutha  of  many  firings, 
not  filent  are  thy  ftreamy  rocks,  when  the  white  hands 
of  Malvina  move  upon  the  harp !  Light  of  the  fliadowy 
thoughts  that  fly  acrofs  my  foul,  daughter  of  Tofcar  of 
helmets,  wilt  thou  not  hear  the  fong  !  We  call  back,  maid 
of  Lutha,  the  years  that  have  rolled  away  ! 

It  was  in  the  days  of  the  king,  while  yet  my  locks  were 
young,  that  I  marked  Con-cathlin  *,  on  high,  froni 
ocean's  nightly  wave.  My  courfe  was  towards  the  ifle  of 
Fuiirfed,  woody  dweller  of  feas !  Fingal  had  fent  me  to 
the  aid  of  Mal-orchol,  king  of  Fuarfed  wild:  for  war  was 
around  him,  and  our  fathers  had  met,  at  the  feaft. 

In  Col-coiled,  I  bound  my  fails ;  I  fent  my  fword  to 

Mal-orchol  of  fliells.    He  knew  the  fignal  of  Albion,  and 

his  joy  arofe.    He  came  from  his  own  high  hall,  and  feized 

I  my 

■*  Con-cathlin,  mild  beam  of  the  wave.  What  fiar  was  fo  called  of  old  is  not 
cafily  afcertained.  Some  now  diftinguifii  the  pole-Oar  by  that  name.  A  fong, 
which  is  dill  in  repute,  among  the  fea-faring  part  of  the  Highlanders,  alludes  to 
this  paflage  of  O'Tian.  The  author  commends  the  knowledge  of  Offian  in  fea-af- 
falrs;  a  merit,  which,  perhaps,  few  of  us  moderns  will  allow  him,  or  any  in  the 
age  in  which  he  lived.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  the  Caledonians  often  made  their 
^vay  thro'  the  dangerous  and  tempciluous  fcas  of  Scandinavia;  which  is  more,  per- 
haps, than  the  more  poliflied  nations,  fubfifting  in  thofe  times,  dared  to  venture. 
In  eflimaiing  the  degree  of  knowledge  of  arts  among  the  antients,  we  ought  not 
to  bring  it  into  comparifon  with  the  improvements  of  modern  times.  Our  advaiv 
tj^es  over  them  proceed  more  from  atiident,  than  any  merit  of  ours. 


66  O  I  N  A  -  M  O  R  U  L  : 

my  hand  in  grief.  "  Why  comes  the  race  of  heroes  to  a 
falling  king  ?  Ton-thormod  of  many  fpears  is  the  chief  of 
wavy  Sar-dronlo.  He  faw  and  loved  my  daughter,  vvhite- 
bofomed  Oina-morul.  He  fought :  I  denied  the  maid ; 
for  our  fathers  had  been  foes.  He  came,  with  battle,  to 
Fuarfed  ;  my  people  are  rolled  away.  Why  comes  the 
race  of  heroes  to  a  failing  king?" 

I  COME  not,  I  laid,  to  look,  like  a  boy,  on  the  ftrife. 
Fingal  remembers  Mal-orchol,  and  his  hall  for  ftrangers. 
From  his  waves,  the  warrior  defcended,  on  thy  woody  ifle. 
Thou  v/ert  no  cloud  before  him.  Thy  feaft  was  fpread 
with  fongs.  For  this  my  fword  fhall  rife ;  and  thy  foes 
perhaps  may  fail.  Our  friends  are  not  forgot  in  their 
danger,  though  difiant  is  our  land. 

"  Descendant  of  the  daring  Trenmor,  thy  words  are 
like  the  voice  of  Cruth-loda,  when  he  fpeaks,  from  his 
parting  cloud,  ftrong  dweller  of  the  Iky  !  Many  have  re- 
joiced at  my  feaft ;  but  they  all  have  forgot  Mal-orchol. 
1  have  looked  towards  all  the  winds ;  but  no  white  fails 
were  feen.  But  fteel  *  refounds  in  my  hall ;  and  not  the 
joyful  fliells.  Come  to  my  dwelling,  race  of  heroes  ;  dark- 
Ikirted  night  is-  near.  Hear  the  voice  of  fongs,  from  the 
maid  of  Fuarfed  wild." 

We  went.  On  the  harp  arofe  the  white  handsof  Oina- 
morul.  She  waked  her  own  fad  tale,  from  every  trem- 
bling ftring.  I  ftood  in  filence  ;  for  bright  in  her  looks 
was  the  daughter  of  many  illes  !  Her  eyes  were  two  ftars, 
looking  forward  through  a  rufliing  fliower.  The  mariner 
marks  them  on  high,  and  bleifes  the  lovely  beams.    With 

morning 

*  There  is  a  fevcre  fatire  couched  in  this  expreffion,  againft  the  guefis  of  Mal- 
orchol.  Had  !iis  feaft  been  ftill  fpread,  had  joy  continued  in  his  hall,  his  former 
parafites  would  not  have  failed  to  refort  to  him.  But  as  the  time  of  feOivity  was 
pad,  their  attendance  alfo  ceafcd.  The  fentiments  of  a  certain  old  bard  are  agree- 
able to  this  obfervation.  He,  poetically,  compares  a  great  man  to  a  fire  kindled 
in  a  defart  place.  "  Thefe  that  pay  court  to  him,  fays  he,  are  rolling  large  around 
him,  like  the  finoke  about  the  fire.  This  fmoke  gives  the  fire  a  great  appearance 
atadiftance,  but  it  is  but  an  empty  vapour  itfelf,  and  varying  its  form  at  every 
breeze.  When  the  trunk,  which  fed  the  fire,  is  confumed,  the  fmoke  departs  on- 
all  the  winds.  So  the  flatterers  forfake  their  chief,  when  his  power  declines."  I 
have  chofen  to  give  a  pa-aphrafe,  rather  than  a  tranflalion,  of  this  paffage,  as  the 
original  is  verbofe  and  frothy,  notwithftanding  of  the  fentimental  merit  of  the  au- 
thor. He  was  one  of  the  lefs  antient  bards,  and  their  compofuions  are  not  n^rvou- 
cnough  to  bear  a  literal  traiiflation. 


A     P  O  E  M.  67 

morning  we  rudied  to  battle,  to  Tormurs  icfoiinding 
ftream  :  the  foe  moved  to  the  found  of  Ton-thormod's 
bolTy  fhield.  From  wing  to  wing  the  ilrife  was  mixed.  I 
met  Ton-thormod  in  fight.  Wide  flew  his  broken  Heel. 
I  feized  the  king  in  war.  I  gave  his  hand,  bound  fail  with 
thongs,  to  Mal-orciiol,  the  giver  of  fliells.  Joy  rofe  at  the 
feafl  of  Fuarfed,  for  the  foe  had  failed.  Ton-thormod 
turned  his  face  away,  from  Oina-morul  of  ifles  1" 

"  Son  of  Fingai,"  begun  Mal-orchol,  "  not  forgot 
flialt  thou  pafs  from  me.  A  light  fhall  dwell  in  thy  iliip, 
Oina-morul  of  flow-rolling  eyes.  She  fhall  kindle  glad- 
nefs,  along  thy  mighty  foul.  Nor  unheeded  fliall  the  maid 
move  in  Selma,  through  the  dwelling  of  kings  !" 

■  In  the  hall  I  lay  in  night.  Mine  eyes  were  half-clofisd 
in  fleep.  Soft  mufic  came  to  mine  ear  :  it  was  like  the 
rinng  breeze,  that  whirls,  at  firll,  the  thiftle's  beard  ; 
then  flies,  dark-fliadowy,  over  the  grafs.  It  was  the  maid 
of  Fuarfed  wild  !  flie  raifed  the  nightly  fong  ;  flie  knew 
that  my  foul  was  a  ilream,  that  flowed  at  pleafant  founds. 
''  Who  looks,"  fhe  faid,  "  from  his  rock,  on  ocean's  clof- 
ing  mift  ?  His  long  locks,  like  the  raven's  wing,  are  wan- 
dering on  the  blaft.  Stately  are  his  fl:eps  in  grief!  The 
tears  are  in  his  eyes  !  His  manly  breafl:  is.  heaving  over 
his  burfting  foul  !  i*  etire,  I  am  diflant  far  ;  a  wanderer 
in  lands  unknown.  Though  the  race  of  kings  are  around 
me,  yet  my  foul  is  dark.  Why  have  our  fathers  been 
foes,  Ton-thormod  love  of  maids !" 

"  Soft  voice  of  the  ftreamy  ifle,"  I  faid,  "  why  doft 
thou  mourn  by  nigh^  ?  The  race  of  daring  Trenmor  are 
not  the  dark  in  foul.  Thou  fiialt  not  wander  by  ftreams 
unknown,  blue-eyed  Oina-morul !  Within  tkis  bofom  is 
a  voice  ;  it  comes  not  to  other  ears  :  it  bids  Ofllan  hear 
the  haplefs,  in  their  hour  of  woe.  Retire,  foft  finger  by 
night ;  Ton-thormod  fhall  not  mourn  on  his  rock  !" 

With  morning  I.loofed  the  king.  I  gave  the  long- 
haired maid.  Mal-orchol  heard  my  words,  in  the  midll 
of  his  echoing  halls.  "  King  of  Fuarfed  wild,  why  fliould 
Ton-thormod  mourn  ?  He  is  of  the  race  of  heroes,  and  a 
flame  in  war.  Your  fathers  have  been  foes,  but  now  their 
dim  ghoflis  rejoice  in  death.    They  (Iretch  their  hands  of 

mifl: 


68  OINA-MORUL. 

mift  to  the  fame  fhell  in  Loda.     Forget  their  rage,  ye 
warriors  !   it  was  the  cloud  of  other  years." 

Such  were  the  deeds  of  Offian,  while  yet  his  locks 
were  young  :  though  lovelinefs,  with  a  robe  of  beams, 
clothed  the  daughter  of  many  ifles.  We  call  back,  maid 
of  Lutha,  the  years  that  have  rolled  av^ay  ! 


COLNA- 


COLNA-DONA 


P  O  E  M. 


ARGUMENT. 

FINGAL  difpatchcs  Oflian  and  Tofcar,  the  fon  of  Conloch  and  father  of  Malvi- 
na,  to  raife  a  flone,  on  the  banks  of  the  ftream  of  Crona,  to  perpetuate  the  me- 
mory' of  a  vi£iory,  which  he  had  obtained  in  that  place.  When  they  were  em- 
ployed in  that  work,  Car-ul,  a  neighbouring  chief,  invited  them  to  afead.  They 
went;  and  Tofcar  fell  dcfpcrately  in  love  with  Colna-dona,  the  daughter  of 
Car-ul.  Colna-dona  becomes  no  lefs  enamoured  of  Tofcar.  An  incident,  at  a 
hunting  party,  brings  their  loves  to  a  happy  iflue. 


C   O  L   N    A  -  D   O   N    A 


P  O  E  xM. 

COL-AM  ON  of  troubled  ftr  earns,  dark  wanderer  of 
diftant  vales,  I  behold  thy  courfe,  between  trees, 
near  Car-ul's  echoing  halls  !  There  dwelt  bright  Colna- 
dona,  the  daughter  of  the  king.  Her  eyes  were  rolling 
liars  ;  her  arms  were  white  as  the  foam  of  ftreams.  Her 
breaft  rofe  flowly  to  fight,  like  ocean's  heaving  wave.  Her 
foul  was  a  ftream  of  light.  Who,  among  the  maids,  was 
like  the  love  of  heroes  ? 

Beneath  the  voice  of  the  king,  we  moved  to  Cronaf 
of  the  dreams,  Tofcar  of  grafly  Lutha,  and  OfTian,  young 
in  fields.  Three  bards  attended  with  fongs.  Three  boffy 
fliields  were  borne  before  us  :  for  we  were  to  rear  the 
flone,  in  memory  of  the  paft.  By  Crona's  molly  courfe, 
Fingal  had  fcattered  his  foes  :  he  had  rolled  away  the 
flrangers,  like  a  troubled  fea.  We  came  to  the  place  of 
renown  :  from  the  mountains  defcended  night.  I  tore  an 
oak  from  its  hill,  and  raifed  a  flame  on  high.  I  bade  my 
fathers  to  look  down,  from  the  clouds  of  their  hall ;  for, 
at  the  fame  of  their  race,  they  brighten  in  the  wind. 

I  TOOK 

*  Co\ni-dom  Cignmei  the  love  of /leroes.  Col-zmon,  narrow  river.  Cm-u\,  dark- 
oyed.  Col-amon,  the  refidence  ofCar-ul,  v.as  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Agricola's 
vail,  towards  the  fouth.  Car-ul  feems  to  have  been  of  the  race  of  thofe  Britons, 
who  aie  dillinguiflied  by  the  name  of  Maiatae,  by  the  writers— ©f  Rome.  Maiatae 
is  derived  from  two  Galic  words,  Moi,  a  plain,  and  Aitich,  inhabitants ;  fo  that 
the  fignification  of  Maiatas  is,  the  inhabitants  of  the  plain  avirtiy;  a  iiatiie  given  to 
the  Britons,  who  were  fettled  in  the  Lowlands,  in  contradiftinction  to  the  Caledo- 
nians, (i.  e.  Cacl-don,  t/ic  Gauls  of  the  hills)  who  were  pofleircd  of  the  more  moun- 
tainous divifion  of  North-Britain. 

+  Crona,  vnnmuring,  was  the  name  of  a  fmall  ftream,  which  difcharged  itfelf 
into  the  river  Carron.  It  is  often  mentioned  by  Oflian,  and  the  icenes  of  many 
of  his  poems  are  on  its  banks.  The  enemies,  whom  Fingal  defeated  here,  are 
not  mentioned.  They  were,  probably,  the  provincial  Biitons.  That  traft  of  coun- 
try between  the  Firths  of  Forth  and  Clyde  has  been,  thro'  all  antiquity,  famous  for 
battles  and  rencounters,  between  the  different  nations,  who  were  poffeffed  of  North 
and  South  Britain.  Stirling,  a  town  fituated  there,  derives  its  name  from  that  very 
circumftance.  It  is  a  corruption  of  the  Galic  name,  Stiila,  i.e.  thi  hill,  or  rod, 
of  contention. 


72  COLNA-DONA: 

I  TOOK  a  ftone  from  the  ftream,  amidfl  the  fong  oi* 
bards.  The  blood  of  Fingal's  foes  hung  curdled  in  its 
ooze.  Beneath,  I  placed,  at  intervals,  three  boffes  from 
the  fhields  of  foes,  as  rofe  or  fell  the  found  of  Ullin*s 
nightly  fong.  Tofcar  laid  a  dagger  in  the  earth,  a  mail 
of  founding  fteel.  We  raifed  the  mould  around  the  ftone, 
and  bade  it  fpeak  to  other  years. 

Oozy  daughter  of  flreams,  that  now  art  reared  on 
high,  fpeak  to  the  feeble,  O  ftone,  after  Selma's  race 
have  failed !  Prone,  from  the  ftormy  night,  the  traveller 
fhall  lay  him  by  thy  fide ;  thy  whiftling  mofs  fhall  found 
in  his  dreams ;  the  years  that  were  paft  fhall  return. 
Battles  rife  before  him,  blue-fhielded  kings  defcend  to 
war:  the  darkened  moon  looks  from  heaven,  on  the  trou- 
bled field.  He  fhall  burft,  with  morning,  from  dreams, 
and  fee  the  tombs  of  warriors  round.  He  fhall  afk  about 
the  ftone,  and  the  aged  fhall  reply,  "  This  grey  ftone  was 
raifed  by  OlFian,  a  chief  of  other  years  !" 

*  From  Col-amon  came  a  bard,  from  Car-ul,  the 
friend  of  ftrangers.  He  bade  us  to  the  feaft  of  kings,  to 
the  dwelling  of  bright  Colna-dona.  We  went  to  the  hall 
of  harps.  There  Car-ul  brightened  between  his  aged 
locks,  when  he  beheld  the  fons  of  his  friends,  like  two 
young  branches  before  him. 

"  Sons  of  the  mighty,"  he  faid,  "  ye  bring  back  the 
days  of  old,  when  firft  I  defcended  from  waves,  on  Sel- 
ma's ftreamy  vale !  I  purfued  Duth-mocarglos,  dweller  of 
ocean's  wind.  Our  fathers  had  been  foes,  we  met  by 
Clutha's  winding  waters.  He  fled,  along  the  fea,  and  my 
fails  were  fpread  behind  him.    Night  deceived  me,  on  the 

deep. 

*  The  manners  of  the  Britons  and  Caledonians  were  fo  finiilar,  in  the  days  of 
OlTian,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  they  were  originally  the  fame  people,  and 
defcended  from  thofe  Gauls  who  firft  poffeffed  themfelves  of  South-Britain,  and 
f^radually  migrated  to  the  north.  This  hypotbefis  is  more  rational  than  the  idle  fa- 
bles of  ill-informed  fenachies,  who  bring  the  Caledonians  from  diftant  countries. 
The  bare  opinion  of  Tacitus,  (which,  byrthe-bye,  was  only  founded  on  a  fimilarity 
of  the  perfonaJ  figure  of  the  Caledonians  to  the  Germans  of  his  ov/n  time)  tho'  ic 
has  daggered  fome  learned  men,  is  not  fufficient  to  make  us  believe,  that  the  anci- 
ent inhabitants  of  North-Britain  were  a  German  colony.  A  difcuffion  of  a  point 
like  this  might  be  curious,  but  could  never  be  fatisfaftory.  Pe;iods  fo  diftant  are 
'o  involved  in  obfcurity,  that  nothing  certain  can  be  now  advanced  concerning 
them.  The  light  which  the  Roman  wiiters  hold  forth  is  too  feeble  to  guide  us  to 
ihe  truth,  thro'  the  daiknefs  which  has  furrounded  it. 


A    P  O  E  M.  73 

deep.  I  came  to  the  dwelling  of  kings,  to  Selma  of  high- 
bolomed  maids.  Fingal  came  forth  with  his  bards,  and 
Conloch,  arm  of  death.  I  feafled  three  days  in  the  hail, 
and  faw  the  blue-eyes  of  Erin,  Ros-crana,  daughter  of 
heroes,  light  of  Cormac's  race.  Nor  forgot  did  my  fteps 
depart:  the  kings  gave  their  {hields  to  Car-ul:  they  hang, 
on  high,  in  Col-amon,  in  memory  of  the  paft.  Sons  of 
the  daring  kings,  ye  bring  back  the  days  of  old  ! 

Car-ul  kindled  the  oak  of  feafts.  He  took  two  bofles 
from  our  fliields.  He  laid  them  in  earth,  beneath  a  ftone, 
to  fpeak  to  the  hero's  race.  "  When  battle,"  faid  the 
king,  "  iliall  roar,  and  our  fons  are  to  meet  in  wrath, 
my  race  Ihall  look,  perhaps,  on  this  flone,  when  they  pre- 
pare the  fpear.  Have  not  our  fathers  met  ?  they  will  fay, 
and  lay  afide  the  fhield.'* 

Night  came  down.  In  her  long  locks  moved  the 
daughter  of  Car-ul.  Mixed  with  the  harp  arofe  the  voice 
of  white-armed  Colna-dona.  Tofcar  darkened  in  his 
place,  before  the  love  of  heroes.  She  came  on  his  trou- 
bled foul,  like  a  beam,  to  the  dark-heaving  ocean :  whert 
it  burfts  from  a  cloud,  and  brightens  the  foamy  fide  of  a 
wave*. 


*     *     # 


With  morning  we  awaked  the  woods ;  and  hung  for- 
ward on  the  path  of  the  roes.  They  fell  by  their  wonted 
ftreams.  We  returned  through  Crona's  vale.  From  the 
wood  a  youth  came  forward,  with  a  fhield  and  pointlefs 
fpear.  *'  Whence,"  faid  Tofcar  of  Lutha,  "  is  the  flying 
beam?  Dwells  there  peace  at  Col-amon,  round  bright 
Colna-dona  of  harps  ?" 

"  By  Col-amon  of  ftreams,"  faid  the  youth,  "  bright 
Colna-dona  dwelt.  She  dwelt ;  but  her  courfe  is  now  in 
defarts,  with  the  fon  of  the  king ;  he  that  feized  with 
love  her  foul  as  it  wandered  thro'  the  hall."  "  Stranger 
of  ta^es,"  faid  Tofcar,  "  haft  thou  marked  the  warrior's 
courfe  ?  He  muft  fall :  give  thou  that  bolfy  Ihield !"  In 
wrath  he  took  the  fliield.  Fair  behind  it  role  the  breafts 
K  of 

*  Here  an  epifode  is  entirely  loft  ;  or,  at  leaft,  is  handed  down  fo  impeifcL^; 
that  it  does  not  deferve  a  place  in  the  poem, 


74  e  O  L  N  A  -  D  O  N  A. 

of  a  maid,  white  as  the  bofom  of  a  fwan,  rifing  graceful 
j)n  fwift-rolling  waves.  It  was  Colna-dona  of  harps,  the 
daughter  of  the  king !  Her  blue  eyes  had  rolled  on  Tof- 
car,  and  her  love  arofe  ! 


O  It  HON  A 


O     I     T     H     6     N     A 


POEM. 


ARGUMENT. 

GAUL,  the  fon  of  Momi,  attended  Lathmon  into  his  own  country,  after  his  being 
defeated  in  Moiven,  as  related  in  the  preceding  poem.  He  was  kindly  enter- 
tained by  Nuath,  the  father  of  Lathmon,  and  fell  in  love  with  his  daughter  Oi- 
thona.  The  lady  was  no  lefi  enamoured  of  Gaul,  and  a  day  was  fixed  for  their 
marriage.  In  the  mean  time  Finga!,  preparing  for  an  expedition  into  the 
country  of  the  Britons,  fent  for  Gaul.  He  obeyed,  and  went ;  but  not  without 
promifing  to  Oithona  to  return,  if  he  furvived  the  war,  by  a  certain  day.  Lath- 
mon too  was  obliged  to  ajtend  his  father  Nuath  in  his  wars,  and  Oithona  was  left 
alone  at  Dunlathmon,  the  feat  of  the  family.  Dunrommath,  lord  of  Uthal, 
fuppofed  to  be  one  of  the  Orkneys,  taking  advantage  of  the  abfence  of  her 
friends,  came  and  carried  off,  by  force,  Oithona,  vAw  had  formerly  rejefted  his 
love,  into  Tromathon,  a  defart  ifland,  where  he  concealed  her  in  a  cave. 

Gaul  returned  on  the  day  appointed ;  heard  of  the  rape,  and  failed  to  Troma- 
thon, to  revenge  himfelf  on  Dunrommath.  When  he  landed,  he  found  Oi- 
thona difconfolate,  and  refolved  not  to  furvive  the  lofs  of  her  honour.  She  told 
him  the  flory  of  her  misfortunes,  and  fhe  fcarce  ended,  when  Dunrommath, 
with  his  followers,  appeared  at  the  further  end  of  the  ifland.  Gaul  prepared  to 
attack  him,  recommending  to  Oithona  to  retire,  till  the  battle  was  over.  She 
fecmingly  obeyed;  but  flie  fecretly  armed  herfelf,  ruflied  into  the  thickeft  of  the 
battle,  and  was  mortally  wounded.  Gaul  purfuing  the  flying  enemy,  found  her 
juft  expiring  on  the  field:  he  mourned  over  her,  raifed  her  tomb,  and  returned 
to  Morven.  Thus  is  the  fiory  handed  down  by  tradition;  nor  is  it  given  with 
any  material  difference  in  the  poem,  which  opens  with  Gaul's  return  to  Dun- 
lathmon, after  the  rape  of  Oithona. 


O      I     T     H     O     N     A  : 


o  E  M. 


DARKNESS  dwells  around  Dunlathmon,  though  the 
moon  fhews  half  her  face  on  the  hill.  The  daugh- 
ter of  night  turns  her  eyes  away ;  (he  beholds  the  ap- 
proaching grief.  The  fon  of  Morni  is  on  the  plain  :  there 
is  no  found  in  the  hall.  No  long-flreaming  beam  of  light 
comes  trembling  through  the  gloom.  The  voice  of  Oitho- 
na  *  is  not  heard  amidft  the  noife  of  the  ftreams  of  Duv- 
ranna.  "  Whither  art  thou  gone  in  thy  beauty,  dark- 
haired  daughter  of  Nuath  ?  Lathmon  is  in  the  field  of  the 
valiant,  but  thou  didft  promife  to  remain  in  the  hall  ; 
thou  didft  promife  to  remain  in  the  hall,  till  the  fon  of 
Morni  returned — till  he  returned  from  Strumon,  to  the 
maid  of  his  love  !  The  tear  was  on  thy  cheek  at  his  de- 
parture ;  the  figh  rofe  in  fecret  in  thy  breaft.  But  thou 
doft  not  come  forth  with  fongs,  with  the  lightly-trembling 
found  of  the  harp  !" 

Such  were  the  words  of  Gaul,  when  he  came  to  Dun- 
lathmon's  towers.  The  gates  were  open  and  dark.,  Tlie 
winds  were  bluftering  in  the  hall.  The  trees  ftrewed  the 
threfhold  with  leaves  :  the  murmur  of  night  was  abroad. 
Sad  and  filent,  at  a  rock,  the  fon  of  Morni  fat :  his  foul 
trembled  for  the  maid  ;  but  he  knev/  not  whither  to  turn 
his  courfe.  The  fon  |  of  Leth  ftood  at  a  diftance,  and 
heard  the  winds  in  his  bufliy  hair.  But  he  did  not  raife 
his  voice,  for  he  fawthe  forrov/  of  Gaul ! 

Sleep  defcended  on  the  chiefs.  The  vifions  of  night 
arofe.     Oithona  ftood,  in  a  dream,  before  the  eyes  of 

Morni's 

*  Oi-thona,  tlie  virgin  of  the  wave. 

t  Morlo,  the  fon  of  L-th,  is  one  of  Fingal's  mod  famous  heroes.  He  and 
-three  other  men  attended  Cawl  on  his  expedition  to  Tromathon, 


78  '     O  I  T  H  O  N  A  : 

Morni^  fon.  Her  hair  was  loofe  and  difordered  :  "her 
lovely  eye  rolled  deep  in  tears.  Blood  flained  her  fnowy 
arm.  The  robe  half  hid  the  wound  of  her  bread.  She 
ftood  over  the  chief,  and  her  voice  was  feebly  heard. 
*"  Sleeps  the  fon  of  Morni,  he  that  was  lovely  in  the  eyes 
of  Oithona  ?  Sleeps  Gaul  at  the  diftant  rock,  and  the 
daughter  of  Nuaih  low  ?  The  fea  rolls  round  the  dark  ifle 
of  Tromathon.  I  fit  in  ray  tears  in  the  cave  !  Nor  do  I  fit 
alone,  O  Gaul :  the  dark  chief  of  Cuthal  is  there.  He  is 
there  in  the  rage  of  his  love.     What  can  Oithona  do  ?'* 

A  ROUGHER  blafl  ruflied  through  the  oak.  The  dream 
of  night  departed.  Gaul  took  his  afpen  fpear.  He  flood 
in  the  rage  of  his  foul.  Often  did  his  ey^s  turn  to  the 
eaft.  He  accufed  the  lagging  light.  At  length  the  morn- 
ing came  forth.  The  hero  lifted  up  the  fail.  The  winds 
came  ruitling  from  the  hill ;  he  bounded  on  the  waves  of 
the  deep.  On  the  third  day  arofe  Tromathon  *,  like  a 
blue  fiiield  in  the  midft  of  the  fea.  The  white  wave  roared 
againft  its  rocks  ;  fad  Oithona  fat  on  the  coaft !  She  look- 
ed on  the  rolling  waters,  and  her  tears  came  down.  But 
when  (lie  faw  Gaul  in  his  arms,  fhe  ftarted  and  turned  her 
eyes  away.  Her  lovely  cheek  is  bent  and  red  ;  her  white 
arm  trembles  by  her  fide.  Thrice  flie  fhrove  to  fly  from 
his  prefence  ;  thrice  her  fteps  failed  her  as  ihe  went ! 

"  Daughter  of  Nuath,"  faid  the  hero,  "  why  doft 
thou  fly  from  Gaul  ?  Do  my  eyes  fend  forth  the  flame  of 
death  ?  Darkens  hatred  in  my  foul  ?  Thou  art  to  me  the 
beam  of  the  eaft,  rifing  in  a  land  unknown.  But  thou 
covereft  thy  face  with  fadnefs,  daughter  of  car-borne 
Nuath  !  Is  the  foe  of  Oithona  near  ?  My  foul  burns  to 
meet  him  in  fight.  The  fword  trembles  by  the  fide  of 
Gaul,  and  longs  to  glitter  in  his  hand.  Speak,  daughter 
of  Nuath,  doft  thou  not  behold  my  tears  ?'* 

*'  Young  chief  of  Strumon,"  replied  the  maid,  "  why 
comeft  thou  over  the  dark-blue  wave,  to  Nuath 's  mourn- 
ful daughter  ?  Why  did  I  not  pafs  av/ay  in  fecret,  like  the 
flower  of  the  rock,  that  lifts  its  fair  head  unfeen,  and 
ftrews  Its  withered  leaves  on  the  blaft  ?  Why  didft  thou 
come,  O  Gaul,  to  hear  my  departing  figh  ?    I  vanifli  in 

my 

■*  Trym-thonj  heavy  or  deep-fmiding  pave-, 


A    P  O  E  M.  79 

my  youth  ;  my  name  fhall  not  be  heard.  Or  it  will  be 
heard  with  grief:  the  tears  of  Nulith  mufl  fall.  Thou  wilr 
be  fad,  fon  of  Morni,  for  the  departed  fame  of  Oithona. 
But  fhe  Ihall  fleep  in  the  narrow  tomb,  far  from  the  voice 
of  the  mourner.  Why  didll  thou  come,  chief  of  Strumon,, 
to  the  fea-beat  rocks  of  Tromathon  ?" 

"  I  CAME  to  m.eet  thy  foes,  daughter  of  car-borne 
Nuath  !  The  death  of  Cuthal's  chief  darkens  before  me  ; 
or  Morni's  fon  iliall  fall  !  Oithona  1  when  Gaul  is  low, 
raife  my  tom.b  on  that  oozy  rock.  When  the  dark-bound- 
ing fhip  fhall  pafs,  call  the  fons  of  the  fea  !  call  them,  and 
give  this  fword,  to  bear  it  hence  to  Morni's  hall.  The- 
grey-haired  chief  will  then  ceafe  to  look  towards  the  de- 
fart,  for  the  return  of  his  fon  !'* 

"  Shall  the  daughter  of  Nuath  live  ?"  fhe  replied  with 
a  burfting  figh.  "  Shall  I  live  in  Tromathon,  and  the 
fon  of  Morni  low  ?  My  heart  is  not  of  that  rock  ;  nor  my 
foul  carelefs  as  that  fea  ;  which  lifts  its  blue  waves  to  every 
wind,  and  rolls  beneath  the  ftorm !  The  blaft  which  fliall 
fey  thee  low,  fhall  fpread  the  branches  of  Oithona  or 
earth.  We  fhall  v/ither  together,  fon  of  car-borne  Morni ! 
The  narrow  houfe  is  pleafant  to  me,  and  the  grey  (tone  of. 
the  dead  :  for  never  more  will  I  leave  thy  rocks,  O  fea- 

furrounded  Tromathon  ! ^Night  *  came  on  with  her 

clouds,  after  the  departure  of  Lathmon,  when  he  wenf 
to  the  wars  of  his  fathers,  to  the  mofs-covered  rock  of 
Duthormoth.  Night  came  on.  I  fat  in  the  hall,  at  the 
beam  of  the  oak !  The  Vvdnd  was  abroad  in  the  trees.  I 
heard  the  found  of  arms.  Joy  rofe  in  my  face.  I  thought 
of  thy  return.  It  was  the  chief  of  Cuthal,  the  red-haired 
ftrength  of  Dunrommath.  His  eyes  rolled  in  fire :  the 
blood  of  my  people  was  on  his  fword.  They  w^ho  defend- 
ed Oithona  fell  by  the  gloomy  chief!  What  could  I  do  ? 
My  arm  was  vveak.  I  could  not  lift  the  fpear.  He  took 
me  in  my  grief,  amidfl  my  tears  he  raifed  the  fail.  He 
feared  the  returning  Lathmon,  the  brother  of  unhappy 

Oithona ! But,  behold,  he  comes  with  his  people  !  the 

dark  wave  is  divided  before  him !  WTiither  wilt  thou  turn 

thy 

*  Oithona  relate?  bow  Cbe  v.-as  carried  away  by  Du,nronim«Ui, 


So  O  I  T  H  O  N  A  : 

thy  fleps,  fon  of  Morni  ?  Many  are  the  warriors  of  thy 
foe  !" 

"  My  (leps  never  turned  from  battle,"  Gaul  fald,  and 
unfheathed  his  fword.  "  Shall  I  then  begin  to  fear,  Oi- 
thona,  Vv.hen  thy  foes  are  near  ?  Go  to  thy  cave,  my  love, 
till  our  battle  ceafe  on  the  field.  Son  of  Leth,  bring  the 
bows  of  our  fathers  !  the  founding  quiver  of  Morni !  Let 
our  three  warriors  bend  the  yew.  Ourfelves  will  lift  the 
fpear.  They  are  an  hoft  on  the  rock  !  our  fouls  are  flrong 
in  war !" 

OiTHONA  went  to  the  cave.  A  troubled  joy  rofe  on  her 
mind,  like  the  red  path  of  lightning  on  a  flormy  cloud  ! 
Her  foul  was  refolved  ;  the  tear  was  dried  from  her  wildly- 
looking  eye.  Dunrommath  flov/ly  approached.  He  faw 
the  fon  of  Morni.  Contempt  contracted  his  face  ;  a  fmile 
is  on  his  dark-brown  cheek ;  his  red  eye  rolled,  half- 
conceal'd,  beneath  his  fhaggy  brows  ! 

"  Whence  are  the  fons  of  the  fea  ?"  begun  the  gloomy 
chief.  "  Have  the  winds  driven  you  on  the  rocks  of 
Tromathon  ?  Or  come  you  in  fearch  of  the  white-handed 
maid  ?  The  fons  of  the  unhappy,  ye  feeble  men,  come  to 
the  hand  of  Dunrommath  !  His  eye  fpares  not  the  weak  ; 
he  delights  in  the  blood  of  ftrangers.  Oithona  is  a  beam 
of  light,  and  the  chief  of  Cuthal  enjoys  it  in  fecret : 
wouldfl  thou  come  on  its  loveiinefs,  like  a  cloud,  fon  of 
the  feeble  hand  !  Thou  mayfl  come  ;  but  flialt  thou  re- 
turn to  the  halls  of  thy  fathers  ?"  "  Doft  thou  not  know 
me,"  faid  Gaul,  "  red-haired  chief  of  Cuthal  ?  Thy  feet 
were  fwift  on  the  heath,  in  the  battle  of  car-borne  Lath- 
mon  ;  when  the  fword  of  Morni's  fon  purfued  his  hoft,  in 
Morven's  woody  land.  Dunrommath !  thy  words  are 
mighty,  for  thy  warriors  gather  behind  thee.  But  do  I 
fear  them,  fon  of  pride?  I  am  not  of  the  race  of  the  feeble  !" 

Gaul  advanced  in  his  arms ;  Dunrommath  fhrunk 
behind  his  people.  But  the  fpear  of  Gaul  pierced  the 
gloomy  chief;  his  fword  lopped  off  his  head,  as  it  bended 
in  death.  The  fon  of  Morni  Ihook  it  thrice  by  the  lock ; 
the  warriors  of  Dunrommath  fled.  The  arrows  of  Morven 
purfued  them  :  ten  fell  on  the  moiTy  rocks.  The  reft  lift 
the  founding  fail,  and  bouiid  oji  the  troubled  deep.    Gaul 

iidvanced 


A    P  O  E  M.  81 

advanced  towards  the  cave  of  Olthona.  He  beheld  a 
youth  leaning  on  a  rock.  An  arrow  had  pierced  his  fide; 
his  eye  rolled  faintly  beneath  his  helmet.  The  foul  of 
Morni's  fon  was  fad,  he  came  and  fpoke  the  words  of 
peace. 

"  Can  the  hand  of  Gaul  heal  thee,  youth  of  the  mourn- 
ful brow  ?  I  have  fearched  for  the  herbs  of  the  mountains; 
I  have  gathered  them  on  the  fecret  banks  of  their  ftreams. 
My  hand  has  clofed  the  wound  of  the  brave,  their  eyes 
have  blelfed  the  fon  of  Morni.  Where  dwelt  thy  fathers, 
warrior?  Were  they  of  the  fons  of  the  mighty  ?  Sadnefs 
fhall  come,  like  night,  on  thy  native  ftreams.  Thou  art 
fallen  in  thy  youth  !" 

"  My  fathers,"  replied  the  ftranger,  "  were  of  the  race 
of  the  mighty  ;  but  they  iliall  not  be  fad  ;  for  my  fame  is 
departed  like  morning  mift.  High  walls  rife  on  the  banks 
of  Duvranna  ;  and  fee  their  molfy  towers  in  the  ftream  ; 
a  rock  afcends  behind  them  with  its  bending  pines. 
Thou  mayft  behold  it  far  diftant.  There  my  brother 
dwells.  He  is  renowned  in  battle:  give  him  this  glittering 
helm." 

The  helmet  fell  from  the  hand  of  Gaul.  It  was  the 
wounded  Oithona !  She  had  armed  herfelf  in  the  cave, 
and  came  in  fearch  of  death.  Her  heavy  eyes  are  half 
clofed  ;  the  blood  pours  from  her  heaving  fide.  "  Son  of 
Morni,"  (he  ,faid,  "  prepare  the  narrow  tomb.  Sleep 
grows,  like  darknefs,  on  my  foul.  The  eyes  of  Oithona 
are  dim  !  O  had  I  dwelt  at  Duvranna,  in  the  bright  beam 
of  my  fame !  then  had  my  years  come  on  with  joy ;  the 
virgins  would  then  blefs  my  fteps.  But  I  fall  in  youth, 
fon  of  Morni ;  my  father  iliall  blufli  in  his  hall !" 

She  fell  pale  on  the  rock  of  Tromathon.  The  mournful 
warrior  raifed  her  tomb.  He  came  to  Morven ;  we  faw 
the  darknefs  of  his  foul.  Offian  took  the  harp  in  the 
praife  of  Oithona.  The  brightnefs  of  the  face  of  Gaul 
returned.  But  his  figh  rofe,  at  times,  in  the  midft  of  his 
friends;  like  blafts  that  fhake  their  unfrequent  wings, 
after  the  ftormy  winds  are  laid! 


CROMA, 


ROMA 


O  E  M, 


ARGUMENT. 

MALVINA  the  daughter  of  Tofcar  is  overheard  by  Offian  lamenting  the  death 
of  Ofcar  her  lover.  Offian,  to  divert  her  grief,  relates  his  own  aflions  in  an 
expedition  which  he  undertook,  at  Fingal's  command,  to  aid  Crothar  the  petty 
king  of  Croma,  a  country  in  Ireland,  againft  Rothmar,  who  invaded  his  domi- 
nions. The  ftory  is  delivered  down  thus  in  tradition.  Crothar  king  of  Croma 
being  blind  with  age,  and  hisTon  too  young  for  the  field,  Rothmar  the  chief  of 
Tromlo  refolved  to  avail  himfelf  of  the  opportunity  offered  of  annexing  the 
dominions  of  Crothar  to  his  own.  He  accordingly  marched  into  the  country 
fubjeft  to  Crothar,  but  which  he  held  of  Arth  or  Artho,  who  was,  at  the  time, 
fupreme  king  of  Ireland. 

Crothar  being,  on  account  of  his  age  and  blindnefs,  unfit  for  a£lion,  fent  for  aid 
to  Fingal  king  of  Scotland ;  who  ordered  his  fon  Oflian  to  the  relief  of  Crothar. 
But  before  his  arrival,  Fovar-gormo,  the  fon  of  Crothar,  attacking  Rothmar,  was 
flain  himfelf,  and  his  forces  totally  defeated.  OflTian  renewed  the  war;  came 
to  battle,  killed  Rothmar,  and  routed  his  army.  Croma  being  thus  delivered  of 
its  enemies,  OInan  returned  to  Scotland. 


ROMA 


P  O  E  M. 

'*  TT  was  the  voice  of  my  love !  feldom  art  thou  In  the 
A  dreams  of  Malvina!  Open  your  airy  halls,  O  fathers 
of  Tofcar  of  fhields  !  Unfold  the  gates  of  your  clouds  : 
the  fteps  of  Malvina  are  near.  I  have  heard  a  voice  in 
my  dream.  I  feel  the  fluttering  of  my  foul.  Why  didfl 
thou  come,  O  blaft,  from  the  dark-rolling  face  of  the 
lake  ?  Thy  rullling  wing  was  in  the  tree  j  the  dream  of 
Malvina  fled.  But  fl^ie  beheld  her  love,  when  his  robe  of 
mifl:  flew  on  the  wind.  A  fun-beam  was  on  his  fl^irts, 
they  glittered  like  the  gold  of  the  llranger.  It  was  the 
voice  of  my  love !    feldom  comes  he  to  my  dreams  ! 

"  But  thou  dwellefl  in  the  foul  of  Malvina,  fon  of 
mighty  Offian!  My  fighs  arife  with  the  beam  of  the  eaflt; 
my  tears  defcend  with  the  drops  of  night.  I  v/as  a  lovely 
tree,  in  thy  prefence,  Ofcar,  with  all  my  branches  round 
me ;  but  thy  death  came  like  a  blaft  from  the  defart,  and 
laid  my  green  head  low.  The  fpring  returned  with  its 
ihowers;  no  leaf  of  mine  arofe!  The  virgins  faw  me  filent 
in  the  hall;  they  touched  the  harp  of  joy.  The  tear  was 
on  the  cheek  of  Malvina :  the  virgins  beheld  me  in  my 
grief.  Why  art  thou  fad,  they  faid ;  thou  firft  of  the 
maids  of  Lutha!  Was  he  lovely  as  the  beam  of  the  morn- 
ing, and  ftately  in  thy  fight  ?" 

Pleasant  is  thy  fong  in  Oflian's  ear,  daughter  of 
ftreamy  Lutha !  Thou  haft  heard  the  mufic  of  departed 
bards,  in  the  dream  of  thy  reft,  when  fleep  fell  on  thine 
eyes,  at  the  murmur  of  Moruth*.  When  thou  didft  return 
from  the  chace,  in  the  day  of  the  fun,  thou  haft  heard 
the  mufic  of  bards,  and  thy  fong  is  lovely !  It  is  lovely, 
O  Malvina,  but  it  melts  the  foul.  There  is  a  joy  in  grief 
when  peace  dwells  in  the  breaft  of  the  fad.     But  forrow 

waftes 

*  Mor'-rutb,  great Jlream, 


86  C    R    O    M    A: 

waftes  the  mournful,  O  daughter  of  Tofcar,  and  their 
days  are  few !  They  fall  away,  like  the  flower  on  which 
the  fun  hath  looked  in  his  ftrength  after  the  mildew  has 
pafled  over  it,  when  its  head  is  heavy  with  the  drops  of 
night.  Attend  to  the  tale  of  Offian,  O  maid.  He  remem- 
bers the  days  of  his  youth  ! 

The  king  commanded  ;  I  raifed  my  fails,  and  rufhed 
into  the  bay  of  Croma ;  into  Croma's  founding  bay,  in 
lovely  Inisfail*.  High  on  the  coaft  arofe  the  tov^ers  of 
Crothar  king  of  fpeays  ;  Crothar  renowned  in  the  battles 
of  his  youth  ;  but  age  dwelt  then  around  the  chief.  Roth- 
mar  had  raifed  the  fword  againft  the  hero  ;  and  the  wrath 
of  Fingal  burned.  He  lent  Offian  to  meet  Rothmar  in 
war,  for  the  chief  of  Croma  was  the  friend  of  his  youth. 
I  fent  the  bard  before  me  with  fongs.  I  came  into  the  hall 
of  Crothar.  There  fat  the  chief  amidft  the  arms  ©f  his 
fathers,  but  his  eyes  had  failed.  His  grey  locks  waved 
around  a  ftaif,  on  which  the  warrior  leaned.  He  hummed 
the  fong  of  other  times,  when  the  found  of  our  arms 
reached  his  ears.  Crothar  rofe,  ftretched  his  aged  hand, 
and  bleffed  the  fon  of  Fingal. 

"  OssiAN,"  faid  the  hero,  "  the  ftrength  of  Crothar's 
arm  has  failed.  O  could  I  lift  the  fwcrd,  as  on  the  day 
that  Fingal  fought  at  Strutha  !  He  was  the  firft  of  men ! 
but  Crothar  had  alfo  his  fame.  The  king  of  Morven 
praifed  me  ;  he  placed  on  my  arm  the  boffy  fliield  of 
Calthar,  whom  the  king  had  flain  in  his  wars.  Doft  thou 
not  behold  it  on  the  wall,  for  Crothar's  eyes  have  failed  ? 
Is  thy  ftrength  like  thy  father's,  Offian  ?  Let  the  aged 
feel  thine  arm !" 

I  GAVE  my  arm  to  the  king;  he  felt  it  with  his  aged 
hands.  The  figh  rofe  in  his  breaft,  and  his  tears  came 
down.  "  Thou  art  ftrong,  my  fon,"  he  faid,  "  but  not 
like  the  king  of  Morven  !  But  who  is  like  the  hero  among 
the  ^mighty  in  war  !  Let  the  feaft  of  my  hall  be  fpread  ; 
and  let  my  bards  exalt  the  fong.  Great  is  he  that  is  with- 
in my  walls,  ye  fons  of  echoing  Croma  !"  The  feaft  is 
fpread.  The  harp  is  heard  ;  and  joy  is  in  the  hall.  But 
it  was  joy  covering  a  figh,  that  darkly  dwelt  in  every  breaft. 

It 

*  inisfail,  one  of  the  ancient  names  of  Ireland. 


A     P  O  E  M.  87 

It  was  like  the  faint  beim  of  the  moon  fpread  on  a  cloud 
in  heaven.  At  length  the  mufic  ceafed,  and  the  aged  king 
of  Croma  fpoke  ;  he  fpoke  vathout  a  tear,  but  forrow 
fwelled  in  the  midll:  of  his  voice. 

"  Son  of  Fingal !  behold'fl  thou  not  the  darknefs  of 
Crothar's  joy  ?  My  foul  was  not  fad  at  the  feaft,  when  my 
people  lived  before  me.  I  rejoiced  in  the  prefence  of  ftran- 
gers,  when  my  fon  ihone  in  the  hall.  But,  Offian,  he  is  a 
beam  that  is  departed.  He  left  no  ilreak  of  light  behind. 
He  is  fallen,  fon  of  Fingal,  in  the  wars  of  his  father. 
Rothmar,  the  chief  of  gralfy  Tromlo,  heard  that  thefe 
eyes  had  failed  ;  he  heard  that  my  arms  were  fixed  in 
the  hall,  and  the  pride  of  his  foul  arofe !  He  came  to- 
wards Croma  ;  my  people  fell  before  him.  I  took  my 
arms  in  my  wrath ;  but  what  could  fightlefs  Crothar  do  ? 
My  fleps  were  unequal  ;  my  grief  was  great.  I  wifhed  for 
the  days  that  were  pafl — Days !  wherein  I  fought ;  and 
won  in  the  field  of  blood.  My  fon  returned  from  the 
chace,  the  fair-haired  Fovar-gormo*.  He  had  not  lifted 
his  fword  in  battle,  for  his  arm  was  young.  But  the  foul  of 
the  youth  v/as  great  ;  the  fire  of  valour  burnt  in  his  eyes. 
He  faw  the  difordered  fteps  of  his  father,  and  his  iigh 
arofe.  "  King  of  Croma,"  he  faid,  "  is  it  becaufe  thou 
haft  no  fon ;  is  it  for  the  weaknefs  of  Fovar-gormo's  arm 
that  thy  fighs  arife?  I  begin,  my  father,  to  feel  my  ftrength : 
I  have  drawn  the  fword  of  my  youth  ;  and  I  have  bent 
the  bow.  Let  me  meet  this  Rothmar,  with  the  fons  of 
Croma  :  let  me  meet  him,  O  my  father  ;  I  feel  my  burn- 
ing foul !"  And  thou  flialt  meet  him,  I  faid,  fon  of  the 
fighdefs  Crothar  !  But  let  others  advance  before  thee,  that 
1  may  hear  the  tread  of  thy  feet  at  thy  return ;  for  my 
eyes  behold  thee  not,  fair-haired  Fovar-gormo  !  He  went ; 
he  met  the  u-e ;  he  fell.  Rothmar  advances  to  Croma. 
He  who  flew  my  fon  is  near,  with  all  his  pointed  fpears." 

Tills  is  no  time  to  fill  the  fhell,  I  replied,  and  took  my 
fpear  !  My  people  law  the  fire  of  my  eyes  ;  they  all  arofe 
around.  Through  night  we  ftrode  along  the  heath.  Grey 
mornmg  rois  in  the  eaft.  A  green  narrov/  vale  appeared 
before  us ;  nor  wanting  was  its  winding  ftream.     The 

dark 

*  raobhar-gorm,  the  blue  point  of  JlefL 


88  C    R    O    M    A: 

dark  hoft  of  Rothmar  are  on  its  banks,  with  all  their 
glittering  arms.  We  fought  along  the  vale.  They  fled. 
Rothmar  funk  beneath  my  fword  !  Day  had  not  defcend- 
ed  in  the  weft,  when  I  brought  his  arms  to  Crothar.  The 
aged  hero  felt  them  with  his  hands,  and  joy  brightened 
over  all  his  thoughts. 

The  people  gather  to  the  hall.  The  fhells  of  the  feaft 
are  heard.  Ten  harps  are  ftrung  ;  five  bards  advance, 
and  fmg,  by  turns*,  the  praife  of  Offian  ;  they  poured 

forth 

*  Thofe  extempore  compofitions  were  in  great  repute  among  fucceeding  bards. 
The  pieces  extant  of  that  kind  fhew  mor';  of  the  good  ear,  than  of  the  poetical 
genius  of  their  authors,  llie  tranflator  has  only  inet  uitb  one  poem  of  this  fort, 
which  he  thinks  worthy  of  being  preferved.  It  is  a  ihoufand  years  later  than 
Offian,  but  the  authors  fcem  to  have  obferved  his  manner,  and  adopted  fome  of 
his  exprcfiions.  The  ftory  of  it  is  this.  Five  bards,  pafling  the  night  in  the  houfe 
of  a  chief,  who  was  a  poet  himfelf,  went  feverally  to  make  their  obfervations  on, 
and  returned  with  an  extempore  defcription  of,  night.  The  night  happened  to  be 
one  in  Ofiober,  as  apptais  from  the  poem,  and  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  it  has 
all  that  variety  which  the  bards  afcribe  to  it,  in  their  defcriplions. 

FIRST  BARD. 

NTGHT  is  dull  and  dark.  The  clouds  reft  on  the  hills.  No  ftar  with  green 
trembling  bean; ;  no  moon  looks  from  the  fl^y.  I  hear  the  blaft  in  tlie  wood ; 
but  I  hear  it  diftant  far.  The  llream  of  the  valley  murmurs;  but  its  murmur  is  ful- 
len  and  fad.  From  the  tree  at  ihe  grave  of  the  dead  the  long-howling  owl  is 
heaid.  I  fee  a  dim  form  on  die  plain !  It  is  a  ghoft  !  it  fades,  it  flies.  Some  fu- 
ner?J  {hall  pafs  this  way  ;  the  meteor  marks  the  path. 

Th.  diliant  dog  is  howling  from  the  hut  of  the  hill.  The  flag  lies  on  the 
mountain  mofs:  the  hind  is  at  his  fide.  She  hears  the  wind  in  his  branchy  horns. 
She  flarts,  but  lies  again. 

The  roe  is  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock;  the  heath-cock's  head  is  beneath  his  wing. 
No  beaff,  no  bird  is  abroad,  but  the  owl  and  the  howling  fox.  She  on  a  leaflefs 
tree :   he  in  a  cloud  on  the  hill. 

Dark,  panting,  trembling,  fid  the  tra\celler  has  loft  his  way.  Through  fiirubs, 
through  thorns,  he  goes,  along  the  gurghng  rill.  He  fears  the  rock  and  the  fen. 
He  fears  the  ghoft  of  night.  The  old  tree  groans  to  the  blaft  ;  the  falling  branch 
refounds.  The  wind  drives  the  withered  burs,  clung  together,  along  the  grafs.  It 
is  the  lif^ht  trea.d  of  a  ghoft  !   He  trembles  amidft  the  night. 

Dark,  dufky,  howling  is  night,  cloudy,  windy,  and  full  ofghofts!  The  dead 
«re  abroad!  my  friends,  receive  me  from  the  night.   ' 

SECOND  BARD. 

Ths  wind  is  up.  The  fiiower  defcends.  The  fpirit  of  the  mountain  flirieks. 
Woods  fall  from  high,  Windows  flap.  The  grov,  ing  rivers  roar.  The  traveller 
attempts  the  ford.  Hark  that  fhriek  !  he  dies  :  The  ftorm  drives  the  horfe  from 
the  hill,  the  goat,  the  lowing  cow.  They  tremble  as  drives  the  fliower,  befide  the 
mouldering  bank. 

The  hunter  ftarts  frorr.  flsep,  in  his  lonely  but;  he  wakes  the  fire  decayed.  His 
wet  'Jogs  fmoke  aroutid  him.  He  fills  the  chinks  with  heath.  Loud  roar  two 
roouutain  lUeair.s  v.hivh  r.ieet  bcfide  his  booth. 

Sad 


A    P  O  E  M:  89 

forth  their  burning  fouls,  and  the  firing  anfwered  to  their 
voice.  The  joy  of  Croma  was  great :  for  peace  returned 
to  the  land.  The  night  came  on  with  filence  ;  the  morn- 
ing returned  with  ioy.  No  foe  came  in  darknefs,  with 
M  his 

Sad  on  the  fide  of  a  hill  the  wandering  fliepherd  fits.  The  tree  refounds  above 
him.  The  (lieam  roars  down  the  rock.  He  waits  for  the  rifing  moon  to  guide 
him  to  his  home. 

Ghofts  ride  on  the  ftorm  to-night.  Sweet  is  their  voice  between  the  fqualls  of 
wind.     Their  longs  are  of  other  worlds. 

The  rain  is  part.  The  dry  wind  blows.  Streams  roar,  and  windows  flap.  Cold 
drops  fall  from  the  roof.  I  fee  the  ftarry  fky.  But  the  Ihower  gathers  again.  The 
weft  is  gloomy  and  dark.  Night  is  flormy  and  difmal;  receive  me,  my  friends, 
from  night. 

THIRD  BARD. 

The  wind  fiill  founds  between  the  hills ;  and  whittles  through  the  grafs  of  the 
rock.  The  firs  fall  from  their  place.  The  turfy  hut  is  torn.  The  clouds,  divi- 
ded, fly  over  the  {k\\  and  (hew  the  burning  ftars.  The  meteor,  token  of  death  • 
flies  fparkling  through  the  gloom.  It  refts  on  the  hill.  I  fee  the  withered  fern, 
the  dark-browed  rock,  the  fallen  oak.  Who  is  that  in  his  ftirowd  beneath  the  tree, 
by  the  ftream  ? 

The  waves  dark-tumble  on  the  lake,  and  lafli  its  rocky  fides.  The  boat  is  brim- 
full  in  the  cove;  the  oars  on  the  rocking  tide.  A  maid  fits  fad  befide  the  rock,  and 
eyes  the  rolling  ftream.  Her  lover  promifed  to  come.  She  faw  his  boat,  when  yet 
it  was  light,  on  the  lake.  Is  this  his  broken  boat  on  the  fhore  ?  Are  thefe  his 
groans  on  the  wind  ? 

Hark!  the  hail  rattles  around.  The  flaky  fnow  defcends.  The  tops  of  the  hill? 
are  white.  The  fiormy  winds  abate.  Various  is  the  night  and  cold ;  receive  me, 
my  friends,  from  night. 

FOURTH  BARD. 

Night  is  calm  and  fair;  blue,  ftarry,  fettled  is  night.  The  winds,  with  the 
clouds,  are  gone.  They  fink  behind  the  hill.  The  moon  is  up  on  the  mountain. 
Trees  gliller:  ftieams  iliine  on  the  rock.  Bright  rolls  the  fettled  lake;  bright  the 
ftream  of  the  vale. 

I  lee  the  trees  overturned  ;  the  fiiocks  of  corn  on  the  plain.  The  wakeful  hind 
rebuilds  the  ftiocks,  and  whittles  on  the  dittant  fi^rld. 

Calm,  fettled,  fair  is  night!  Who  comes  from  the  place  of  the  dead  ?  That 
form  with  the  robe  of  fnow  ;  white  arms  and  dark-brov.'n  hair !  It  is  the  daughter 
of- the  chief  of  the  people  :  ttie  that  latelv  fell !  Come,  let  us  view  thee,  O  maid! 
thou  that  haft  been  the  delight  of  heroes !  The  blaft  drives  the  phantom  away  j 
white,  without  form,  it  afcends  the  hill. 

The  breezes  drive  the  blue  mift  flowly  over  the  narrow  vale.  It  rifes  on  the 
hill,  and  joins  its  head  to  heaven.  Night  is  fettled,  calm,  blue,  ftarry,  blight  witii 
the  moon.    Receive  me  not,  my  friends,  for  lovely  is  the  night. 

FIFTH  BARD. 
Night  is  calm,  but  dreary.  The  moon  is  in  a  cloud  in  the  weft.  Slow  moves 
that  pale  beam  along  the  ftiaded  hill.  The  diftanc  wave  is  heard.  The  torrent 
murmurs  on  the  rock.  The  cock  is  heard  from  the  booth.  More  than  half  the 
night  is  paft.  The  houfe-wife,  groping  in  the  gloom,  rekindles  the  fettled  fire. 
The  hunter  thinks  that  day  approaches,  and  calls  his  bounding  dogs.  He  afcen^di 
the  hill  and  whiftles  on  his  way.  A  blaft  removes  the  cloud.  He  fees  the  flarr/ 
plough  of  the  nor'h.    Much  of  the  night  is  to  pafs.     He  nods  by  the  moffy  rock. 


^o  .  C     R    O     M     A. 

his  glittering  fpear.    The  joy  of  Croma  was  great,  for  the 
gloomy  Rothmar  had  fallen  ! 

I  RAISED  my  voice  for  Fovar-gormo,  when  they  laid 
the  chief  in  earth.  The  aged  Crothar  was  there,  but  his 
figh  was  not  heard.  He  fearched  for  the  wound  of  his 
fon,  and  found  ,it  in  his  bread.  Joy  rofe  in  the  face  of 
the  aged.  He  came  and  fpoke  to  Offian.  "  King  of 
fpears !"  he  faid,  "  my  fon  has  not  fallen  without  his 
fame.  The  young  warrior  did  not  fly  ;  but  met  death, 
as  he  went  forward  in  his  flrength.  Happy  are  they  who 
die  in  youth,  when  their  renown  is  heard  !  The  feeble 
will  not  behold  them  in  the  hall  ;  or  fmile  at  their  trem- 
bling hands.  Their  memory  ihall  be  honoured  in  fong  ; 
the  young  tear  of  the  virgin  will  fall.  But  the  aged  wi- 
ther away,  by  degrees  :  the  fame  of  their  youth,  while 
yet  they  live,  is  all  forgot.  They  fall  in  fecret.  The  figh 
of  their  fon  is  not  heard.  Joy  is  around  their  tomb  ;  the 
ftone  of  their  fame  is  placed  without  a  tear.  Happy  are 
they  who  die  in  youth,  when  their  renown  is  around 
them  !" 

Hark!  the  whirlwind  is  in  the  wood  f  a  lo-.v  murmur  in  the  vale!  It  is  the  migh- 
ty army  of  the  dead  returnino  from  the  air. 

The  moon  retls  behind  the  hill.  The  beam  is  filU  on  that  lofty  rock.  Long  are 
th^fhadows  of  the  trees.  Now  it  is  dark  over  all.  Night  is  dreary,  filent,  and 
dark ;  receive  me,  my  friends,  from  night. 

THE  CHIEF. 

Let  clouds  refi  on  the  hills  ;  fpirits  fly,  and  travellers  fear.  Let  the  winds  of  the 
woods  arifc,  the  founding  fiorms  defcend.  Roar  ftrcams  and  windows  flap,  and 
green  win"cd  meteors  fly;  rife  the  pale  moon  from  behind  her  hills,  or  cnclofe 
her  head  in  clouds ;  night-  is  alike  to  me,  blue,  (lormy,  or  gloomy  the  fky.  Night 
flies  before  the  beam,  when  it  is  poured  on  the  hill.  The  young  da'y  returns  from 
his  cioudi,  but  we  return  no  more. 

Where  are  our  chiefs  of  old  ?  Where  our  kings  of  mighty  name  ?  The  fields  of 
their  battles  are  filent.  Scarce  theii  molTy  tombs  remain.  We  fhall  alio  be  forgot. 
'This  lofty  houfe  fliall  fail.  Our  fons  fhall  not  behold  the  ruin  in  grafs.  They  fhdl 
afk  of  the  au,ed,   "  Where  flood  the  walls  of  our  fathers?" 

Raif?  the  fong,  and  flrike  the  harp  ;  fend  round  the  (hells  of  joy.  Sufpcnd  a 
hui'dred  tapers  on  high.  Youths  and  maids  begin  the  dance.  Let  fome  grey  b;iid 
be  near  me  to  tell  the  deeds  of  other  times;  of  kings  renowned  in  our  land,  of 
chiefs  we  behold  no  more.  Thus  let  the  night  pafs  until  morning  fliall  appear  in 
GUI  halls.  Th;n  let  the  bow  be  at  hand,  the  dogs,  the  youths  of  the  chacc.  We 
fliall  afcend  the  Iidll  with  day,  and  awake  the  deer. 


CALTHON 


CALTHON  AND  COLMAL 


P  O  E  M. 


ARGUMENT. 

THIS  piece,  as  many  more  of  Offian's  compofitions,  is  addreffed  to  one  of  the  firfi 
Chriftian  miflionaries.  The  flory  of  the  poem  is  handed  down,  by  tradition, 
thus.  In  the  country  of  the  Britons  between  the  walls,  two  chiefs  lived  in  the 
days  of  Fingal,  Dunthalmo,  lord  of  Teutha,  fuppofed  to  be  the  Tweed;  and 
Rathmor,  who  dwelt  at  Clutlia,  well  known  to  be  the  river  Clyde.  Rathmor 
was  not  more  renowned  for  his  generofity  and  hofpitality,  than  Dunthalmo  was 
infamous  for  his  cruelty  and  ambition.  Dunthalmo,  through  envy,  or  on  account 
of  fome  private  feuds,  which  fubfifted  between  the  families,  murdered  Rathmor 
at  a  feaft ;  but  being  afterwards  touched  with  remorfe,  he  educated  the  two  fons 
of  Rathmor,  Calthon  and  Colmar,  in  his  own  houfe.  They  growing  up  to 
man's  eftate,  dropped  fome  hints  that  they  intended  to  revenge  the  death  of  their 
father,  upon  which  Dunthalmo  fhut  them  up  in  two  caves  on  the  banks  of  Teu- 
tha, intending  to  take  them  off  privately,  Colmal,  the  daughter  of  Dunthalmo, 
vho  wasfecretly  in  love  with  Calthon,  helped  him  to  make  his  efcape  from  pri- 
fon,  and  fled  with  him  to  Fingal,  difguifed  in  the  habit  of  a  young  warrior,  and 
implored  his  aid  againft  Dunthalmo.  Fingal  fent  OlTian  with  three  hundred 
men,  to  Colmar's  relief.  Dunthslmo  having  previoufly  murdered  Colmar,  came 
to  a  battle  with  Offian;  but  he  was  killed  by  that  hero,  and  his  army  totally 
defeated. 

Calthon  married  Colmal,  his  deliverer:  and  OITian  returned  to  Morven. 


CALTHON  AND  COLMAL 


POEM. 

PLEASANT  is  the  voice  of  thy  fong,  thou  lonely 
dweller  of  the  rock.  It  comes  on  the  found  of  the 
ftream,  along  the  narrow  vale.  My  foul  awakes,  O  ftran- 
ger  !  in  the  midfl  of  my  hall.  I  ftretch  my  hand  to  the 
fpear,  as  in  the  days  of  other  years,  I  ftretch  my  har.l, 
but  it  is  feeble  ;  and  the  figh  of  my  bofom  grows.  V/  ,t 
thou  not  liften,  fon  of  the  rock,  to  the  fong  of  Ofl;:^^ .  ? 
My  foul  is  full  of  other  times  ;  the  joy  of  my  youth  re- 
turns. Thus  the  fun  appears  in  the  weft,  after  the  fteps 
of  his  brightnefs  have  moved  behind  a  ftorm :  the  green 
hills  lift  their  dewy  heads  ;  the  blue  ftreams  rejoice  in  the 
vale.  The  aged  hero  comes  forth  on  his  ftafF;  his  grey 
hair  glitters  in  the  beam.  Doft  thou  not  behold,  fon  of 
the  rock,  a  lliield  in  Oftian's  hall  ?  It  is  marked  with  the 
ftrokes  of  battle  ;  and  the  brightnefs  of  its  boffes  has 
failed.  That  fliield  the  great  Dunthalmo  bore,  the  chief 
of  ftreamy  Teutha.  Dunthalmo  bore  it  in  battle,  before 
he  fell  by  Offian's  fpear.  Liften,  fo  i  of  the  rock,  to  the 
tale  of  other  years  ! 

Rathmor  was  a  chief  of  Clutha.  The  feeble  dwelt  in 
his  hall.  The  gates  of  Rathmor  were  never  fhut ;  his 
feaft  was  already  fpread.  The  fons  of  the  ftranger  came. 
They  blelfed  the  generous  chief  of  Clutha.  Bards  raifed 
the  fong,  and  touched  the  harp  :  joy  brightened  on  the 
face  of  the  fad  !  Dunthalmo  came,  in  his  pride,  and  rulh- 
ed  into  the  combat  of  Rathmor.  The  chief  of  Clutha 
overcame:  the  rage  of  Dunthalmo  rofe.  He  came,  by 
night,  with  his  warriors  ;  the  mighty  Rathmor  fell.  He 
fell  in  his  halls,  where  his  feaft  was  often  fpread  for  ftran- 
gers. 

CoLMAR  and  Calthon  were  young,  the  fons  of  car-borne 
R-athmor,  They  came,  in  the  joy  of  youth,  into  their  fa- 
ther's 


94         CALTHON  and  COLMAL: 

ther's  hall.  They  behold  him  In  his  blood  ;  their  burfting 
tears  defcend.  The  foul  of  Dunthalmo  melted,  when  he 
faw  the  children  of  youth.  He  brought  them  to  Alteu- 
tha's  *  walls  ;  they  grew  in  the  houfe  of  their  foe.  They 
bent  the  bow  in  his  prefence  ;  and  came  forth  to  his  wars. 
They  faw  the  fallen  walls  of  their  fathers  ;  they  faw  the 
green  thorn  in  the  hall.  Their  tears  rallied  forth  in  fe- 
cret.  At  times,  their  faces  were  fad.  Dunthalmo  beheld 
their  grief :  his  darkening  foul  defigned  their  death.  He 
clofed  them  in  two  caves,  on  the  echoing  banks  of  Teutha. 
The  fun  did  not  come  there  with  his  beams  ;  nor  the 
moon  of  heaven  by  night.  The  fons  of  Rathmor  remain- 
ed in  darknefs,  and  forefaw  their  death. 

The  daughter  of  Dunthalmo  wept  in  filence,  the  fair- 
haired,  blue-eyed  Colmal-]-.  Her  eye  had  rolled  in  fecret 
on  Calthon  ;  his  lovelinefs  fwelled  in  her  foul.  She  trem- 
bled for  her  warrior  ;  but  what  could  Colmal  do  ?  Her 
arm  could  not  lift  the  fpear  ;  nor  was  the  fword  formed 
for  her  fide.  Her  white  bread  never  rofe  beneath  a  mail. 
Neither  was  her  eye  the  terror  of  heroes.  What  canft 
thou  do,  O  Colmal !  for  the  falling  chief  ?  Her  fleps  are 
unequal  ;  her  hair  is  loofe  :  her  eye  looks  wildly  through 
her  tears.  She  came,  by  night,  to  the  halll|.  She  armed 
her  lovely  form  in  fteel ;  the  fteel  of  a  young  warrior, 
who  fell  in  the  firft  of  his  battles.  She  came  to  the  cave 
of  Calthon,  and  loofed  the  thong  from  his  hands. 

"  Arise,  fon  of  Rathmor,"  flie  faid,  "  arife,  the  night 
is  dark  !  Let  us  fly  to  the  king  of  Selma§,  chief  of  fallen 
Clutha  !  I  am  the  fon  of  Lamgal,  who  dwelt  in  thy  fa- 
ther's hall.  I  heard  of  thy  dark  dwelling  in  the  cave,  and 
my  foul  arofe.     Arife,  fon  of  Rathmor,  arife,  the  night  is 

dark  !" 

*  Al-teutha,  or  rather  Balteutha,  the  town  of  Tweed,  the  name  of  Dunthalmo's 
f;at.  It  is  obfeivable  that  all  the  names  in  this  poem,  are  derived  from  the  Galic 
janguage ;  which  is  a  proof  that  it  was  once  the  univerfal  language  of  the  whole 
ifland. 

t  Caol-rahal,  a  woman  with/mail  eye-brows;  fmall  eye-brows  were  a  diflin- 
guifliing  part  of  beauty  in  Offian's  time :  and  he  feldom  fails  to  give  them  to  the  fine 
women  of  his  poems. 

II  That  is,  the  hall  where  the  arms  taken  from  enemies  were  hung  up  as  trophies. 
Offian  is  very  careful  to  make  his  Oories  probable  :  he  makes  Colmal  put  on  the 
arms  of  a  youth  killed  in  his  firft  battle,  as  more  proper  for  a  young  woman,  who 
cannot  be  fuppofed  ftrong  enough  to  carry  the  armour  of  a  full-grov/n  warrior. 

^  Fi'ngal, 


A     P  O  E  M.  95 

dark  !"  "  Bieft  voice,"  replied  the  chief,  "  comefl  thou 
from  the  clouds  to  Calthon  ?  The  ghoib  of  his  fathers  have 
often  defcended  in  his  dreams,  fmce  the  fun  has  retired 
from  his  eyes,  and  darknefs  has  dwelt  around  him.  Or 
art  thou  the  fon  of  Lamgal,  the  chief  I  often  faw  in  Clu- 
tha  ?  But,  lliali  I  fly  to  Fingal,  and  Colmar  my  brother 
low  ?  Will  I  fiy  to  Morven,  and  the  hero  clofed  in  night  ? 
No :  give  me  that  fpear,  fon  of  Lamgal ;  Calthon  will 
defend  his  brother !" 

"  A  THOUSAND  warriors,"  replied  the  maid,  "  (Iretch 
their  fpears  round  car-borne  Colmar.  What  can  Calthon 
do  againlf  a  hoil  fo  great  ?  Let  us  fly  to  the  king  of  Mor- 
ven :  he  will  come  with  war.  His  arm  is  ftretched  forth  to 
the  unhappy  ;  the  lightning  of  his  fv/ord  is  round  the 
weak.  Arile,  thou  fon  of  Rathmor;  the  fliadows  will  fly 
away.  Arife,  or  thy  fteps  may  be  feen,  and  thou  mult 
fall  in  youth  1" 

The  fighing  hero  rofe;  his  tears  defcend  for  car-borne 
Colmar.  He  came  with  the  maid  to  Selma*s  hall;  but  he 
knew  not  that  it  was  Colmal.  The  helmet  covered  her 
lovely  face.  Her  bofom  heaved  beneath  the  fl:eel.  Fingal 
returned  from  the  chace,  and  found  the  lovely  flrangers. 
They  were  like  two  beams  of  light,  in  the  midft  of  the 
hall  of  fhells.  The  king  heard  the  tale  of  grtef ;  and 
turned  his  eyes  around.  A  thoufand  heroes  half-rofe  be- 
fore him ;  claiming  the  war  of  Teutha.  I  came  with  my 
fpear  from  the  hill ;  the  joy  of  battle  rofe  in  my  bread  : 
for  the  king  fpoke  to  Ofllan  in  the  midft  of  a  thoufand 
chiefs. 

"  Son  of  my  ftrength,"  began  the  king,  "  take  thou 
the  fpear  of  Fingal.  Go  to  Teutha's  rufliing  ftream,  and 
fave  the  car-borne  Colmar.  Let  thy  fame  return  before 
thee  like  a  pleafant  gale ;  that  my  foul  may  rejoice  over 
my  fon,  who  renews  the  renown  of  our  fathers.  OlTian  I 
be  thou  a  ftorm  in  v/ar ;  but  mild  when  the  foe  is  low^ ! 
It  was  thus  my  fame  arofe,  O  my  fon ;  be  thou  like  Sel- 
ma's  chief.  When  the  haughty  come  to  my  halls,  my  evcs 
behold  them  not.  But  my  arm  is  ftretched  forth  to  the 
unhappy.    My  fword  defends  the  weak." 

I  REJ0ICEi> 


96 


CALTHON  AND  COLMAL: 


I  REJOICED  in  the  words  of  the  king.  I  took  my  rat- 
tling arms.  Diaran  *  rofe  at  my  fide,  and  Dargo  f  king  of 
fpears.  Three  hundred  youths  followed  our  fteps :  the 
lovely  ftrangers  were  at  my  fide.  Dunthalmo  heard  the 
found  of  our  approach.  He  gathered  the  ftrength  of  Teu- 
tha.  He  flood  on  a  hill  with  his  hofl.  They  were  like 
rocks  broken  with  thunder,  when  their  bent  trees  are 
fmged  and  bare,  and  the  (treams  of  their  chinks  have  fail- 
ed. The  ftream  of  Teutha  rolled,  in  its  pride,  before  the 
gloomy  foe.  I  fent  a  bard  to  Dunthalmo,  to  offer  the 
combat  on  the  plain ;  but  he  fmiled  in  the  darknefs  of  his 
pride.  His  unfettled  hoft  mxoved  on  the  hill ;  like  the 
mountain-cloud,  when  the  blafl  has  entered  its  womb,  and 
fcatters  the  curling  gloom  on  every  fide. 

They  brought  Colmar  to  Teutha's  bank,  bound  with 
a  thoufand  thongs.  The  chief  is  fad,  but  (lately.  His  eye 
is  on  his  friends  ;  for  we  Hood,  in  our  arms,  whilfl  Teu- 
tha's waters  rolled  between.  Dunthalmo  came  with  his 
fpear,  and  pierced  the  hero's  fide  :  he  rolled  on  the  bank 
in  his  blood.     We  heard  his  broken  fighs.    Calthon  rufii- 

ed 

*  Diaran,  father  of  that  Connal  who  was  unfortunately  killed  by  Crimoia,  his 
iniftiefs. 

+  Dargo,  the  Ton  of  Collath,  is  celebrated  in  other  poems  by  Oflian.  He  is  faid 
to  have  been  killed  by  a  boar  at  a  hunting  party.  The  lamentation  of  his  mifirefs, 
or  wife,  Mingala,  over  his  body  is  extant;  but  whether  it  is  of  Offian's  compofiti- 
on,  1  can'iot  determine.  It  is  generally  afcribed  to  him,  and  has  much  of  his  man- 
ner; but  fome  tiaditions  mention  it  as  an  imitation  by  Ibme  later  bard.  As  it  has 
fome  poetical  merit,  I  have  fubjoined  it. 

THE  fpoufe  of  Dargo  comes  in  tears:  for  Dargo  is  no  morel  The  heroes  figlv 
ovc:  Lartho's  chief:  and  what  fliall  fad  Mingala  do?  The  dark  foul  vanidied 
like  morning  mid,  before  the  king  of  fpears :  but  the  generous  glowed  in  his  pre- 
fence  likv^-  the  morning  flar. 

Who  was  the  faireft  and  moft  lovely?  Who  but  Goliath's  flately  fon?  Who  fat 
in  the  niidft  of  the  wife,  but  Darjj^o  of  mighty  deeds? 

Thy  hand  touched  the  trembling  harp  :  Thy  voice  was  foft  as  fummer-winds. 
Ah  me  !  what  fhall  the  heroes  fay?  for  Dargo  fell  before  a  boar.  Pale  is  thy  love- 
ly cheek ;  the  iook  of  which  was  firm  in  danger  !  Why  haft  thou  failed  on  our 
hills,  thou  fairer  than  the  beams  of  the  fun  ? 

The  daughter  of  Adonfion  was  lovely  in  the  eyes  of  the  vahant;  fhe  was  lovely 
in  their  eyes,  but  Ihe  chofe  to  be  the  fpoufe  of  Dargo. 

But  thou  art  alone,  Mingala  I  the  night  is  coming  with  its  clouds :  where  is  the 
bed  of  thy  repofe  ?  Where,  but  in  the  tomb  of  Dargo  ? 

Why  dofl  thou  lift  the  ftone,  O  bard !  Why  dofl  thou  fliut  the  narrow  houfe  ? 
Mingala's  eyes  are  heavy,  bard  !  She  miaft  fieep  with  Dargo. 

Laft  night  I  heard  the  fong  of  joy  in  Lartho's  lofty  hall.  But  filence  dweh 
around  my  bed.     Mingala  refls  with  Dargo. 


A    P  O  E  M.  97 

ed  Into  the  ftream  :  I  bounded  forward  on  my  fpear. 
Teutha's  race  fell  before  us.  Night  came  rolling  down. 
Dunthalmo  refted  on  a  rock,  amidft  an  aged  wood.  The 
rage  of  his  bofom  burned  againft  the  car-borne  Calthon. 
But  Calthon  flood  in  his  grief :  he  mourned  the  fallen 
Colmar  ;  Colmar  flain  in  youth,  before  his  fame  arofe  ! 

I  BADE  the  fong  of  woe  to  rife,  to  footh  the  mournful 
chief ;  but  he  flood  beneath  a  tree,  and  often  threw  his 
fpear  on  earth.  The  humid  eye  of  Colmal  rolled  near  in 
a  fecret  tear  :  fhe  forefaw  the  fall  of  Dunthalmo,  or  of 
Clutha's  warlike  chief.  Now  half  the  night  had  pafTed 
away.  Silence  and  darknefs  were  on  the  field.  Sleep 
refled  on  the  eyes  of  the  heroes :  Calthon's  fettling  foul 
was  flill.  His  eyes  were  half-clofed  ;  but  the  murmur  of 
Teutha  had  not  yet  failed  in  his  ear.  Pale,  and  fhewing 
his  wounds,  the  ghofl  of  Colmar  came :  he  bent  his  head 
over  the  hero,  and  raifed  his  feeble  voice  ! 

"  Sleeps  the  fon  of  Rathmor  in  his  night,  and  his  bro- 
ther low?  Did  we  not  rife  to  the  chace  together?  Purfued 
we  not  the  dark-brown  hinds  ?  Colmar  was  not  forgot  till 
he  fell:  till  death  had  blafled  his  youth.  I  lie  pale  beneath 
the  rock  of  Lona.  O  let  Calthon  rife !  the  morning  comes 
with  its  beams ;  Dunthalmo  will  difhonour  the  fallen." 
He  paffcd  away  in  his  blafl.  The  rifmg  Calthon  faw  the 
ileps  of  his  departure.  He  rufhed  in  the  found  of  his 
fleel.  Unhappy  Colmal  rofe.  She  followed  her  hero 
through  night,  and  dragged  her  fpear  behind.  But  when 
Calthon  came  to  Lona's  rock,  he  found  his  fallen  brother. 
The  rage  of  his  bofom  rofe ;  he  ruflied  among  the  foe. 
,The  groans  of  death  afcend.  They  clofe  around  the  chief. 
He  is  bound  in  the  midfl,  and  brought  to  gloomy  Dun- 
thalmo. The  fhout  of  joy  arofe  j  and  the  hills  of  night 
replied. 

I  STARTED  at  the  found;  and  took  my  father's  fpear. 
Diaran  rofe  at  my  fide;  and  the  youthful  flrength  of  Dargo. 
We  miffed  the  chief  of  Clutha,  and  our  fouls  were  fad.  I 
dreaded  the  departure  of  my  fame.  The  pride  of  my  va- 
lour rofe  !  "  Sons  of  Morven,"  I  faid,  "  it  is  not  thus  our 
fathers  fought.  They  refled  not  on  the  field  of  flrangers, 
when  the  foe  was  not  fallen  before  them.  Their  flrength 
N  was 


98         CALTHON  and  COLMAL. 

was  like  the  eagles  of  heaven;  their  renown  is  in  the  fong« 
But  our  people  fall  by  degrees.  Our  fame  begins  to  de- 
part. What  fhall  the  king  of  Morven  fay,  if  Offian  con- 
quers not  at  Teutha  ?  Rife  in  your  fteel,  ye  warriors ; 
follow  the  found  of  OfTian's  courfe.  He  wi.l  not  return, 
but  renowned,  to  the  echoing  wails  of  Selma.'* 

Morning  rofe  on  the  blue  waters  of  Teutha.  Colmal 
ftood  before  me  in  tears.  She  told  of  the  chief  of  Clutha: 
thrice  the  fpear  fell  from  her  hand.  My  wrath  turned 
againfl;  the  ft  ranger ;  for  my  foul  trembled  for  Calthon. 
"  Son  of  the  feeble  hand,"  I  faid,  "  do  Teutha's  warriors 
fight  with  tears  ?  The  battle  is  not  won  with  grief;  nor 
dwells  the  figh  in  the  foul  of  war.  Go  to  the  deer  of 
Carmun,  to  the  lowing  herds  of  Teutha.  But  leave  thefe 
arms,  thou  fon  of  fear.    A  warrior  may  lift  them  in  fight.'* 

I  TORE  the  mail  from  her  flioulders.  Her  fnowy  breafl 
appeared.  She  bent  her  blufliing  face  to  the  ground.  I 
looked  in  filence  to  the  chiefs.  The  fpear  fell  from  my 
hand  ;  the  figh  of  my  bofom  rofe  !  But  when  I  heard  the 
name  of  the  maid,  my  crowding  tears  ruflied  down.  I 
blefled  the  lovely  beam  of  youth,  and  bade  the  battle 
move  ! 

Why,  fon  of  the  rock,  fhould  Offian  tell  how  Teutha's 
warriors  died  ?  They  are  nov;  forgot  in  their  land  ;  their 
tombs  are  not  found  on  the  heath.  Years  came  on  with 
their  ftorms.  The  green  mounds  are  mouldered  away. 
Scarce  is  the  grave  cf  Dunthalmo  feen,  or  the  place  where 
he  fell  by  the  fpear  of  Offian.  Some  grey  warrior,  half 
blind  with  age,  fitting  by  night  at  the  flaming  oak  of  the 
hall,  tells  now  my  deeds  to  his  fons,  and  the  fall  of  the, 
dark  Dunthalmo.  The  faces  of  youth  bend  fidelong  to- 
wards his  voice.  Surprize  and  joy  burn  in  their  eyes !  I 
found  Calthon  bound  to  an  oak;  my  fword  cut  the  thongs 
from  his  hands.  I  gave  him  the  white-boforaed  Colmal 
They  dwelt  in  the  halls  of  Teutha. 


THE' 


THE 


WAR    OF    CAROS: 


POEM. 


ARGUMENT. 

CAROS  is  probably  the  noted  ufurper  Caraufius,  by  birth  a  Menapian,  who  af- 
fumed  the  purple  in  the  year  284  :  and,  feizing  on  Britain,  defeated  the  emperor 
Maximian  Herculius  in  feveral  naval  engagements,  which  gives  propriety  to  his 
being  called  in  this  poem  the  king  ofJJiips.  He  repaired  Agricola's  wall,  in  or- 
der to  obftruft  the  incurfions  of  the  Caledonians;  and  when  he  was  employed  in 
that  work,  it  appears  he  was  attacked  by  a  party  under  the  command  of  Ofcar 
the  fon  of  Offian.  This  battle  is  the  foundation  of  the  prefent  poem,  which  is 
addreffed  to  Malvina  the  daughter  of  Tofcar. 


The   war   of    Cx\ROS  : 


POEM. 

BRING,  daughter  of  Tofcar,  bring  the  harp  !  the 
light  of  the  fong  rifes  in  Offian's  foul !  It  is  like  the 
field,  when  darknefs  covers  the  hills  around,  and  the  fha- 
dow  grows  flowly  on  the  plain  of  the  fun.  I  behold  my 
fon,  O  Malvina,  near  the  mofly  rock  of  Crona  *.  But 
it  is  the  mid  of  the  defart,  tinged  with  the  beam  of  the 
weft !  Lovely  is  the  mift  that  aifumes  the  form  of  Ofcar ! 
turn  from  it,  ye  winds,  when  ye  roar  on  the  fideof  Ardven  \ 

Who  comes  towards  my  fon,  with  the  murmur  of  a 
fong  ?  His  ftaff  is  in  his  hand,  his  grey  hair  loofe  on  the 
wind.  Surly  joy  lightens  his  face.  He  often  looks  back 
to  Caros.  It  is  Rynof  of  fongs,  he  that  went  to  view  the 
foe.  "  What  does  Caros  king  of  fhips  ?"  faid  the  fon  of 
the  now  mournful  Offian  ;  "  fpreads  he  the  wings  ||  of  his 
pride,  bard  of  the  times  of  old  ?"  "  He  fpreads  them, 
Ofcar,"  replied  the  bard,  "  but  it  is  behind  his  gathered 
heap  §.  He  looks  over  his  Hones  with  fear.  He  beholds 
thee  terrible,  as  the  ghoft  of  night,  that  rolls  the  wave  to 
his  fhips  1" 

"  Go,  thou  firft  of  my  bards,"  fays  Ofcar,  "  take  the 
fpear  of  Fingal.  Fix  a  flame  on  its  point.  Shake  it  to  the 
winds  of  heaven.  Bid  him,  in  fongs,  to  advance,  and 
leave  the  roiling  of  his  wave.  Tell  to  Caros  that  I  long 
for  battle ;  that  my  bow  is  weary  of  the  chace  of  Cona. 
Tell  him  the  mighty  are  not  here ;  and  that  my  arm  is 
young." 

He  went  with  the  murmur  of  fongs.  Ofcar  reared  his 
voice  on  high.    It  reached  his  heroes  on  Ardven,  like  the 

noifc 

*  Crona  is  the  name  of  a  fmall  fircam  which  runs  into  the  Carron. 
+  Ryno  is  often  mentioned  in  the  ancient  poetry.    He  feems  to  have  been  a  bard 
of  the  firft  rank,  in  the  days  cf  Fingal. 
11  The  Roman  eagle. 
^  Agricola's  wall,  which  Caraufius  repaired. 


102  The  war  of  CAROS: 

noife  of  a  cave;  when  the  fea  of  Togorma  rolls  before  it, 
and  its  trees  meet  the  roaring  winds.  They  gather  round 
my  fon  like  the  dreams  of  tlie  hill;  when,  after  rairu  tb-y 
roll  in  the  pride  of  their  courfe.  Ryno  came  to  the  n: :  :..  y 
Caros.  He  ftruck  his  flaming  fpear.  "  Come  to  the  oat- 
tie  of  Ofcar,  O  thou  that  fittefl  on  the  rolling  of  waves. 
Fingal  is  diftant  far ;  he  hears  the  fong  of  bards  in  Morvcn : ' 
the  wind  of  his  hall  is  in  his  hair.  His  terrible  fj-ear  is  at 
his  fide;  his  (hield  that  is  like  the  darkened  moon!  Come 
to  the  battle  of  Ofcar  ;  the  hero  is  alone  !" 

He  came  not  over  the  ftreamy  Carun  *.  The  b^rd  re- 
turned with  his  fong.  Grey  night  grows  dim  on  Crona. 
The  feaft  of  fhells  is  fpread.  A  hundred  oaks  burn  to  the 
wind ;  faint  light  gleams  over  the  heath.  The  ghoils  of 
Ardven  pafs  through  the  beam,  and  fhew  their  uim  and 
diftant  forms.  Comala  f  is  half  unfeen  on  her  meteor  ; 
Hidallan  is  fullen  and  dim,  like  the  darkened  moon  be- 
hind the  mill  of  night. 

"  Why  art  thou  fad?"  faid  Ryno;  for  hs  alone  beheld 
the  chief.  "  Why  art  thou  fad,  Hidaiian  ?  haft  thou 
not  received  thy  fame  ?  The  fongs  of  Oflian  have  been 
.heard;  thy  ghoft  has  brightened  in  wind,  when  thou 
didft  bend  from  thy  cloud,  to  hear  the  long  of  Morven's 
bard  !'*  "  And  do  thine  eyes,"  faid  Ofcar,  "  behold  the 
chief,  like  the  dim  meteor  of  night?  Say,  Ryno,  fay, 
how  fell  Hidallan,  the  renowned  in  the  days  of  my  fa- 
thers ?  His  name  remains  on  the  rocks  of  Cona.  I  have 
often  feen  the  ftreams  of  his  hills  !" 

FiNGAL,  replied  the  bard,  drove  Hidallan  from  his 
wars.  The  king's  foul  was  fad  for  Comala,  and  his  eyes 
could  not  behold  the  chief.  Lonely,  f:  d  along  the  heath 
he,  ilowly,  moved,  v/ith  filent  fteps.  His  arms  hang  dif- 
ordered  on  his  fide.  His  hair  files  loofe  from  his  brow. 
The  tear  is  in  his  down-caft  eyes;  a  figh  half-filent  in  his 
breaft !  Three  days  he  ftrayed  unfeen,  alone,  before  he 
came  to  Lamor's  halls :  the  molfy  halls  of  his  fathers,  at 

the 

*  The  river  Carron. 

+  This  is  the  fcene  of  Cofnala's  death,  which  is  the  fubjefl  of  the  dramatic 
poem.  The  poet  mentions  her  in  this  place,  in  order  to  introduce  the  fequel  ot 
Hidallan's  fiory,  who,  oa  account  of  her  death,  had  been  expelled  from  the  wars 
of  Fingal. 


A     P  O  E  M.  103 

the  flream  of  ?alva  *.  There  Lamor  fat  alone  beneath  a 
tr,e;  for  he  had  fent  his  people  with  Hidallan  to  war. 
The  {Ire.un  ran.  at  his  feet.  His  grey  head  refted  on  a 
f;rjF.  Si^htlefs  are  his  aged  eyes.  He  hums  the  fong  of 
ct:i:r  times.  The  noile  of  Hidallan's  feet  came  to  his  ear: 
Le  jaiew  the  tread  of  his  fon. 

"  Is  the  fon  of  Lamor  returned ;  or  is  it  the  found  of 
his  ghclt?  Had  thou  fallen  on  the  banks  of  Carun,  fon  of 
the  aged  Lamor  ?  Or,  if  I  hear  the  found  of  Hidallan*s 
feet ;  where  are  the  mighty  in  the  war  ?  where  are  my 
people,  Hidallan,  that  were  wont  to  return  with  their 
echoing  fiiields?  Have  they  fallen  on  the  banks  of  Carun?" 

"  No  :  replied  the  fighing  youtk  ;  the  people  of  Lamor 
live.  They  are  renowned  in  war,  my  father;  but  Hidallan 
is  renovv^ned  no  more.  I  muft  fit  alone  on  the  banks  of 
Balva,  when  the  roar  of  the  battle  grows.'* 

"  But  thy  fathers  never  fat  alone,"  replied  the  rifmg 
pride  of  Lamor.  "  They  never  fat  alone  on  the  banks  of 
Balva,  when  the  roar  of  battle  rofe.  Doft  thou  not  behold 
that  tomb  ?  My  eyes  difcern  it  not :  there  refts  the  noble 
Garmallon,  who  never  fled  from  war !  Come,  thou  renown- 
ed in  battle,  he  fays,  come  to  thy  father's  tomb.  How  am 
I  renowned,  Garmallon  ?  my  fon  has  fled  from  war  !" 

"  King  of  the  flreamy  Balva !"  faid  Hidallan  with  a 
figh,  "  why  dofl  thou  torment  my  foul  ?  Lamor,  I  never 
fled.  Fingal  was  fad  for  Comala  ;  he  denied  his  wars  to 
Hidallan.  Go  to  the  grey  dreams  of  thy  land,  he  faid  ; 
moulder  like  a  leaflefs  oak,  which  the  winds  have  bent 
over  Balva,  never  more  to  grow  !" 

"  And  muft  I  hear,"  Lamor  replied,  "  the  lonely  tread 
of  Hidalian's  feet  ?  When  thoufands  are  renowned  in  bat- 
tle, fiiall  he  bend  over  my  grey  ftreams  ?  Spirit  of  the 
noble  Garmallon  !  carry  Lamor  to  his  place:  his  eyes  are 
dark  ;   his  foul  is  fad  ;  his  fon  has  loft  his  fame  !" 

"  Where,"  faid  the  youth,  "  (hall  I  fearchfor  fame  to 
g'addtn  the  foul  of  Lamor  ?  From  whence  fhall  I  return 
with  renown,  that  the  found  of  my  arms  may  be  pleafant 

in 

*  This  is  perhaps  thr.t  fmall  ftrsam  ftill  retaining  the  name  of  Palva,  v.hich  runs 
thro'j;:,h  thn  ron-.aniic  valley  of  Glentivar  in  Siiz-iiji^fhire,  Balva  fignifics  a  fikn^ 
f.reavi;  and  Gknuvar,  tkn feqwf,credvaU. 


104  The   WAR   of   CAROS: 

in  his  ear  ?  If  I  go  to  the  chace  of  hinds,  my  name  will  not 
be  heard.  Lamor  will  not  feel  my  dogs,  with  his  hands, 
glad  at  my  arrival  from  the  hill.  He  will  not  enquire  of 
his  mountains,  or  of  the  dark-brown  deer  of  his  defarts  !'* 

"  I  MUST  fall,"  faid  Lamor,  "  like  a  leaflefs  oak  :  it 
grew  on  a  rock !  it  was  overturned  by  the  winds  !  My 
ghofl  will  be  feen  on  my  hills,  mournful  for  my  young 
Hidallan.  Will  not  ye,  ye  mifts,  as  ye  rife,  hide  him  from 
my  fight  ?  My  fon !  go  to  Lamor's  hall  :  there  the  arms 
of  our  fathers  hang.  Bring  the  fword  of  Garmallon  j  he 
took  it  from  a  foe  !'* 

He  went  and  brought  the  fword  with  all  its  fludded 
thongs.  He  gave  it  to  his  father.  The  grey-haired  hero 
felt  the  point  with  bis  hand. 

"  My  fon  !  lead  me  to  Garmallon' s  tomb  :  it  rifes  be- 
fide  that  ruflling  tree.  The  long  grafs  is  withered  ;  I 
hear  the  breezes  whiftling  there.  A  little  fountain  mur- 
murs near,  and  fends  its  water  to  Balva.  There  let  me 
reft  ;  it  is  noon  :  the  fun  is  on  our  fields  !'* 

He  led  him  to  Garmallon's  tomb.  Lamor  pierced  the 
fide  of  his  fon.  They  deep  together :  their  ancient  halls 
moulder  away.  Ghofts  are  feen  there  at  noon  :  the  valley 
is  filent,  and  the  people  fliun  the  place  of  Lamor. 

"  Mournful  is  thy  tale,"  faid  Ofcar,  "  fon  of  the 
times  of  old  !  My  foul  fighs  for  Hidallan ;  he  fell  in  the 
days  of  his  youth.  He  flies  on  the  blaft  of  the  defart,  his 
wandering  is  in  a  foreign  land.  Sons  of  the  echoing 
Morven  !  draw  near  to  the  foes  of  Fingal.  Send  the 
night  away  in  fongs  ;  watch  the  ftrength  of  Caros.  Ofcar 
goes  to  the  people  of  other  times  ;  to  the  fhades  of  filent 
Ardven ;  where  his  fathers  fit  dim  in  their  clouds,  and 
behold  the  future  war.  And  art  thou  there,  Hidallan, 
like  a  half-extinguiflied  meteor  ?  Come  to  my  fight,  in 
thy  forrow,  chief  of  the  winding  Balva  !" 

The  heroes  move  with  their  fongs.  Ofcar  flowly  afcends 
the  hill.  The  meteors  of  night  fat  on  the  heath  before 
him.  A  diftant  torrent  faintly  roars.  Unfrequent  blafts 
rudi  through  aged  oaks.  The  half-enlightened  mooA  finks 
dim  and  red  behind  her  hill.  Feeble  voices  are  heard  on 
the  heath.     Ofcar  drew  his  fword, 

"  Come," 


A    POEM. 


105 


'^  Come,"  faid  the  hero,  "  O  ye  ghofts  of  my  fathers ! 
ye  that  fought  againil  the  kings  of  the  world  !  Tell  me 
the  deeds  of  future  times  ;  and  your  converfe  in  your 
caves  ;  when  you  talk  together,  and  behold  your  fons  in 
the  fields  of  the  brave.'* 

Trenmor  came  from  his  hill,  at  the  voice  of  his  migh- 
ty fon.  A  cloud,  like  the  fleed  of  the  ilranger,  fupported 
his  airy  limbs.  His  robe  is  of  the  mill  of  Lano,  that  brings 
death  to  the  people.  His  fword  is  a  green  meteor  half- 
cxtinguifhed.  His  face  is  without  form,  and  dark.  He 
fighed  thrice  over  the  hero  :  thrice  the  winds  of  night 
roared  around  !  Many  were  his  words  to  Ofcar  ;  but  they 
only  came  by  halves  to  our  ears  :  they  w;ere  dark  as  the 
tales  of  other  times,  before  the  light  of  the  fong  arofe.  He 
flowly  vaniihed,  like  a  mill  that  melts  on  the  funny  hill. 
It  was  then,  O  daughter  of  Tofcar,  my  fon  began  firft  to 
be  fad.  He  forefaw  the  fall  of  his  race.  At  times,  he  was 
thoughtful  and  dark  ;  like  the  fun  when  he  carries  a  cloud 
on  his  face,  bun.  again  he  looks  forth  from  his  darknefs 
on  the  green  hills  of  Cona. 

Oscar  paifed  the  night  am.ong  his  fathers,  grey  morn- 
ing met  him  on  Carun's  banks.  A  green  vale  furrounded 
a  tomb  which  rofe  in  the  times  of  old.  Little  hills  lift 
their  heads  at  a  diltance ;  and  ftretch  their  old  trees  to 
the  wind.  The  warriors  of  Caros  fat  there,  for  they  had 
paifed  the  ilream  by  night.  They  appeared,  like  the  trunks 
of  aged  pines,  to  the  pale  light  of  the  morning.  Ofcar 
flood  at  the  tomb,  and  raifed  thrice  his  terrible  voice. 
The  rocking  hills  echoed  around;  the  ftarting  roes  bound- 
ed away ;  and  the  trembling  ghofls  of  the  dead  fled, 
flirieking  on  their  clouds.  So  terrible  was  the  voice  of 
my  fon,  when  he  called  his  friends ! 

A  THOUSAND  fpears  rofe  around  ;  the  people  of 
Caros  rofe.  Why,  daughter  of  Tofcar,  why  that  tear  ? 
My  fon,  though  alone,  is  brave.  Ofcar  is  like  a  beam  of 
the  fky  ;  he  turns  around,  and  the  people  fall.  His  hand 
is  the  arm  of  a  ghoft,  v\rhen  he  flretches  it  from  a  cloud; 
the  reft  of  his  thin  form  is  unfeen  ;  but  the  people  die  in 
the  vale!  My  fon  beheld  the  approach  of  the  foe;  he  flood 
in  the  fdent  darknefs  of  his  flrength,  "  Am  I  alone,  faid 
O  Ofcar, 


io6  The   WAR   of   CAROS. 

Ofcar,  in  the  midfl  of  a  thoufand  foes  ?  Many  a  fpear  is 
there  !  many  a  darkly-rolling  eye  !  Shall  I  fly  to  Ardven? 
But  did  my  fathers  ever  fly  ?  The  mark  of  their  arm  is  in 
a  thoufand  battles.  Ofcar  too  fhall  be  renowned  !  Come, 
ye  dim  ghofts  of  my  fathers,  and  behold  my  deeds  in 
war !  I  may  fall  j  but  I  will  be  renowned  like  the  race  of 
echoing  Morven."  He  flood,  growing  in  his  place,  like 
a  flood  in  a  narrow  vale!  The  battle  came,  but  they  fell: 
bloody  v/as  the  fword  of  Ofcar ! 

The  noife  reached  his  people  at  Crona;  they  came  like 

a  hundred  Itreams.    The  warriors  of  Caros  fled ;  Ofcar 

remained  like  a  rock  left  by  the  ebbing  fea.     Now  dark 

and  deep,  with  all  his  fleeds,  Caros  rolled  his  might 

along:  the  little  ftreams  are  Isfl:  in  his  courfe ;  the  earth 

is  rocking  round.    Battle  fpreads  from  wing  to  wing:  ten 

thoufand  fword s  gleam  at  once  in  the  fky.    But  why  fhould 

Oflian  fmg  of  battles?  For  never  more  fliall  my  fteel  fliine 

in  war.    I  remember  the  days  of  my  youth  with  grief ; 

when  I  feel  the  weaknefs  of  my  arm.     Happy  are  they 

who  fell  in  their  youth,  in  the  midft  of  their  renown!  They 

have  not  beheld  the  tombs  of  their  friend  ;  or  failed  to 

bend  the  bow  of  their  flrength.    Happy  art  thou,  O  Ofcar, 

in  the  midft  of  thy  rufliing  blafl.    Thou  often  goefl:  to  the 

fields  of  thy  fame,  where  Caros  fled  from  thy  lifted  fword. 

Darkness  comes  on   my  foul,  O   fair   daughter    of 

Tofcar  :  I  behold  not  the  form  of  my  fon  at  Carun  ;  nor 

the  figure  of  Ofcar  on  Crona,    The  rufliing  winds  have 

carried  him  far  away ;  and  the  heart  of  his  father  is  fad. 

But  lead  me,  O  Malvina,  to  the  found  of  my  woods ;  to 

the  roar  of  my  mountain  flreams.    Let  the  chace  be  heard 

on  Cona  ;  let  me  think  on  the  days  of  other  years.    And 

bring  me  the  harp,  O  maid,  that  I  may  touch  it,  when 

the  light  of  my  foul  fnall  arife.    Be  thou  near,  to  learn  the 

fong;  future  times  fhall  hear  of  me!  The  fans  of  the  feeble 

hereafter  will  lift  the  voice  on  Cona ;  and  looking  up  to 

the  rocks,  fay,  "  Here  Offian  dwelt."    They  fhall  admire 

the  chiefs  of  old,  the  race  that  are  no  more !  while  we 

ride  on  our  clouds,  Malvina,  on  the  wings  of  the  roaring 

^  winds.    Our  voices  fliall  be  heard,  at  times,  in  the  defartj 

we  fliall  fing  on  the  breeze  of  the  rock. 

CATHLIN 


CATHLIN  OF  CLUTHA 


POEM. 


ARGUMENT. 

AN  addrefs  to  Malvina,  the  daughter  of  Tofcar.  The  poet  relates  the  arrival  of 
Cathlin  in  Sclma,  to  folicit  aid  againft  Duth-carmor  of  Cluba,  who  had_  killed 
Cathmol,  for  the  fake  of  his  daughter  Lanul.  Fingal  declining  to  make  a  choice 
among  his  heroes,  who  were  all  claiming  the  command  of  the  expedition;  they 
retired  each  to  his  hill  of  ghojls;  to  be  determined  by  dreams.  The  fpirit  of  Tren- 
mor  appears  to  Oflian  and  Ofcar  ;  they  fail,  from  the  bay  of  Carmona,  and,  on 
the  fourth  day,  appear  off  the  valley  of  Rath-col,  in  Inis-huna,  where  Duth- 
carmor  had  fixed  his  refidence.  Oflian  difpatches  a  bard  to  Duth-carmor  to  de- 
mand battle.  Night  comes  on.  The  diftrefs  of  Cathlin  of  Clutha.  Oflian  de- 
volves the  command  on  Ofcar,  who,  according  to  the  cuflom  of  the  kings  of 
Morven,  before  battle,  retired  to  a  neighbouring  hill.  Upon  the  coming  on  of 
day,  the  battle  joins.  Ofcar  and  Duth-carmor  meet.  The  latter  falls.  Ofcar 
carries  the  mail  and  helmet  of  Duth-carmor  to  Cathlin,  who  had  retired  from 
the  field.  Cathlin  is  difcovered  to  be  the  daughter  of  Cathmol,  in  difguife,  who 
had  been  carried  off,  by  force,  by,  and  had  made  her  efcape  from,  Duth-carmor. 


CATHLIN    OF  CLUTHA 


P  o  E  M. 

*/^OME,  thou  beam  that  art  lonely,  from  watching 
V->4  in  the  night !  The  fqually  winds  are  around  thee, 
from  all  their  echoing  hills.  Red,  over  my  hundred 
ftreams,  are  the  light-covered  paths  of  the  dead.  They 
rejoice,  on  the  eddying  winds,  in  the  feafon  of  night. 
Dwells  there  no  joy  in  ibng,  white  hand  of  the  harps  of 
Lutha  ?  Awake  the  voice  of  the  firing ;  roll  my  foul  to 
me.  It  is  a  flream  that  has  failed.  Malvina,  pour  the  fong. 
I  HEAR  thee,  from  thy  darknefs,  in  Selma,  thou  that 
watcheft,  lonely  by  night!  Why  didft  thou  withhold  the 
fong  from  Oilian's  failing  foul  ?  As  the  falling  brook  to 
the  ear  of  the  hunter,  defcending  from  his  ftorm-covered 
hill  ;  in  a  fun  beam  rolls  the  echoing  flream  ;  he  hears, 
and  Ihakes  his  dewy  locks:  fuch  is  the  voice  of  Lutha,  to 
the  friend  of  the  fpirits  of  heroes.  My  fwelling  bofom 
beats  high.  I  look  back  on  the  days  that  are  pafl.  Come, 
thou  beam  that  are  lonely,  from  watching  in  the  night ! 

In 

*  The  traditions,  which  accompany  this  poem,  inform  us,  that  it  went,  of 
old,  under  the  name  oi  Laoi-Oi-Lutha  ;  i.  e.  the  hymn  of  the  maid  of  Lutha.  They 
pretend  alfo  to  fix  the  time  of  its  compofition,  to  the  third  year  after  the  death  of 
Fingal ;  that  is,  during  the  expedition  of  Fergus  the  Ion  of  Fingnl,  to  the  banks  of 
Vifcha-duthon.  In  fupport  of  this  opinion,  the  Highland  fenachies  have  prefixed 
to  this  poem,  an  addrefs  of  Oflian,  to  Congnl  the  young  fon  of  Fcrgas,  which  I 
have  rejefled,  as  having  no  manner  of  connection  with  the  reft  of  the  piece.  It 
has  poetical  meru;  and,  probably,  it  was  the  opening  of  fome  of  Oflian's  other 
poems,  tho'  the  bards  injudicioufly  transferred  it  to  the  piece  now  before  us. 

CONGAL,  fon  of  Fergus  of  Duraih,  thou  light  between' thy  locks,  afcend  to 
the  rock  of  Selma,  to  the  oak  of  the  breaker  of  fliields.  Look  over  the  bofom 
of  night,  it  is  ftreaked  with  the  red  paths  of  the  dead  :  look  on  the  night  of  ghofls, 
and  kindle,  O  Congal,  ihy  foul.  Be  not,  like  the  moon  onaftream,  lonely  in  the 
midft  of  clouds  :  darknefs  clofes  around  it :  and  the  beam  departs.  Depart  not, 
fon  of  Fergus,  ere  thou  markeft  the  field  with  thy  fword.  Afcend  to  the  rock  of 
Selma;  to  the  oak  of  the  breaker  of  fliieids. 


110  CATHLIN  OF  CLUTHA: 

In  the  echoing  bay  of  Carmona  *  we  faw,  one  day,  the 
bounding  fhip.  On  high,  hung  a  broken  fliield ;  it  was 
marked  with  wandering  blood.  Forward  came  a  youth, 
in  arms,  and  flretched  his  pointlefs  fpear.  Long,  over  his 
tearful  eyes,  hung  ioofe  his  difordered  locks.  Fingal  gave 
the  fnell  of  kings.  The  words  of  the  ftranger  arofe.  "  In 
his  hall  lies  Cathmol  of  Clutha,  by  the  winding  of  his 
own  dark  ftreams.  Duth-carmor  faw  white-bofomed  La- 
nulf,  and  pierced  her  father's  fide.  In  the  rufhy  defart 
were  my  fteps.  He  fled  in  the  feafon  of  night.  Give  thine 
aid  to  Cathlin  to  revenge  his  father.  I  fought  thee  not  as 
a  beam,  in  a  land  of  clouds.  Thou,  like  the  fun,  art 
known,  king  of  echoing  Selma  I" 

Selma's  king  looked  around.  In  his  prefence,  we  rofe 
in  arms.  But  who  fhould  lift  the  fhield  ?  for  all  had 
claimed  the  war.  The  night  came  down  :  we  ftrode,  in 
filence,  each  to  his  hill  of  ghofts  ;  that  fpirits  might  de- 
fcend,  in  our  dreams,  to  mark  us  for  the  field.  We  ftruck 
the  iliield  of  the  dead  :  we  raifed  the  hum  of  fongs.  We 
thrice  called  the  ghofls  of  our  fathers.  We  laid  us  down 
in  dreams.  Trenmor  came,  before  my  eyes,  the  tall  form 
of  other  years  !  His  blue  hofts  were  behind  him  in  half- 
diftinguifhed  rows.    Scarce  feen  is  their  flrife  in  mift,  or 

their 

*  Car-mona,  l>ay  of  the  dark  brown  hills,  an  arm  of  the  fea,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Selma.  In  this  paragraph  are  mentioned  the  fignals  prefented  to  Fingal,  by 
thofe  who  came  to  demand  his  aid.  The  fuppliants  held,  in  one  hand,  a  {hield 
covered  with  blood,  and  in  the  other,  a  broken  fpear;  the  firft  a  fymbol  of  the 
death  of  their  friends,  the  laft  an  emblem  of  their  own  helplefs  fimation.  If  the 
king  chofe  to  grant  fuccours,  which  generally  was  the  cafe,  he  reached  to  them  t/ie 
Jlmil  offea[ls,  as  a  token  of  his  hofpitality  and  friendly  intentions  towards  them. 

It  may  not  be  difagreeable  to  the  reader  to  lay  here  before  him  the  ceremony  of 
the  Cran-tara,  which  was  of  a  fmiilar  nature,  and,  till  very  lately,  ufed  in  the 
Highlands.  Wiien  the  news  of  an  enemy  came  to  the  refidence  of  the  chief,  he 
immediately  killed  a  goat  with  his  own  fword,  dipped  the  end  of  a  half-burnt  piece 
of  wood  in  the  blood,  »iid  gave  it  to  one  of  his  fervants,  to  be  carried  to  the  next 
hamlet.  From  hamlet  to  hamlet  this  tejfera  was  carried  with  the  utmoft  expedition, 
and  in  the  fpace  of  a  few  hours,  the  whole  clan  were  in  arms,  and  convened  in  an 
appointed  place;  the  name  of  which  was  the  only  word  that  accompanied  the  de- 
livery of  the  Cran-tara.  This  fymbol  was  the  manifefto  of  the  chief,  by  which  he 
threatened  fire  and  fword  to  thofe  of  his  clan,  that  did  not  immediately  appear  at 
his  ftandard.  ' 

t  Lanul,  full-eyed,  a  furname  which,  according  to  t'adition,  was  beftowed  on 
the  daughter  of  Cathmol,  on  account  of  her  beauty  ;  this  tradition,  however,  may 
have  been  founded  on  that  partiality,  which  the  bards  have  (hewn  to  Cathlin  oJCht- 
iha;  for,  according  to  them,  no  faljliood  could  dwdl  in  the  foul  of  the  lovely. 


A    P  O  E  M.  Ill 

their  ftretching  forward  to  deaths.     I  liftened ;  but  no 
found  was  there.    The  forms  were  empty  wind ! 

I  STAP.TED  from  the  dream  of  ghofts.  On  a  fudden 
blaft  flew  my  whiftling  hair.  Low-founding,  in  the  oak, 
is  the  departure  of  the  dead.  I  took  my  Ihield  from  its 
bough.  Onward  came  the  rattling  of  fteel.  It  was  Ofcar* 
of  Lego.  He  had  feen  his  fathers.  "  As  rulhes  forth 
the  blaft,  on  the  bofom  of  whitening  waves ;  fo  carelefs 
fhall  my  courfe  be,  through  ocean,  to  the  dwelling  of  foes. 
I  have  feen  the  dead,  my  father!  My  beating  foul  is  high! 
My  fame  is  bright  before  me,  like  the  ftreak  of  light  on 
a  cloud,  when  the  broad  fun  comes  forth,  red  traveller  of 
the  iky  1" 

"  Grandson  of  Branno,"  Ifaid,  "  not  Ofcar  alone  Ihall 
meet  the  foe.  I  ruih  forward,  thro*  ocean,  to  the  woody- 
dwelling  of  heroes.  Let  us  contend,  my  fon,  like  eagles, 
from  one  rock;  when  they  lift  their  broad  wings,  againft 
the  ftream  of  winds."  We  raifed  our  fails  in  Carmona. 
From  three  Ihips,  they  marked  my  fhleld  on  the  wave,  as 
I  looked  on  nightly  Tonthenaf ,  red  traveller  between  the 
clouds.  Four  days  came  the  breeze  abroad.  Luman  came 
forward  in  mift.  In  winds  were  its  hundred  groves.  Sun- 
beams marked,  at  times,  its  brown  fide.  White,  leapt 
the  foamy  dreams,  from  all  its  echoing   rocks. 

A  GREEN  field,  in  the  bofom  of  hills,  winds  filent  with 
its  own  blue  ftream.  Here,  midft  the  waving  of  oaks, 
were  the  dwellings  of  kings  of  old.  But  filence,  for  ma- 
ny dark-brown  years,  had  fettled  in  gralfy  Rath-col  |j ; 

for 

*  Ofcar  is  here  called  (?/far  of  Lego,  from  his  mother  being  the  daughter  of 
Branno,  a  powerful  chief,  on  the  banks  of  that  lake.  It  is  remarkable  that  Oflian 
addrellts  no  poem  to  Malvina,  in  which  her  lover  Ofcar  was  not  one  of  the  princi- 
pal aftors.  His  attention  to  her,  aftei  the  death  of  his  fon,  {hews  that  delicacy  of 
ientiment  is  not  confined,  as  fome  fondly  imagine,  to  our  own  polifhed  times. 

+  Ton-thena,  Jire  oj  the  wave,  was  the  remarkable  ftar  mentioned  in  the  fcventh 
bookof  Temora,  which  direri -d  I'le  courfe  of  Lar;hon  tolrehnd.  It  feemstohavc 
been  well  known  to  tho'e,  who  (aih'd  on  that  fea,  which  divides  Ireland  fioui 
Sodth-Britain.  As  the  courfe  of  OfLan  was  along  the  coaft  of  lnis-hu:.a,  he  ivx'a- 
tions,  with  propriety,  that  ftar  which  direfted  the  voyage  of  the  colony  from  thai 
country  to  Ireland. 

II  Rath-col,  WQcdy field,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the  refidence  of  Duth-car- 
mor :  he  feems  rather  to  have  been  forc-d  thither  by  a  ftorm  ;  at  Iraft  I  {houkl 
think  that  to  be  the  meaning  of  M:.'  Doet.  f.om  his  expreflion,  that  Ton-tkena  ha^. 
hid  her  head,  and  that  ke  bound  his  rvhite-bofomed  fails ;  which  is  as  much  as  to  fa)-, 
that  the  weather  was  ftormy,  and  that  Dath-carir.oi-  put  in  to  the  bay  of  Rath-co.' 
for  flicker. 


112  CATHLIN  OF  CLUTHA: 

for  the  race  of  heroes  had  failed,  along  the  pleafant  vale. 
Duth-carmor  was  here,  with  his  people,  dark  rider  of  the 
wave.  Ton-thena  had  hid  her  head  in  the  fky.  ?Ie  bound 
his  white-bofomed  fails.  His  courfe  is  on  the  hills  of  Rath- 
col,  to  the  feats  of  roes.  We  came  ;  I  fent  the  bard,  with 
fongs,  to  call  the  foe  to  fight.  Duth-carmor  heard  him, 
with  joy.  The  king's  foul  was  like  a  beam  of  fire;  a  beam 
of  fire,  marked  with  fmoke,  rufhing,  varied,  thro'  the 
bofom  of  night.  The  deeds  of  Duth-carmor  were  dark, 
though  his  arm  was  ftrong. 

Night  came,  with  the  gathering  of  clouds.  By  the 
beam  of  the  oak  we  fat  down.  At  a  diftance  ftood  Cathlin 
of  Clutha.  I  faw  the  changeful  *  foul  of  the  ftranger.  As 
ftiadows  fly  over  the  field  of  grafs,  fo  various  is  Cathlin's 
cheek.  It  was  fair,  within  locks,  that  rofe  on  Rath-col's 
wind.  I  did  not  rufh,  amidil  his  foul ;  with  my  words  I 
bade  the  fong  to  rife. 

"  Oscar  of  Lego,"  I  faid,  "  be  thine  the  fecret  hill  f 
to-night.  Strike  the  fhield,  like  Morven's  kings.  Witji 
day,  thou  flialt  lead  in  war.  From  my  rock,  I  fhall  fee 
thee,  Ofcar,  a  dreadful  form  in  fight,  like  the  appearance 
of  ghofts,  amidft  the  ftorms  they  raife.  Why  fhould  mine 
eyes  return  to  the  dim  times  of  old,  ere  yet  the  fong  had 
burfted  forth,  like  the  fudden  rifing  of  winds  ?  But  the 
years  that  are  pall,  are  marked  with  mighty  deeds.  As 
the  nightly  rider  of  waves  looks  up  to  Ton-thena  of  beams; 
fo  let  us  turn  our  eyes  to  Trenmor,  the  father  of  kings.'* 

"  Wide, 

*  From  this  circumflance,  rucceeclln,'^  bards  feigned  that  Cathlin,  who  is  herein 
the  difguifc  of  a  young  warrior,  had  fallen  in  love  with  Duth-carmor  at  a  feaft,  to 
which  he  had  been  invited  by  her  father.  Her  love  was  converted  into  detefiation 
for  him,  after  he  had  murdered  her  father.  But  as  thofe  rain-bozvs  of  keaven  arc 
changeful,  fay  my  authors,  fpcaking  of  women,  fhe  felt  the  return  of  her  former 
pafiion,  upon  the  approach  of  Ddth-carmor's  danger.  I  myfelf,  who  think  more 
favourably  of  the  fex,  muft  attribute  the  agitation  of  Cathlin's  mind  to  her  extreme 
fenfibility  to  the  injuries  done  her  by  Duth-carmor:  and  this  opinion  is  favoured 
by  the  fcqucl  of  the  ftory. 

t  This  paffage  alludes  to  the  well  known  cudom  among  the  ancient  kings  of 
Scotland,  to  retire  from  their  army  on  the  night  preceding  a  battle.  The  (lory 
which  Offian  introduces  in  the  next  paragraph,  concerns  the  fall  of  the  Druids.  It 
is  faid  in  many  old  poerns,  that  the  Druids,  in  the  extremity  of  their  affairs,  had 
folicited  and  obtained  aid  from  Scandinavia.  Among  the  auxiliaries  there  came 
many  pretended  magicians,  which  cirr umftance  OiTian  alludes  to,  in  his  defcripti- 
on  oi ihe  fon  q/' Loda.  Magic  and  incantation  could  not,  however,  prevail;  tor 
Trenmor,  aflifted  by  the  valour  of  his  fon  Trathal,  entirely  broke  the  power  oi." 
the  D.uids. 


A    P  O  E  M.  113 

"  Wide,  in  Caracha*s  echoing  field,  Carmal  had  pour- 
ed his  tribes.  They  were  a  dark  ridge  of  waves.  The 
grey-haired  bards  were  like  moving  foam  on  their  face. 
They  kindled  the  flrife  around,  with  their  red-roiling  eyes. 
Nor  alone  were  the  dwellers  of  rocks  ;  a  fon  of  Loda  was 
there ;  a  voice,  in  his  own  dark  land,  to  call  the  ghofts 
from  high.  On  his  hill,  he  had  dwelt,  in  Lochlin,  in  the 
the  midil  of  a  leaflefs  grove.  Five  ftones  lifted,  near, 
their  heads.  Loud  roared  his  rufhing  flream.  He  often 
raifed  his  voice  to  the  winds,  when  meteors  marked  their 
nightly  wings;  when  the  dark-robed  moon  was  rolled  be- 
hind her  hill.  Nor  unheard  of  ghofts  was  he!  They  came 
with  the  found  of  eagles  wings.  They  turned  battle,  in 
fields,  before  the  kings  of  men. 

"  But  Trenmor  they  turned  not  from  battle.  He 
drew  forward  that  troubled  war  ;  in  its  dark  Ikirt  was 
Trathal,  like  a  riling  light.  It  was  dark;  and  Loda's  fon 
poured  forth  his  figns,  on  night.  The  feeble  were  not 
before  thee,  fon  of  other  lands  !  *Then  rofe  the  ftrife  of 
kings,  about  the  hill  of  night  ;  but  it  was  foft  as  two 
fummer  gales,  fhaking  their  light  wings,  on  a  lake.  Tren- 
mor yielded  to  his  fon  ;  for  the  fame  of  the  king  had  been 
heard.  Trathal  came  forth  before  his  father,  and  the  foes 
failed,  in  echoing  Caracha.  The  years  that  are  paft,  my 
fon,  are  marked  with  mighty  deeds  |." 

In  clouds  rofe  the  eaftern  light.  The  foe  came  forth  in 
arms.  The  ftrife  is  mixed  on  Rath-col,  like  the  roar  of 
ftrcams.  Behold  the  contending  of  kings  !  They  meet 
befide  the  oak.  In  gleams  of  fteel  the  dark  forms  are  loft'. 
Such  is  the  meeting  of  meteors,  in  a  vale,  by  night  :  red 
light  is  fcattered  round,  and  men  forefee  the  ftorm !  Duth- 
carmor  is  low  in  blood !  The  fon  of  Oflian  overcam^e  ! 
Not  harmlefs  in  battle  was  he,  Malvina  hand  of  harps ! 

Nor,  in  the   field,  were  the  fteps   of  Cathlln.     The 

ftranger  ftood  by  a  fecret  ftream,  where  the  foam  of  Rath- 

P  col 

*  Trenmor  and  Trathal,  OITian  introduces  this  epifode,  as  an  example  to  hia 
ion,  from  ancient  times. 

t  Thofe  who  deliver  down  this  poem  in  tradition,  lament  that  there  is  a  great 
pait  of  It  loft.  In  particular  they  regret  the  lofs  of  an  epifode,  which  was  here  in- 
troduced, with  the  fequel  of  the  ftory  of  Carmal  and  his  Druids.  Their  attachment 
to  it  was  founded  on  the  defcripiions  of  nngical  enchantments  whi-ch  it  contained. 


114  CATHLIN  OF  CLUTHA. 

col  fkirted  the  mofTy  ftones.  Above,  bends  the  branchy- 
birch,  and  ftrews  its  leaves,  on  w^ind.  The  inverted  fpear 
of  Cathlin  touched,  at  times,  the  ilream.  Ofcar  brought 
Duth-carmor's  mail :  his  helmet  with  its  eagle-wing.  He 
placed  them  before  the  llranger,  and  his  words  were  heard. 
"  The  foes  of  thy  father  have  failed.  They  are  laid  in  the 
field  of  gholls.  Renown  returns  to  Morven,  like  a  rifmg 
v/ind.  Why  art  thou  dark,  chief  of  Clutha  ?  Is  there 
caufe  for  grief  ?'* 

"  Son  of  Offian  of  harps,  my  foul  is  darkly  fad.  I  be- 
hold the  arms  of  Cathmol,  which  he  raifed  in  war.  Take 
the  mail  of  Cathlin,  place  it  high  in  Selma's  hall ;  that 
thou  mayft  remember  the  haplefs  in  thy  diftant  land.'* 
From  white  breads  defcended  the  mail.  It  was  the  race 
of  kings ;  the  foft-handed  daughter  of  Cathmol,  at  the 
ftreams  of  Clutha  !  Duth-carmor  faw  her  bright  in  the 
hall ;  he  had  come,  by  night,  to  Clutha.  Cathmol  met 
him  in  battle  ;  but  the  hero  fell.  Three  days  dwelt  the 
foe,  with  the  maid.  On  the  fourth  fhe  fled  in  arms.  She 
remembered  the  race  of  kings,  and  felt  her  burfting  foul ! 

Why,  maid  of  Tofcar  of  Lutha,  fhould  I  tell  how 
Cathlin  failed  ?  Her  tomb  is  at  rufhy  Lumon,  in  a  dif- 
tant land.  Near  it  were  the  fteps  of  Sul-malla,  in  the 
days  of  grief.  She  raifed  the  fong  for  the  daughter  of 
flrangers,  and  touched  the  mournful  harp. 

Come,  from  the  watching  of  night,  Malvina,  lonely 
beam  ! 


SUL-MALLA 


SULMALLA  of  LUMON 


POEM, 


ARGUMENT. 

THIS  p0em,  which,  properly  fpeaking,  is  a  continuation  of  the  laft,  opens  witk 
an  addrefs  to  Sul-malla,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Inis-huna,  whom  Offian 
met,  at  the  chacc,  as  he  returned  from  the  battle  of  Rath-col.  Sul-malla  invites 
Offian  and  Ofcar  to  a  feaft,  at  the  refidence  of  her  father,  who  was  then  abfent 
in  the  wars.  Upon  hearing  their  name  and  family,  fhe  relates  an  expedition  of 
Kngal  into  Inis-huna,  She  cafually  mentioning  Cafhmor,  chief  of  Atha,  (who 
then  affifted  her  father  againft  his  enemies)  Ofllan  introduces  the  epifode  of  Cul- 
gorm  and  Suran-dronlo,  two  Scandinavian  kings,  in  whofe  wars  Oflian  himfelf 
and  Cathmor  were  engaged  in  oppofite  fides.  The  flory  is  imperfeft,  a  part  of 
the  original  being  loft.  Oflian,  warned,  in  a  dream,  by  the  ghoft  of  Trenmor, 
lets  fail  from  Inis-huna, 


SUL-MALLA  of  LUMON 


POEM. 

*"1  T  rHO  moves  fo  ftately,  on  Lumon,  at  the  roar  of 
VV  the  foamy  waters?  Her  hair  falls  upon  her  heav- 
ing bread.  White  is  her  arm  behind,  as  flow  {he  bends 
the  bow.  Why  doft  thou  wander  in  defarts,  like  a  light 
thro'  a  cloudy  field?  The  young  roes  are  panting,  by 
their  fecret  rocks.  Return,  thou  daughter  of  kings  !  the 
cloudy  night  is  near !  It  was  the  young  branch  of  green 
Inis-huna,  Sul-malla  of  blue  eyes.  She  fent  the  bard  from 
her  rock,  to  bid  us  to  her  feaft.  Amidft  the  fong  we  fat 
down,  in  Cluba's  echoing  hall.  White  moved  the  hands 
of  Sul-malla,  on  the  trembling  firings.  Half-heard  amidlt 
the  found,  was  the  name  of  Atha's  king :  he  that  was 
abfent  in  battle  for  her  own  green  land.  Nor  abfent  from 
her  foul  was  he ;  he  came  midfl  her  thoughts  by  night. 
Ton-thena  looked  in,  from  the  iky,  and  faw  her  tolling 
arms. 

The  found  of  fhells  had  ceafed.  Amidft  long  locks, 
Sul-malla  rofe.  She  fpoke  with  bended  eyes,  and  aflced 
of  our  courfe  thro'  feas ;  "  for  of  the  kings  of  men  are 

*  The  expedition  of  Offian  to  Inis-huna  happened  a  fhort  time  before  Fingal 
paffed  over  into  Ireland,  to  dethrone  Cairbar  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul.  Cathmor 
the  brother  of  Cairbar,  was  aiding  Conmor,  king  of  Inis-huna,  in  his  wars,  at  the 
time  that  Offian  defeated  Duth-carmor,  in  the  valley  of  Rath-col.  The  poem  is 
more  interefting,  that  it  contains  fo  many  particulars  concerning  thofe  pcrfonages, 
who  make  fo  great  a  figure  in  Temora. 

The  exaft  correfpondence  in  the  manners  and  cufloms  of  Inis-huna,  as  here  de- 
fcribcd,  to  thofe  of  Caledonia,  leaves  no  rojm  to  doubt,  that  the  inhabitants  of  both 
were  originally  the  fame  people.  Some  may  allege,  that  Offian  might  transfer, 
in  his  poetical  defcriptions,  the  manners  of  his  own  nation  to  foreigners.  This  ob- 
^eftion  iseafily  anfwered.  Why  has  he  not  done  this  with  regard  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Scandinavia  ?  We  find  the  latter  very  different  in  their  cuftoms  and  fupei- 
flitions  from  the  nations  of  Britain  and  Ireland.  The  Scandinavian  manners  are 
lemarkably  barbarous  and  fierce,  and  feem  to  mark  out  a  nation  lefs  advanced  in  a 
flate  of  civilization,  than  the  inhabitants  of  Britain  were  in  the  times  of  Offian. 


ii8        SUL-MALLA  of  LUMON: 

ye,  tall  riders  of  the  wave  *."  "  Not  unknown,"  I  faid, 
'*  at  his  llreams  is  he,  the  father  of  our  race.  Fingal  has 
been  heard  of  at  Cluba,  blue-eyed  daughter  of  kings.  Nor 
only  at  Cona's  flream,  is  Offian  and  Ofcar  known.  Foes 
trembled  at  our  voice,  and  fhrunk  in  other  lands.'* 

"  Not  unmarked,"  faid  the  maid,  "  by  Sul-malla,  is 
the  fhield  of  Morven's  king.  It  hangs  high,  in  my  father's 
hall,  in  memory  of  the  pad ;  when  Fingal  came  to  Cluba, 
in  the  days  of  other  years.  Loud  roared  the  boar  of  Cul- 
darnu,  in  the  midfl  of  his  rocks  and  woods.  Inis-huna 
fent  her  youths,  but  they  failed ;  and  virgins  wept  over 
tombs.  Carelefs  went  Fingal  to  Culdarnu.  On  his  fpear 
roiled  the  ftrength  of  the  woods.  He  was  bright,  they  laid, 
in  his  locks,  the  firft  of  mortal  men.  Nor  at  the  feall  were 
heard  his  words.  His  deeds  paffed  from  his  foul  of  fire, 
like  the  rolling  of  vapours  from  the  face  of  the  wandering 
fun.  Not  carelefs  looked  the  blue  eyes  of  Cluba  on  his 
ftately  fteps.  In  white  bofoms  rofe  the  king  of  Selma, 
in  the  midfl  of  their  thoughts  by  night.  But  the  winds 
bore  the  flranger  to  the  echoing  vales  of  his  roes.  Nor 
loft  to  other  lands  was  he,  like  a  meteor  that  fmks  in  a 
cloud.  He  came  forth,  at  times,  in  his  brightnefs,  to  the 
diflant  dwelling  of  foes.  His  fame  came,  like  the  found 
of  winds,  to  Cluba's  woody  vale  f ." 

"  Darkness 

*  Sul-malla  here  difcovers  the  quality  of  Offian  and  Ofcar,  from  their  flaturc 
and  {lately  gait.  Among  nations,  not  far  advanced  in  civilization,  a  fuperior  beau- 
ty and  ftatelinefs  of  perfon  were  infeparable  from  nobility  of  blood.  It  was  from 
thefe  qualities,  that  thofe  of  family  were  known  by  Grangers,  not  from  tawdry 
ixippings  of  ftate  injudicioufly  thrown  round  them.  The  caufe  of  this  diftmguifh- 
in^  property,  mull,  in  fome  meafure,  be  afcribed  to  their  unmixed  blood.  They 
had  no  inducement  to  intermarry  with  the  vulgar:  and  no  low  notions  of  intereft 
made  them  deviate  from  their  choice,  in  their  own  fphere.  In  ftates,  where 
luxury  has  been  long  eftabliflied,  beauty  of  perfon  is,  by  no  means,  the  charafter- 
iftic  of  antiquity  of  family.  This  m.uft  be  attributed  to  thofe  enervating  vices, 
which  are  infeparable  from  luxury  and  wealth.  A  great  family,  (to  alter  a  little 
the  words  of  the  hiftorian)  it  is  true,  like  a  river,  becomes  confiderable  from  the 
length  of  its  courfe,  but,  as  it  rolls  on,  hereditary  diftempers,  as  well  as  pro- 
perty, flow  fucceffively  into  it. 

+  Too  partial  (o  our  own  times,  we  are  ready  to  mark  out  remote  antiquity,  as 
the  region  of  ignorance  and  barbarifm.  This,  perhaps,  is  extending  our  prejudices 
too  far.  It  has  been  long  remarked,  that  knovi'ledgc,  in  a  great  meafure,  is  feunded" 
on  a  free  Intercourfe  between  mankind;  and  that  the  mind  is  enlarged  in  proportion 
to  the  obfervations  it  has  made  upon  the  manners  of  different  men  and  nations.  If 
*x-  look,  with  attention,  into  the  hiftory  of  Fingal,  as  delivered  by  Offian,  we  fhail 
fijid  that  he  was  not  altogether  a  poor  ignorant  hunter,  confined  to  the  narrow  cor- 


A    P  O  E  M:  119 

"  Darkness  dwells  in  Cluba  of  harps :  the  race  of 
khigs  is  diflant  far ;  in  battle  is  my  father  Conmor :  and 
Lormar  *  my  brother,  king  of  ftreams.  Nor  darkening 
alone  are  they ;  a  beam,  from  other  lands,  is  nigh ;  the 
friend  of  flrangers  f  in  Atha,  the  troubler  of  the  field. 
High,  from  their  midy  hills,  look  forth  the  blue  eyes  of 
Erin ;  for  he  is  far  away,  young  dweller  of  theii  fouls ! 
Nor  harmlefs,  white  hands  of  Erin !  is  Cathmor  in  the 
fkirts  of  war;  he  rolls  ten  thoufand  before  him,  in  his 
diflant  field." 

"  Not  unfeen  by  Offian,"  I  faid,  "  rufhed  Cathmor 
from  his  ftreams,  when  he  poured  his  ftrength  on  I-thor- 
no||,  ifle  of  many  waves!  In  ftrife  met  two  kings  in  I-thor- 
no,  Culgorm  and  Suran-dronlo ;  each  from  his  echoing 
ifle,  ftern  hunters  of  the  boar  ! 

"  They  met  a  boar,  at  a  foamy  ftream :  each  pierced 
him  with  his  fpear.  .They  ftrove  for  the  fame  of  the  deed; 
and  gloomy  battle  rofe.  From  ifle  to  ifle  they  fent  a  fpear, 
broken  and  ftained  with  blood,  to  call  the  friends -of  their 
fathers,  in  their  founding  arms.  Cathmor  came,  from 
Erin,  to  Culgorm,  red-eyed  king :  I  aided  Suran-dronlo, 
in  his  land  of  boars. 

"We 

ner  of  an  ifland.  His  expeditions  to  all  parts  of  Scandinavia,  to  the  north  of  Ger- 
many, and  the  diiferent  flates  of  Gieat  Britain  and  Iieland,  were  very  numerous, 
and  performed  under  fuch  a  character,  and  at  fuch  times,  as  gave  him  an  opportu-' 
nity  to  mark  the  undifguifed  manners  of  mankind.  War  and  an  aflive  life,  as 
they  call  forth,  by  turns,  all  the  powers  of  the  foul,  prefent  to  us  the  different  cha- 
rafters  of  men:  in  times  of  peace  and  quiet,  for  want  of  objects  to  exert  them, 
the  powers  of  the  mind  lie  concealed,  in  a  great  meafure,  and  we  fee  only  artifi- 
cial paffions  and  manners.  It  is  from  this  confideration  1  conclude,  that  a  travel- 
ler of  penetration  could  gather  more  genuine  knowledge  from  a  lour  of  ancienf 
Gaul,  than  from  the  minuteft  ohfervaiion  of  all  the  artificial  manners,  and  elegant 
refinements  of  modern  France. 

*  Lormar  was  the  fon  of  Conmor,  and  the  brother  of  Sul-malla.  After  the 
death  of  Conmor,  Lormar  fucceeded  him  in  the  throne. 

f  Cathmor,  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul.  It  would  appear,  from  the  partiality 
with  which  Sul-malla  fpcaks  of  that  hero,  that  fhe  had  feen  him,  previous  to  his 
joining  her  father's  army  ;  tbo'  tradition  pofitively  aflerts,  that  it  was  after  his  re- 
turn, that  flie  fell  in  love  with  him, 

I  1-thorno,  fays  tradition,  was  an  ifland  of  Scandinavia.  In  It  at  a  hunting  par- 
ty, met  Culgorm  and  Suran-dronlo,  the  kings  of  two  neighbouring  illcs.  They 
difiFered  about  the  honour  of  killing  a  boar  ;  and  a  war  was  kindled  between  them. 
From  this  epifode  we  may  learn,  that  the  manners  of  the  Scandinavians  were  much 
more  favage  and  cruel,  than  thofe  of  Britain.  It  is  remarkable,  that  the  namey, 
introduced  in  this  ftory,  are  not  of  Galic  o/iginal,  which  circumfiance  affords  rooiR 
to  fuppofe,  that  it  had  its  foundation  in  true  hiitorv. 


120        SUL-MALLA  of  LUMON: 

"  We  rufhed  on  either  fide  of  a  flream,  which  roared 
thro*  a  blafled  heath.  High  broken  rocks  were  round, 
with  all  their  bending  trees.  Near  were  two  circles  of 
Loda,  with  the  ftone  of  power ;  where  fpirits  defcended, 
by  night,  in  dark-red  flreams  of  fire.  There,  mixed  with 
the  murmur  of  waters,  rofe  the  voice  of  aged  men,  they 
called  the  forms  of  night,  to  aid  them  in  their  war. 

"  *  Heedless  I  flood,  with  my  people,  where  fell  the 
foamy  ftream  from  rocks.  The  moon  moved  red  from  the 
mountain.  My  fong,  at  times,  arofe.  Dark,  on  the  other 
fide,  young  Cathmor  heard  my  voice;  for  he  lay,  beneath 
the  oak,  in  all  his  gleaming  arms.  Morning  came ;  we 
rufhed  to  fight:  from  wing  to  wing  is  the  rolling  of  ftrife. 
They  fell,  like  the  thillle's  head,  beneath  autumnal  winds. 

"  In  armour  came  a  ftately  form :  I  mixed  my  ftrokes 
with  the  chief.  By  turns  our  fnields  are  pierced :  loud 
rung  OUT  fteely  mails.  His  helmet  fell  to  the  ground.  In 
brightnefs  fhcne  the  foe.  His  eyes,  two  pleafant  flames, 
rolled  between  his  wandering  locks.  I  knew  Cathmor  of 
Atha,  and  threw  my  fpear  on  earth.  Dark,  we  turned, 
and  filent  palTed  to  mix  with  other  foes. 

"  Not  fo  pafTed  the  ftriving  kings  j-.  They  mixed  in 
echoing  fray;  like  the  meeting  of  ghofls,  in  the  dark  wing 
of  winds.  Thro'  either  breaft  rufhed  the  fpears  ;  nor  yet 
lay  the  foes  on  earth !  A  rock  received  their  fall ;  half- 
reclined  they  lay  in  death.  Each  held  the  lock  of  his  foe ; 
each  grimly  feemed  to  roll  his  eyes.  The  flream  of  the 
rock  leapt  on  their  fhields,  and  mixed  below  with  blood. 

"  The  battle  ceafed  in  I-thorno.  The  flrangers  met  in 
peace ;  Cathmor  from  Atha  of  flreams,  and  OfTian,  king 
of  harps.  We  placed  the  dead  in  earth.  Our  fleps  were 
by  Runar's  bay.  With  the  bounding  boat,  afar,  advanced 
a  ridgy  wave.    Dark  was  the  rider  of  feas,  but  a  beam  of 

light 

*  From  the  circumRancc  of  Offian  not  being  prcfent  at  the  rites,  defcribed  in 
the  preceding  paragraph,  we  may  fuppofe  that  he  held  them  in  contempt.  This 
difference  of  fcntimcnt,  '^kh  regard  to  religion,  is  a  fort  of  argument,  that  the  Ca- 
ledonians were  not  orginallv  a  colony  of  Scandinavians,  as  fome  have  imagined. 
Concerning  fo  remote  a  period,  mere  conjefture  mull  fiipply  the  place  of  argument 
anu  pofitive  proofs. 

+  Culgorm  and  Suran-dronlo.  The  combat  of  the  kings  and  their  attitude  in 
death  are  highly  piflurefque,  and  expiefiivc  of  that  ferocity  of  manners,  which  dif- 
tinguilhed  the  riorihern  naiiuns. 


A     P  O  E  M.  121 

light  was  there,  like  the  ray  of  the  fun,  in  Stromlo's  roll- 
ing fmoke.  It  was  the  daughter  f  of  Suran-dronlo,  wild 
in  brightened  looks.  Her  eyes  were  wandering  flames, 
amidft  difordered  locks.  Forward  is  her  white  arm,  with 
the  fpear;  her  high-heaving  bread  is  feen,  white  as  foamy 
waves  that  rife,  by  turns,  amidft  rocks.  They  are  beauti- 
ful, but  terrible,  and  mariners  call  the  winds  !" 

"  Come,  ye  dwellers  of  Loda!"  jQie  faid,  "  come,  Car- 
char,  pale  in  the  midft  of  clouds  !  Sluthmor,  that  ftrideft 
in  airy  halls!  Corchtur,  terrible  in  winds!  Receive,  from 
his  daughter's  fpear,  the  foes  of  Suran-dronlo.  No  fha- 
dow,  at  his  roaring  ftreams ;  no  mildly-looking  form  was 
he !  When  he  took  up  his  fpear,  the  hawks  fhook  their 
founding  wings :  for  blood  was  poured  around  the  fteps 
of  dark-eyed  Suran-dronlo.  He  lighted  me,  no  harmlefs 
beam,  to  glitter  on  his  ftreams.  Like  meteors  I  was  bright, 
but  Iblafted  the  foes  of  Suran-dronlo." 

Nor  unconcerned  heard  Sul-malla,  the  praife  of  Cath- 

mor  of  fliields.    He  was  within  her  foul,  like  a  fire  in  fe- 

cret  heath,  which  awakes  at  the  voice  of  the  blaft,  and 

fends  its  beams  abroad.     Amidft  the  fong  removed  the 

Q^  daughter 

+  Tradition  has  handed  down  the  name  of  this  princefs.  The  bards  call  her 
Runo-forlo,  which  has  no  other  fort  of  title  for  being  genuine,  but  its  not  being  of 
Galic  original ;  a  diftinclion,  which  the  bards  had  not  the  art  to  preferve,  whea 
they  feigned  names  for  foreigners.  The  highland  fenachies,  who  very  often  en- 
deavoured to  fupply  the  deficiency,  they  thought  they  found  in  the  tales  of  Oflian, 
have  given  us  the  continuation  of  the  ftory  of  the  daughter  of  Suran-dronlo.  The 
cataftrophe  is  fo  unnatural,  and  the  circumftances  of  it  fo  ridiculoufly  pompous, 
that,  for  the  fake  of  the  inventors,  1  (hall  conceal  them. 

The  wildly  beautiful  appearance  of  Runo-forlo,  made  a  deep  impreflion  on  a 
chief,  fome  ages  ago,  who  was  himfelf  no  contemptible  poet.  The  ftory  is  ro- 
mantic, but  not  incredible,  if  we  make  allowances  for  the  lively  imagination  of 
a  man  of  gen'.us.  Our  chief  failing,  in  a  florm,  along  one  oi  the  iflands  of  Ork- 
ney, faw  a  woman,  in  a  boat,  near  the  fliore,  whom  he  thought,  as  he  expreffes  it 
himfelf,  as  beautiful  as  a  Juddcn  ray  of  the  fun,  on  the  dark-heaviiig  deep.  The  ver- 
fes  of  Offian,  on  the  attitude  of  Runo-forlo,  which  was  fo  limilar  to  that  of  the 
woman  in  the  boat,  wrought  fo  much  on  his  fancy  that  he  fell  defperately  in  love. 
The  winds,  however,  drove  him  from  the  coaft,  and,  after  a  few  days,  he  arri^-ed 
at  his  refidence  in  Scotland.  There  his  paffion  increafed  to  fuch  a  degree,  that 
two  of  his  friends,  tearing  the  confequence,  failed  to  the  Orkneys,  to  carry  to  him 
the  objeft  of  his  defire.  Upon  enquiry  they  foon  found  the  nymph,  and  carried  her 
to  the  enamoured  chief;  but  mark  his  furprize,  when,  inftead  of  a  ray  of  the  fun,  he 
faw  a  Ikinny  fiflierwoman,  more  than  middle  aged,  appearing  before  him.  Tra- 
dition here  ends  the  ftory  ;  but  it  may  cafily  be  fuppofed  tljat  the  paftion  of  t\\ 
chief  foon  fubfided. 


122         SUL-MALLA  of  LUMON. 

daughter  of  kings,  like  the  voice  of  a  fummer-breeze  ; 
when  it  lifts  the  heads  of  flowers,  and  curls  the  lakes  and 
ftrcams.  The  ruilling  found  gently  fpreads  o'er  the  vale, 
foftly-pleafmg  as  it  faddens  the  foul. 

By  night  came  a  dream  to  Offian ;  formlefs  ftood  the 
fiiadow  of  Trenmor.  He  feemed  to  ilrike  the  dim  Ihield, 
on  Selma's  ftreamy  rock.  I  role,  in  my  rattling  fteel  ; 
I  knew  that  war  was  near  ;  before  the  winds  our  fails 
were  fpread;  when  Lumon  Ihewed  its  ftreams  to  the  mornc 

Come  from  the.  watching  of  night,  Malvina,  lonely 
beam !. 


'r  H  E 


THE 


WAPv  OF  INIS-THONA 


O  E  M, 


ARGUMENT. 

REFLECTIONS  on  the  poet's  youth.  An  apofirophe  to  Selma.  Ofcar  ohtains 
leave  to  go  to  Inis-thona,  an  ifland  of  Scandinavia.  The  mournful  ftory  of 
Argon  and  Ruro,  the  two  fons  of  the  king  of  Inis-thona.  Ofcar  revenges  their 
death,  and  returns  in  triumph  to  Selm:*.     A  foliloquy  by  the  poet  himfelf. 


The  war  of  INIS-THONA  : 


POEM. 

OUR  youth  is  like  the  dream  of  the  hunter  on  the  hill 
of  heath.  He  ileeps  in  the  mild  beams  of  the  fun  ; 
he  awakes  amidfl  a  ftorm:  the  red  lightening  flies  around; 
trees  fliake  their  heads  to  the  wind !  He  looks  back,  with 
joy,  on  the  day  of  the  fun  ;  and  the  pleafant  dreams  of  his 
reft  !  When  fhall  Ofiian's  youth  return?  when  his  ear  de- 
light in  the  found  of  arms  ?  When  fliall  I,  like  Ofcar,  tra- 
vel in  the  light  of  my  fteel  ?  Com.e,  with  your  ftreams,  ye 
hills  of  Coria  !  liften  to  the  voice  of  Offian.  The  fong  ri- 
fes,  like  the  fun,  in  my  foul.    I  feel  the  joys  of  other  times  ! 

I  BEHOLD  thy  towers,  O  Selma !  the  oaks  of  thy  fhaded 
wall :  thy  ftreams  found  in  my  ear  ;  thy  heroes  gather 
around.  Fingal  fits  in  the  midft.  He  leans  on  the  fliield 
of  Trenmor  :  his  fpear  ftands  againft  the  wall ;  he  liftens 
to  the  fong  of  his  bards.  The  deeds  of  his  arm  are  heard ; 
the  aftions  of  the  king  in  his  youth  !  Ofcar  had  returned 
from  the  chace,  and  heard  the  hero's  praife.  He  took  the 
Ihield  of  Branno  *  from  the  wall ;  his  eyes  were  filled  with 
tears.  Red  was  the  cheek  of  youth.  His  voice  was  trem- 
bling, low.  My  fpear  fliook  its  bright  head  in  his  hand  : 
he  fpoke  to  Morven's  king. 

"  Fingal  !  thou  king  of  heroes  !  OfTian,  next  to  him 
in  war !  ye  have  fought  in  your  youth  ;  your  names  are 
renowned  in  fong.  Ofcar  is  like  the  mift  of  Cona ;  I  ap- 
pear, and  I  vanifh  away.  The  bard  will  not  know  my 
name.  The  hunter  will  not  fearch  in  the  heath  for  my 
tomb.  Let  me  fight,  O  heroes,  in  the  battles  of  Inis-thona. 
Diftant  is  the  land  of  my  war !  ye  lliall  not  hear  of  Ofcar's 
fall !  Some  bard  may  find  me  there  ;  fome  bard  may  give 
my  name  to  fong.    The  daughter  of  the  ftranger  ftiall  fee 

my 

*  This  is  Branno,  the  father  of  Everallin,  and  grandfather  to  Olcar;  he  was  of 
Irifh  extraftion,  and  lord  of  the  country  round  the  lake  of  Lego.  His  great  aftions 
are  handed  down  by  tradition,  and  his  hofpitality  has  paffed  into  a  proverb. 


126       The  war  of  INIS-THONA: 

jny  tomb,  and  weep  over  the  youth,  that  came  from  afar. 
The  bard  Ihall  fay,  at  the  feaft,  "  hear  the  fong  of  Oicar 
from  the  diftant  land." 

"  Oscar,"  rephed  the  king  of  Morven,  "  thou  Ihalt 
fight,  fon  of  my  fame !  Prepare  my  dark-bofomed  Ihip  lo 
carry  my  hero  to  Inis-thona.  Son  of  my  fon,  regard  our 
fame !  thou  art  of  the  race  of  renown  i  Let  not  the  chil- 
dren of  flrangers  fay,  Feeble  are  the  fons  of  Morven  ' 
Be  thou,  in  battle,  a  roaring  florm  :  mild,  as  the  evening 
fun,  in  peace  !  Tell,  Ofcar,  to  Inis-thona's  king,  that  Fin« 
gal  remembers  his  youth  ;  when  we  drove  in  the  combat 
together,  in  the  days  of  Agandecca." 

They  lifted  up  the  founding  fail  ;  the  wind  v/hiftled 
through  the  thongs*  of  their  mafts.  Waves  lafli  the  oozy 
rocks  :•  the  ftrength  of  ocean  roars.  My  fon  beheld,  from 
the  wave,  the  land  of  groves.  He  ruflied  into  Runa's 
founding  bay,  and  feni  his  fword  to  Annir  of  fpears.  The 
grey-haired  hero  rofe,  when  he  faw  the  fword  of  FingaL 
His  eyes  were  full  of  tears ;  he  remembered  his  battles  in 
youth.  Thrice  had  they  lifted  the  fpear,  before  the  lovely 
Agandecca  :  heroes  flood  far  diftant,  as  if  two  fpirits  were 
ftriving  in  winds. 

"  But  now,"  began  the  king,  "  I  am  old  ;  the  fword 
lies  uielefs  in  my  hall.  Thou,  who  art  of  Morven's  race  ! 
Annir  has  feen  the  battle  of  fpears  ;  but  now  he  is  pale 
and  withered,  like  the  oak  of  Lano.  I  have  no  fon  to 
meet  thee  with  joy,  to  bring  thee  to  the  halls  of  his  fa- 
thers. Argon  is  pale  in  the  tomb,  and  Ruro  is  no  more. 
My  daughter  is  in  the  hali  of  ftrangers  :  fhe  longs  to  be- 
hold my  tomb.  Her  fpoufe  fliakes  ten  thoufand  fpears  ; 
he  comes  f  a  cloud  of  death  from  Lano.  Come,  to  fliare 
the  feaft  of  Annir,  fon  of  echoing  Morven  !" 

Three  days  they  feafted  together ;  on  the  fourth,  Annir 

heard 

*  Leather  thongs  were  ufed  among  the  Celtic  nations,  infiead  of  ropes. 

+  Cormalo  had  refolvcd  on  a  war  iitrainft  his  father  in  law  Annir  king  of  Inis- 
thona,  in  order  to  deprive  him  of  his  kingdom:  the  injuftice  of  his  defi^ns  was  fo 
much  rcfented  by  Fingal,  that  he  fent  his  grandfon,  Ofcar,  to  the  affiftance  of 
Annir.  Roth  armies  came  foon  to  ahattle,  in  which  the  conduft  and  valour  of 
Ofcar  obtained  a  compleat  victory.  An  end  was  put  to  the  war  by  the  death  of 
Cormalo,  who  fell  in  a  fingle  combat,  by  Ofcar's  hand.  Thus  is  the  fiory  deliver- 
ed dov  n  in  tradition  ;  though  the  poet,  to  raife  the  charafter  of  his  fon,  makes  Of- 
car hiiafelf  propofe  the  expedition. 


A    POEM. 


127 


heard  the  name  of  Ofcar.  They  rejoiced  In  the  fliell  *„ 
They  purfued  the  boars  of  Runa.  Befide  the  fount  of 
mofly  Hones,  the  weary  heroes  reft.  The  tear  fteals  in 
fecret  from  Annir  :  he  broke  the  rifing  figh.  "  Here 
darkly  reft,"  the  hero  faid,  "  the  children  of  my  youth. 
This  ftone  is  the  tomb  of  Ruro  ;  that  tree  founds  over 
the  grave  of  Argon.  Do  ye  hear  my  voice,  O  my  fons, 
within  your  narrow  houfe  ?  Or  do  ye  fpeak  in  thefe  ruft- 
Hng  leaves,  when  the  winds  of  the  defart  rife  ?" 

"  King  of  Inis-thona,"  faid  Ofcar,  "  how  fell  the  chil- 
dren of  youth  ?  The  wild  boar  ruihes  over  their  tombs, 
but  he  does  not  difturb  their  repofe.  They  purfue  deer  f 
formed  of  clouds,  and  bend  their  airy  bow.  They  ftill 
love  the  fport  of  their  youth  ;  and  mount  the  wind  with 

"  CoRMALo,"  replied  the  king,  "  is  a  chief  of  ten 
thoufand  fpears.  He  dwells  at  the  waters  of  Lano  jj,  which 
fends  forth  the  vapour  of  death.  He  came  to  Runa*s 
echoing  halls,  and  fought  the  honour  of  the  fpear  §.  The 
youth  was  lovely  as  the  firft  beam  of  the  fun  ;  few  were 
they  who  could  meet  him  in  fight  1  My  heroes  yielded  to 
Cormalo  :  my  daughter  was  feized  in  his  love.  Argon 
and  Ruro  returned  from  the  chace ;  the  tears  of  their 
pride  defcend :  they  roll  their  filent  eyes  on  Runa's  he- 
roes, who  had  yielded  to  a  ftranger.  Three  days  they 
feafted  with  Cormalo :  on  the  fourth  young  Argon  fought. 
But  who  cauld  fight  with  Argon !  Cormalo  is  overcome. 
His  heart  fwelled  v/lth  the  grief  of  pride;  he  refolved,  in 
fecret,  to  behold  the  death  of  my  fons?  They  went  to  the 
hills  of  Runa:  they  purfued  the  dark-brown  hinds.  The 
arrov^  of  Cormalo  flew  in  fecret  ;  my  children  fell  in 
blood.    He  came  to  the  maid  of  his  love;  to  Inis-thona's 

long- 

*  To  rn:Tice  in  the  JJidl  is  a  phrafe  for  feafling  fumptuoully,  and  drinking  freely. 

+  The  notion  of  OiTiau  concerning  the  flateofthe  dcceafed,  was  the  fame  with 
that  of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans.  They  imagined  that  the  fouls  purfued, 
in  their  leparate  ftate,  the  employments  and  pleafures  of  their  former  life. 

11  Lano  was  a  lake  of  Scandmavia,  remarkable,  in  the  days  of  Ollian,  for  emit- 
ting a  peftilential  vapour  in  autumn.  And  thou,  0  valiant  Duc/iomar,  like  the  miji 
cf  maijliy  Lano ;  zuken  it  Jails  uvcr  the  plains  of  autumn,  and  brings  death  to  the  hojr. 

FINGAL,  B.  1. 

\  By  the  honour  of  the  fpexr  is  meant  the  tournament  piatfifed  among  the  anci- 
ent northern  nations. 


128       The  war  of  INIS-THONA: 

long-haired  maid.  They  fled  over  the  defart.  Annir  re- 
mained alone.  Night  came  on,  and  day  appeared ;  nor 
Argon's  voice,  nor  Ruro's  came.  At  length  their  much- 
loved  dog  was  feen  ;  the  fleet  and  bounding  Runar.  He 
came  into  the  hall  and  howled  ;  and  feemed  to  look  to- 
wards the  place  of  their  fall.  We  followed  him:  we  found 
them  here  :  we  laid  them  by  this  moflTy  ftream.  This  is 
the  haunt  of  Annir,  when  the  chace  of  the  hinds  is  pafl:. 
I  bend  like  the  trunk  of  an  aged  oak ;  my  tears  for  ever 
flow !" 

"  O  RoNNAN !"  faid  the  rifmg  Ofcar,  "  Ogar  king  of 
fpears !  call  my  heroes  to  my  fide,  the  fons  of  flireamy 
Morven.  To-day  we  go  to  Lano's  water,  that  fends  forth 
the  vapour  of  death.  Cormalo  will  not  long  rejoice:  death 
is  often  at  the  point  of  our  fwords  !" 

THEy  came  over  the  defart  like  fl:ormy  clouds,  when 
the  winds  roll  tkem  along  the  heath:  their  edges  are  tinged 
with  lightening ;  the  echoing  groves  forefee  the  ftorm ! 
The  horn  of  Ofcar's  battle  is  heard;  Lano  fliook  over  all 
Its  waves.  The  children  of  the  lake  convened  around  the 
founding  fliield  of  Cormalo.  Ofcar  fought,  as  he  was 
wont  in  war.  Cormalo  fell  beneath  his  fword  :  the  fons 
of  difmal  Lano  fled  to  their  fecret  vales !  Ofcar  brought 
the  daughter  of  Inis-thona  to  Annir's  echoing  halls.  The 
face  of  age  is  bright  with  joy  ;  he  blefi:  the  king  of 
fwords ! 

How  great  was  the  joy  of  Oflian,  when  he  beheld  the 
diilant  fail  of  his  fon !  it  was  like  a  cloud  of  light  that 
rifes  in  the  eail,  when  the  traveller  is  fad  in  a  land  un- 
known ;  and  difmal  night,  with  her  ghofts,  is  fitting 
around  in  fliades !  We  brought  him,  with  fongs,  to  Sel- 
ma's  halls.  Fingal  fpread  the  feaft  of  fliells.  A  thoufand 
bards  raifed  the  name  of  Ofcar  :  Morven  anfwered  to  the 
found.  The  daughter  of  Tofcar  was  there:  her  voice  was 
like  the  harp;  when  the  diilant  found  comes,  in  the 
evening,  on  the  foft-ruftling  breeze  of  the  vale  ! 

O  LAY  me,  ye  that  fee  the  light,  near  fome  rock  of  my 
hills!  let  the  thick  hazels  be  around,  let  the  rufliling  oak 
be  near.  Green  be  the  place  of  my  reft:;  let  the  found  of 
the  J.jflnnt  torrent  be  heard.     Daughter  of  Tofcar,  take 

the 


A     P  O  E  M.  129 

the  harp,  and  ralfe  the  lovely  fong  of  Selma  ;  that  fleep 
may  overtake  my  foul  m  the  midft  of  joy;  that  the  dreams 
of  my  youth  may  return,  and  the  days  of  the  mighty  Fin- 
gal.  Selma !  I  behold  thy  towers,  thy  trees,  thy  Ihaded 
wall !  I  fee  the  heroes  of  Morven  ;  I  hear  the  fongs  of 
bards  !  Ofcar  lifts  the  fword  of  Carmalo ;  a  thoufand 
youths  admire  its  fludded  thongs.  They  look  with  won- 
der on  my  fon  :  they  admire  the  ftrength  of  his  arm. 
They  mark  the  joy  of  his  father's  eyes  ;  they  long  for  an 
equal  fame.  And  ye  Ihall  have  your  fame,  O  fons  of 
ftreamy  Morven!  My  foul  is  often  brightened  with  fong; 
I  remember  the  friends  of  my  youth.  But  fleep  defcends, 
in  the  found  of  the  harp !  pleafant  dreams  begin  to  rife  1 
Ye  fons  of  the  chace !  Hand  far  diftant,  nor  diflurb  my 
reft.  The  bard  of  other  times  holds  difcourfe  with  his 
fathers,  the  chiefs  of  the  days  of  old  !  Sons  of  the  chace, 
ftand  far  diftant !  difturb  not  the  dreams  of  Offian  ! 


THE 


THE 


SONGS   OF   SELMA. 


ARGUMENT, 

ADDRESS  to  the  evening  flar.  An  apoflrophe  to  Fingal  and  his  times.  Minona 
fings  before  the  king  the  fong  of  the  unfortunate  Colma;  and  the  bards  exhibit 
other  fpecimens  of  their  poetical  talents;  according  to  an  annual  cuflom  eftablift- 
ed  by  the  monarchs  of  the  ancient  Caledonians, 


The    songs    of    SELMA. 


STAR  of  defcending  night!  fair  Is  thy  light  in  the 
weft !  thou  lifteft  thy  unfliorn  head  from  thy  cloud : 
thy  fteps  are  (lately  on  thy  hill.  What  doft  thou  behold 
in  the  plain  ?  The  ftormy  winds  are  laid.  The  murmur 
of  the  torrent  comes  from  afar.  Roaring  waves  climb  the 
diftant  rock.  The  flies  of  evening  are  on  their  feeble 
wings ;  the  hum  of  their  courfe  is  on  the  field.  What 
doft  thou  behold,  fair  light  ?  But  thou  doft  fmiie  and  de- 
part. The  waves  come  with  joy  around  thee:  they  bathe 
thy  lovely  hair.  Farewel,  thou  filent  beam!  Let  the  light 
of  Offian's  foul  arife  ! 

And  it  does  arife  in  its  ftrength!  I  behold  my  departed 
friends.  Their  gathering  is  on  Lora,  as  in  the  days  of 
other  years.  Fingal  comes  like  a  v/atry  column  of  mift ; 
his  heroes  are  around:  And,  fee  the  bards  of  fong,  grey- 
haired  Ullin !  ftatelv  Ryno !  Alpin  *,  with  the  tuneful 
voice!  the  foft  complaint  of  Minona!  How  are  ye  changed, 
my  friends,  fmce  the  days  of  Selma's  feaft?  when  we  con- 
tended, like  gales  of  fpring,  as  they  fly  along  the  hill,  and 
bend  by  turns  the  feebly-whiftling  grafs. 

Minona  |  came  forth  in  her  beauty ;  with  down-caft 
look  and  tearful  eye.  Her  hair  flew  flowly  on  the  biaft, 
that  ruflied  unfrequent  from  the  hill.  The  fouls  of  the 
heroes  were  fad  when  fhe  raifed  the  tuneful  voice.  Often 
had  they  feen  the  grave  of  Salgar  jj,  the  dark  dwelling  of 
white-bofomed  Colma§.  Colma  left  alone  on  the  hill, 
with  all  her  voice  of  fong!  Salgar  promifed  to  come:  but 

the 

*  A'lpin  is  from  the  fame  root  with  Albion,  or  rather  Albin,  the  ancient  name 
of  Britain  ;  Alp,  high  ijland,  or  country.  The  prcfent  name  of  our  ifland  has  its 
origin  in  the  Celtic  tongue;  fo  that  thole  who  derived  it  from  any  other,  betrayed 
their  ignorance  of  the  ancient  language  of  our  country .  Br  ait  or  Braid  extenfive ; 
and  in,  land. 

+  Offian  introduces  Minona,  not  in  the  ideal  fcene  in  his  own  mind,  which  he 
had  defcribcd;  but  at  the  annual  feaft  of  Selma,  where  the  bards  repeated  their 
works  before  FingaU 

\  Sealg-'er,  a  hunter. 

^  Cul-math,  a  woman  with  jim  hair. 


^34 


The   songs   of   SELMA. 


the  night  defcended  around.     Hear  the  voice  of  Colmaj,, 
when  Ihe  fat  alone  on  the  hiil ! 

COLMA. 

It  is  night ;  I  am  alone,  forlorn  on  the  hill  of  ftorms. 
The  wind  is  heard  in  the  mountain.  The  torrent  pours 
down  the  rock.  No  hut  receives  me  from  the  rain ;  for- 
lorn on  the  hill  of  winds  ! 

Rise,  moon !  from  behind  thy  clouds.  Stars  of  the 
night,  arife!  Lead  me,  fome  light,  to  the  place  where  my 
love  refts  from  the  chace  alone !  his  bow  near  him,  un- 
ilrung :  his  dogs  panting  around  him.  But  here  I  mull 
fit  alone,  by  the  ro(*k  of  the  mofly  ftream.  The  ftreani 
and  the  wind  roar  aloud.  I  hear  not  the  voice  of  my 
love!  Why  delays  my  Salgar,  why  the  chief  of  the  hill, 
his  promife  I  Here  is  the  rock,  and  here  the  tree !  here 
is  the  roaring  ftream !  Thou  didft  promife  with  night 
to  be  here.  Ah,  whither  is  my  Salgar  gone  ?  With  thee 
I  would  fly,  from  my  father ;  with  thee,  from  my  bro- 
ther of  pride.  Our  race  have  long  been  foes  :  we  are 
not  foes,  O  Salgar ! 

Cease  a  little  while,  O  wind!  ftream,  be  thou  filent 
a  while !  let  my  voice  be  heard  around.  Let  my  wanderer 
hear  me  !  Salgar  !  it  is  Colma  who  calls.  Here  is  the 
tree,  and  the  rock.  Salgar,  my  love !  I  am  here.  Why 
delayeft  thou  thy  coming  ?  Lo !  the  calm  moon  comes 
forth.  The  flood  is  bright  in  the  vale.  The  rocks  are  grey 
on  the  fteep.  I  fee  him  not  on  the  brow.  His  dogs  come 
not  before  him,  with  tidings  of  his  near  approach.  Here 
I  mull  fit  alone ! 

Who  lie  on  the  heath  befide  me  ?  Are  they  my  love 
and  my  brother?  Speak  to  me,  O  my  friends!  To  Colma 
they  give  no  reply.  Speak  to  me :  I  am  alone  !  My  foul 
is  tormented  with  fears!  Ah!  they  are  dead!  Their  fwords 
are  red  from  the  fight.  O  my  brother!  my  brother!  v/hy 
haft  thou  flain  my  Salgar?  why,  O  Salgar!  haft  thou 
ilain  my  brother  ?  Dear  were  ye  both  to  me  !  what  fiiall 
I  fay  in  your  praife  ?  Thou  wert  fair  on  the  hill  among 
thoufands  !  he  was  terrible  in  fight.  Speak  to  me  ;  hear 
mv  voice  ;  hear  me,  fons  of  my  love !  Thev  are  filent ; 

filent 


The    songs   of   SEL  ma.         135 

filent  for  ever  !  Cold,  cold  are  their  breads  of  clay  !  Oh  ! 
from  the  rock  on  the  hill ;  from  the  top  of  the  windy 
fteep,  fpeak,  ye  ghofts  of  the  dead !  fpeak,  I  will  not  be 
afraid!  Whither  are  ye  gone  to  reft?  In  what  cave  of  the 
hill  fhall  I  find  the  departed  ?  No  feeble  voice  is  on  the 
gale  :  no  aniwer  half-drowned  in  the  ftorm  ! 

I  SIT  in  my  grief!  I  wait  for  morning  in  my  tears  T 
Rear  the  tomb,  ye  friends  of  the  dead.  Clofe  it  not  till 
Colma  come.  My  life  flies  away  like  a  dream :  why  fhould 
I  ftay  behind  ?  Here  fliall  I  reft  with  my  friends,  by  the 
ftream  of  the  founding  rock.  When  night  comes  on  the 
hill :  when  the  loud  winds  arife ;  my  ghoft  fliall  ftand  in 
the  blaft,  and  mourn  the  death  of  my  friends.  The  hun- 
ter fhall  hear  from  his  booth.  He  fl:iall  fear  but  love  my 
voice !  For  fweet  ftiall  my  voice  be  for  my  friends  :  plea- 
fant  were  her  friends  to  Colma ! 

Such  was  thy  fong,  Minona,  foftljblufhing  daughter 
of  Torman.  Our  tears  defcended  for  Colma,  and  our 
fouls  were  fad !  Ullin  came  with  his  harp  ;  he  gave  the 
fong  of  Alpin.  The  voice  of  Alpin  was  pleafant;  the  foul 
of  Ryno  was  a  beam  of  fire  !  But  they  had  refted  in  the 
narrow  houfe :  their  voice  had  ceafed  in  Selma.  Uliin 
had  returned,  one  day,  from  the  chace,  before  the  heroes 
fell.  He  heart!  their  ftrife  on  the  hill;  their  fong  was  foft 
but  fad  !  They  mourned  the  fall  of  Morar,  firft  of  mortal 
men!  His  foul  was  like  the  foul  of  Fingal;  his  fword  like 
the  fword  of  Ofcar.  But  he  fell,  and  his  father  mourned  : 
his  fifter's  eyes  were  full  of  tears.  Minona's  eyes  WTre 
full  of  tears,  the  lifter  of  car-borne  Morar.  She  retired 
from  the  fong  of  Ullin,  like  the  moon  in  the  weft,  when 
ihe  forefees  the  (bower,  and  hides  her  fair  head  in  a  cloud. 
I  touched  the  harp,  with  Ullin  j  the  fong  of  mourning  rofei 

Ryno. 
The  wind  and  the  rain  are  paft  :  calm  is  the  noon  of 
day.  The  clouds  are  divided  in  heaven.  Over  the  green, 
hills  flies  the  inconftant  fun.  Red  through  the  ftony  vale 
comes  down  the  ftream  of  the  hill.  Sweet  are  thy  mur- 
murs, O  ftream  !  but  more  fweet  is  the  voice  I  hear.  It 
is  the  voice  of  Alpin,  the  fon  of  fong,  mourning  for  the 

dead! 


136        The   songs  of   SELMA. 

dead  !  Bent  is  his  head  of  age  ;  red  his  tearful  eye.    Al- 

piii,   thou   fon   of  fong,   why   alone   on  the  filent  hill  i 

why  complained  thou,  as  a  blaft  in  the  wood  ;  as  a  wave 

on  the  lonely  fliore  ?  . 

^  Alpin. 

My  tears,  O  Ryno !  are  for  the  dead  ;  my  voice  for 
thofe  that  have  paffed  away.  Tall  thou  art  on  the  hill ; 
fair  among  the  ions  of  the  vale.  But  thou  fhalt  fall  like 
Morar*;  the  mourner  ihall  fit  on  thy  tomb.  The  hills 
fliall  know  thee  no  more ;  thy  bow  fhall  lie  in  the  hall, 
unftrung ! 

Thou  wert  fwift,  O  Morar !  as  a  foe  on  the  defart  ; 
terrible  as  a  meteor  of  lire.  Thy  wrath  was  as  the  ftorm  ; 
thy  fword,  in  battle,  as  lightning  In  the  field.  Thy  voice 
was  as  a  ftream  after  rain  ;  like  thunder  on  diflant  hills. 
Many  fell  by  thy  arm ;  they  v/ere  confumed  in  the  flames 
of  thy  wrath.  But  when  thou  didfh  return  from  war,  how 
peaceful  was  thy  brow !  Thy  face  was  like  the  fun  after 
rain  ;  like  the  moon  in  the  hlence  of  night ;  calm  as  the 
breaft  of  the  lake  when  the  loud  wind  is  laid. 

Narrow  is  thy  dwelling  now  !  dark  the  place  of  thine 
abode  !  With  three  fleps  I  compafs  thy  grave,  O  thou 
who  waft  fo  great  before  !  Four  ftones,  with  their  heads! 
of  mofs,  are  the  only  memorials  of  thee.  A  tree  with 
fcarce  a  leaf,  long  grafs,  which  whiftles  in  the  wind,  mark 
to  the  hunter's  eye  the  grave  of  the  mighty  Morar.  Mo- 
rar I  thou  art  low  indeed.  Thou  haft  no  mother  to  mourn 
thee  ;  no  maid,  with  her  tears  of  love.  Dead  is  Ihe  that 
brought  thee  forth.    Fallen  is  the  daughter  of  Morglan. 

Who  on  his  ftaft"  is  this  ?  who  is  this,  whofe  head  is 
white  with  age  ?  whofe  eyes  are  red  with  tears  ?  who  quakes 
at  every  ftep  ?  It  is  thy  father-)-,  O  Morar  !  the  father  of 
no  fon  but  thee.  He  heard  of  thy  fame  in  war;  he  heard 
of  foes  difperfed.  He  heard  of  Morar's  renown  :  why  did 
he  not  hear  of  his  wound  ?  Weep,  thou  father  of  Morar  ! 
w^eep  ;  but  thy  fon  heareth  thee  not.  Deep  is  the  fleep  of 
the  dead  ;  low  their  pillow  of  duft.  No  more  fhall  he 
hear  thy  voice  ;  no  more  awake  at  thy  call.    When  fliall 

it 

*  M'jr--er,  great  man. 

t  Tonuan,  the  fon  of  Cwrthul,  loid  of  I-morJ,  ene  of  the  wsftern  ifles.. 


The  songs  of  SELMA. 


^37 


It  be  morn  in  the  grave,  to  bid  the  flumberer  awake  ? 
Farewel,  thou  bravefl  of  men  !  thou  conqueror  in  the 
field  !  But  the  field  (hall  fee  thee  no  more ;  nor  the  dark 
wood  be  lightened  with  the  fplendor  of  thy  fleel.  Thou 
haft  left  no  fon.  The  fong  fliall  preferve  thy  name.  Fu- 
ture times  lliall  hear  of  thee  j  they  fliall  hear  of  the  fallen 
Morar ! 

The  grief  of  all  arofe,  but  moft  the  burfting  figh  of 
Armin*.  He  remembers  the  death  of  his  fon,  who  fell 
in  the  days  of  his  youth.  Carmorf  was  near  the  hero, 
the  chief  of  the  echoing  Galmal.  Why  burfts  the  figh  of 
Armin,  he  faid  ?  Is  there  a  caufe  to  mourn  ?  The  fong 
comes,  with  its  mufic,  to  melt  and  pleafe  the. foul.  It  is 
like  foft  mift,  that,  rifing  from  a  lake,  pours  on  the  filent 
vale ;  the  green  flowers  are  filled  with  dew,  but  the  fun 
returns  in  his  ftrength,  and  the  mift  is  gone.  "Why  art 
thau  fad,  O  Armin,  chief  of  fea-furrounded  Gorma? 

Sad  I  am !  nor  fmall  is  my  caufe  of  woe !  Carmor^ 
thou  haft  loft  no  fon;  thou  haft  loft  no  daughter  of  beau- 
ty. Colgar  the  valiant  lives  ;  and  Annira  faireft  maid. 
The  boughs  of  thy  houfe  afcend,  O  Carmor  !  but  Armin. 
is  the  laft  of  his  race.  Dark  is  thy  bed,  O  Daura !  deep 
thy  fleep  in  the  tomb !  When  (halt  thou  awake  with  thy 
fongs  ?  with  all  thy  voice  of  mufic  ? 

Arise,  winds  of  autumn,  arife ;  blow  along  the  heath! 
ftreams  of  the  mountains,  roar !  roar,  tempefts,  in  the 
groves  of  my  oaks!  walk  through  broken  clouds,  O 
moon!  (how  thy  pale  face,  at  intervals!  bring  to  my  mind 
the  night,  when  all  my  children  fell ;  when  Arlndal  the 
mighty  fell ;  when  Daura  the  lovely  failed  !  Daura-,  my 
daughter!  thou  wert  fair:  fair  as  the  moon,  on  Fur^jf; 
white  as  the  driven  fnow ;  fweet  as  the  breathing  gale. 
Arindal,  thy  bov/  was  ftrong.  Thy  fpear  was  fwift  in  the 
field.  Thy  look  was  like  mift  on  the  wave ;  thy  (hield,  a 
red  cloud  in  a  ftorm.  Armar,  renowned  in  war,  came, 
and  fought  Daura's  love.  He  was  not  long  refuled :  fair 
was  the  hope  of  their  friends ! 

S  Erath, 

•  Armin,  a  hero.     He  was  chief  or  petty  king  of  Gorma,  ?.  e.  tk  Hue  i 
fuppofed  to  be  one  o£the  Hebrides. 

t  Cear-mor,  a  tall  dark-ccmpkxmfd  jnaii , 
\  Fuar-a,  ctld  ijland. 


138        The  songs   of   SELMA. 

Erath,  fon  of  Odgal,  repined :  his  brother  had  been 
flain  by  Armar.  He  came  difguifed  like  a  fon  of  the  fear 
fair  was  his  ikiffon  the  wave;  white  his  locks  of  age;  calm 
his  ferious  brow.  Faireft  of  women,  he  faid,  lovely  daugh- 
ter of  Armin  !  a  rock  not  diflant  in  the  fea,  bears  a  tree 
on  its  fide ;  red  fhines  the  fruit  afar !  There  Armor  waits 
for  Daura.  I  come  to  carry  his  love!  She  went;  ihe  cal- 
led on  Armar.  Nought  anfwered,  but  the  *  fon  of  the 
rock.  Armar,  my  love  !  my  love  !  why  tormenteft  thou 
me  with  fear?  hear,  fon  of  Arnart,  hear:  it  is  Daura  who 
calleth  thee !  Erath  the  traitor  fled  laughing  to  the  land. 
She  lifted  up  her  voice;  fhe  called  for  her  brother  and  her 
father.    Arindai !  Armin  !  none  to  relieve  your  Daura ! 

Her  voice  came  over  the  fea.  Arindai  my  fon  defcend- 
ed  from  the  hill ;  rough  in  the  fpoils  of  the  chace.  His 
arrows  rattled  by  his  fide ;  his  bow  was  in  his  hand :  five 
dark  grey  dogs  attend  his  fteps.  He  faw  fierce  Erath  on 
the  Ihore :  he  feized  and  bound  him  to  an  oak.  Thick 
wind  the  thongs  f  of  the  hide  around  his  limbs;  he  loads 
the  wind  with  his  groans.  Arindai  afcends  the  deep  In 
his  boat  to  bring  Daura  to  land.  Armar  came  in  his 
wrath,  and  let  fly  the  grey -feathered  fhaft.  It  fung  ;  it 
funk  in  thy  heart,  O  Arindai  my  fon ;  for  Erath  the  traitor 
thou  diedft.  The  oar  is  flopped  at  once  ;  he  panted  on 
the  rock  and  expired.  What  is  thy  grief,  O  Daura,  when 
round  thy  feet  is  poured  thy  brother's  blood !  The  boat 
is  broken  in  twain.  Armar  plunges  into  the  fea,  to  refcue 
his  Daura  or  die.  Sudden  a  blafl  from  the  hill  came  over 
the  waves.     He  funk,  and  he  rofe  no  more. 

Alone  on  the  fea-beat  rock  my  daughter  was  heard  to 
complain.  Frequent  and  loud  were  her  cries.  What  could 
her  father  do  ?  All  night  I  ftood  on  the  fl^iore.  I  faw  her 
by  the  faint  beam  of  the  moon.  All  night  I  heard  her 
cries.  Loud  was  the  wind  ;  the  rain  beat  hard  on  the 
hill.  Before  morning  appeared,  her  voice  was  weak.  It 
died  away,  like  the  evening-breeze  among  the  grafs  of 

the 

*  By  the  fon  of  the  rock  the  poet  means  the  echoing  back  of  the  human  voice 
from  a  rock.  The  vulgar  were  of  opinion,  that  this  repetition  of  found  was  made 
by  a  fpirit  within  the  rock ;  and  they,  on  that  account,  called  it  mac  talla ;  tkcfoic 
who  dwells  in  the  rock. 

t  The  poet  here  only  means  that  Erath  v/as  bound  with  leathern  thong«. 


The  songs   of   S  elm  a.         139 

the  rocks.  Spent  with  grief  flie  expired  ;  and  left  thee, 
Armin,  alone:  gone  is  my  ftrength  in  war!  fallen  my  pride 
among  women  !  When  the  ftorms  aloft  arife  :  when  the 
north  lifts  the  wave  on  high  ;  I  fit  by  the  founding  fliore, 
and  look  on  the  fatal  rock.  Often  by  the  fetting  moon  I 
fee  the  ghofts  of  my  children.  Half-viewlefs,  they  walk 
in  mournful  conference  together.  Will  none  of  you  fpeak 
in  pity  ?  They  do  not  regard  their  father.  I  am  fad,  O 
Carmor,  nor  fmall  is  my  caufe  of  woe ! 

Such  were  the  words  of  the  bards  in  the  days  of  fong; 
when  the  king  heard  the  mufic  of  harps,  the  tales  of  other 
times!  The  chiefs  gathered  from  all  their  hills,  and  heard 
the  lovely  found.  They  praifed  the  *  voice  of  Cona  !  the 
fir  ft  among  a  thoufand  bards !  But  age  is  now  on  my 
tongue ;  my  foul  has  failed  !  I  hear,  at  times,  the  ghofts 
of  bards,  and  learn  their  pleafant  fong.  But  memory  fails 
on  my  mind.  I  hear  the  call  of  years!  They  fay,  as 
they  pafs  along,  why  does  OfTian  fing  ?  Soon  fhall  he  lie 
in  the  narrow  houfe,  and  no  bard  fhall  raife  his  fame ! 
Roll  on,  ye  dark-brown  years  ;  ye  bring  no  joy  on  your 
courfe !  Let  the  tomb  open  to  Oflian,  for  his  ftrength  has 
failed.  The  fons  of  fong  are  gone  to  reft.  My  voice  re- 
mains like  a  blaft,  that  roars,  lonely,  on  a  fea-furround- 
ed  rock,  after  the  winds  are  laid.  The  dark  mofs  whiftles 
there  j  the  diftant  mariner  fees  the  waving  trees ! 

*  Oflian  is  fometimes  poetically  called  the  voice  of  Cona. 


FINGAL: 


F       I       N       G       A       L 


AN    ANCIENT 


EPIC       POEM. 


Ivi    SIX    BOOKS. 


ARGUMENT. 

Cuthullin,  (general  of  the  Irifli  tribes,  in  the  minority  of  Cormac,  king  of  Ire- 
land) fitting  alone  beneath  a  tree,  at  the  gate  of  Tura,  a  caflle  of  Ulfter,  (the 
other  chiefs  having  gone  on  a  hunting  party  to  Cromla,  a  neighbouring  hill)  is 
informed  of  the  landing  of  Swaran,  king  of  Lochlin,  by  Moran,  the  fon  of  Fi- 
thil,  one  of  his  fcouts.  He  convenes  the  chiefs;  a  council  is  held,  and  difputes 
run  high  about  giving  battle  to  the  enemy.  Connal,  the  petty  king  of  Togorma, 
and  an  intimate  friend  of  Cuthullin,  was  for  retreating  till  Fingal,  king  of  thofe 
Caledonians  who  inhabited  the  north-weft  coafi  of  Scotland,  whofe  aid  had  been 
previoufly  fohcited,  fhould  arrive;  but  Calmar,  the  fon  of  Matha,  lord  of  Lara, 
a  country  in  Connaught,  was  for  engaging  the  enemy  immediately.  Cuthullin,  of 
himfelf  willing  to  fight,  went  into  the  opinion  of  Calmai .  Marching  towards  the 
enemy,  he  miffed  three  of  his  bravcft  heroes,  Fergus,  Duchomar,  and  Cathba. 
Fergus  arriving,  tells  Cuthullin  of  the  death  of  the  two  other  chiefs,  which  in- 
troduces the  affefting  epifode  of  Morna,  the  daughter  of  Cormac.  The  army 
of  Cuthullin  is  defcried  at  a  diflance  by  Swaran,  who  fent  the  fon  of  Arno  to 
obferve  the  motions  of  the  enemy,  while  himfelf  ranged  his  forces  in  order  of 
battle.  The  fon  of  Arno  returning  to  Swaran,  defcribes  to  him  Cuthullin's  cha- 
liot,  and  the  terrible  appearance  of  that  hero.  The  armies  engage,  but  night 
coming  on,  leaves  the  viftory  undecided.  Cuthullin,  according  to  the  hofpi- 
tality  of  the  times,  fends  to  Swaran  a  formal  invitation  to  a  feaft,  by  his  bard  Car- 
ril,  the  fon  of  Kinfena.  Swaran  refufes  to  come.  Carril  relates  to  Cuthullin 
the  ftory  of  Grudar  and  Braffolis.  A  party,  by  Connal's  advice,  is  fent  to  obferve 
fhe  enemy;  which  clofes  the  aftion  of  the  firft  day. 


F       I       N        G       A       L  : 

ANANCIENT 

EPIC         POEM. 
B  O  O  K    I. 

CUTHULLIN*  fat  by  Tura*s  wall :  by  the  tree  of 
the  ruftling  found.  His  fpear  leaned  againft  a  rock. 
His  fhield  lay  on  grafs,  by  his  fide.  Amid  his  thoughts  of 
mighty  Carbarf ,  a  hero  flain  by  the  chief  in  war ;  the 
fcout  II  of  ocean  comes,  Moran  §  the  fon  of  Fithil  ! 

"  Arise,"  fays  the  youth,  "Cuthullin,  arife.  I  fee 
the  fhips  of  the  north  !  Many,  chief  of  men,  are  the  foe  ! 
Many  the  heroes  of  the  fea-borne  Swaran  !'*  "  Moran  !'* 
replied  the  blue-eyed  chief,  "  thou  ever  trembleft,  fon  of 

Fithil ! 

*  Cuthullin  the  fon  of  Semo  and  grandfon  to  Caithbat,  a  draid,  celebrated  in  tra- 
dition for  his  wifdom  and  valour,  Cuthullin  when  very  young  married  Bragela 
the  daughter  of  Sorglan,  and  paffing  over  into  Ireland,  lived  fer  fome  time  wiih 
Connal,  grandfon  by  a  daughter  to  Congol  the  petty  king  of  Ulfter.  His  wifdom 
and  valour  in  a  fliort  time  gamed  him  fuch  reputation,  that  in  the  minority  of  Cor- 
mac,  the  fupreme  king  of  Ireland,  he  was  chofen  guardian  to  the  young  king,  and 
fole  manager  of  the  war  againft  Swaran  king  of  Lochlin.  After  a  feries  of  great 
anions  he  was  killed  in  battle  fomewhere  in  Connaught,  in  the  twenty-feventhyear 
of  his  age.  He  was  fo  remarkable  for  his  ftrength,  that  to  defciibe  a  ftrong  man 
it  has  palTed  into  a  proverb,  "  He  has  the  ftrength  of  Cuthulliji."  They  ftiow  the 
remains  of  his  palace  at  Dnnfcaich  in  the  ifle  of  Skye ;  and  a  ftone  to  which  he 
bound  his  dog  Luath,  goes  flill  by  his  name. 

+  Cairbar  or  Cairbre,  fignifies  a  ftrong  vian, 

H  Cuthullin  having  previous  intelligence  of  the  invafion  intended  by  Swaran, 
fent  fcouts  all  over  the  coaft  of  Ullin  or  Ulfter,  to  give  early  notice  of  the  firft  ap- 
pearance of  the  enemy,  at  the  fame  time  that  he  fent  Munan  the  fori  of  Stirmal  to 
implore  the  aftiftance  of  Fingal.  He  himfelfcollefted  the  flower  of  the  Irifh  youth 
to  Tura,  a  callle  on  the  coaft,  to  ftop  the  progrefs  of  the  enemy  till  Fingal  fhould 
arrive  from  Scotland.  We  may  conclude  from  Cuthollin's  upph  ing,  fo  early  for 
foreign  aid,  that  the  Irifli  were  not  then  fo  numerous  as  they  ha>'o  fine-  b';cn;  which 
is  a  great  prefumption  a?ainft  the  high  antiquities  of  that  people.  Vv'^e  have  the 
teftimony  of  Tacitus,  that  one  legion  only  was  thought  fufRcient,  in  the  time  of 
Agricola,  to  reduce  the  whole  illand  under  the  Roman  yoke;  which  would  not 
probably  have  been  the  cafe  had  the  iftand  been  inhabited  for  any  number  of  cen- 
turies before. 

^  Moran  lignifies  many;  and  Fithil,  or  rather  Fili,  an  infaior  b^r /, 


744  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

Fithll !  Thy  fears  have  increafed  the  foe.  It  is  Fingal, 
king*  of  defarts,  with  aid  to  green  Erin  of  ftreams.**  "  I 
beheld  their  chief,"  fays  Moran,  "  tall  as  a  glittering  rock. 
His  fpear  is  a  blafted  pine  :  his  fhield  the  rifing  moon  !  He 
fat  on  the  Ihore,  like  a  cloud  of  mift  on  the  filent  hill ! 
Many,  chief  of  heroes  !  I  faid,  many  are  our  hands  of 
war.  Well  art  thou  named,  the  Mighty  Man  ;  but  many 
mighty  men  are  feen  from  Tura's  windy  walls. 

"  He  fpoke,  like  a  wave  on  a  rock,  "  Who  in  this 
lahd  appears  like  me  ?  Heroes  Hand  not  in  my  prefence  : 
they  fall  to  earth  from  my  hand.  Who  can  meet  Swaran 
in  fight  ?  Who  but  Fingal,  king  of  Selma  of  ftorms  ? 
Once  we  wreftled  on  Malmor-j-;  our  heels  overturned  the 
woods.  Rocks  fell  from  their  place  ;  rivulets,  changing 
their  courfe,  fled  murmuring  from  our  fide  ?  Three  days 
we  renewed  the  ftrife  ;  heroes  flood  at  a  diftance,  and 
trembled.  On  the  fourth,  Fingal  fays,  that  the  king  of 
the  ocean  fell !  but  Swaran  fays,  he  ftood  !  Let  dark  Cu- 
thullin  yield  to  him,  that  is  flrong  as  the  ftorms  of  his 
land  1"  ^ 

"  No  !"  replied  the  blue-eyed  chief,  "  I  never  yield  to 
mortal  man !  Dark  CuthuUin  fhall  be  great  or  dead !  Go, 
fon  of  Fithil,  take  my  fpear.  Strike  the  founding  fliield 
ofSemo§.  It  hangs  at  Tura*s  ruftling  gate.  The  found 
of  peace  is  not  its  voice  !  My  heroes  fhall  hear,  and  obey.'* 
He  went.  He  flruck  the  bofly  fhield.  The  hills,  the  rocks, 
reply.  The  found  fpreads  along  the  wood  :  deer  ftart  by 
the  lake  of  roes.  CarachU  leaps  from  the  founding  rock  ; 
and  Gonnal  of  the  bloody  fpear !  Crugal's^f  breaft  of  fnow 
beats  high.  The  fon  of  Favi  leaves  the  dark-brown  hind. 
It  is  the  fhield  of  war,  faid  Ronnar  !  the  fpear  of  Cuthul- 
lin,  faid  Lugar  !  fon  of  thefea,  put  on  thy  arms  !  Calmar, 

Uh 

*  Fingal  the  fon  of  Comhal  and  Morna  the  daughter  of  Thaddu.  Kis  grandfa- 
'iier  was  Trathal,  and  great  grandfather  Trenmor,  both  of  whom  are  often  menti- 
oned in  the  poem. 

t  Meal-mor,  a  great  hill. 

\  Cabait,  or  rather  Cathbaif,  grandfather  to  the  hero,  was  fo  remarkable  for  his 
valour,  that  bis  fhield  was  made  ufe  of  to  alarm  his  pofterity  to^the  battles  of  the 
family.  We  find  Fingal  making  tlie  lame  ufe  of  his  own  (liield  in  the  4th  book, 
A  horn  was  the  moQ  common  inilrument  to  call  the  army  together- 

d  Cu-raoch  fignifies  the  viadmfi  of  battU^ 

^  Cruth-gcal,  fair-cempltxiomd. 


Book  I.  An   EPIC    POEM.  145 

lift  thy  founding  fleel !  Puno!  dreadful  hero,  arife !  Cair- 
bar,  from  thy  red  tree  of  Cromla!  Bend  thy  knee,  O  Eth; 
defcend  from  the  ftreams  of  Lena.  Ca-olt,  ftretch  thy  fide 
as  thou  moved  along  the  whiftling  heath  of  Mora  :  thy 
fide,  that  is  white  as  the  foam  of  the  troubled  fea,  when 
the  dark  winds  pour  it  on  rocky  Cuthon  *. 

Now  I  behold  the  chiefs,  in  the  pride  of  their  former 
deeds !  Their  fouls  are  kindled  at  the  battles  of  old  ;  at 
the  actions  of  other  times.  Their  eyes  are  flames  of  fire. 
They  roll  in  fearch  of  the  foes  of  the  land.  Their  mighty 
hands  are  on  their  fwords.  Lightning  pours  from  their 
fides  of  flieel.  They  come  like  ftreams  from  the  moun- 
tains ;  each  ruflies  roaring  from  his  hilL  Bright  are  the 
chiefs  of  battle,  in  the  armour  of  their  fathers.  Gloomy 
and  dark  their  heroes  follow,  like  the  gathering  of  the 
rainy  clouds  behind  the  red  meteors  of  heaven.  The 
founds  of  cralhing  arms  afcend.  The  grey  dogs  howl 
between.  Unequal  burfls  the  fong  of  battle.  Rocking 
Cromla  f  echoed  round.  On  Lena's  dufky  heath  they 
{land,  like  mift  that  fhades  the  hills  of  autumn ;  when 
broken  and  dark  it  fettles  high,  and  lifts  its  head  to  heavenl 

"  Hail,"  faid  Cuthullin,  "  fons  of  the  narrow  vales! 
hail,  hunters  of  the  deer!  Another  fport  is  drawing  near: 
It  is  like  the  dark  rolling  of  that  wave  on  the  coall !  Or 
fliall  we  fight,  ye  fons  of  war  !  or  yield  green  Erin  ||  to 
Lochlin  !  O  Connal  § ,  fpeak,  thou  firft  of  men  !  thou 
breaker  of  the  Ihields !  thou  haft  often  fought  with  Loch- 
lin :  wilt  thou  lift  thy  father's  fpear  ?" 

"  Cuthullin  i"  calm  the  chief  replied,  "  the  fpear 

of  Connal  is  keen.     It  delights  to  fliine  ii\  battle;  to  mix 

with  the  blood  of  thoufands.     But  tho'  my  hand  is  bent 

T  on 

*  Cu-thon,  the  nouriiful  found  of  waves. 

+  Crom-leach  fignified  a  place  of  worlhip  among  the  Druids.  It  is  here  the  pro- 
per name  of  a  hill  on  the  coa'ft  of  Ullin  or  Ulfter. 

II  Ireland  fo  called  froni  a  colony  that  fettled  there  called  Falans.  Innjs-fail, 
the  ifland  of  the  Fa-il  or  Falans, 

%  Cennal,  the  friend  of  Cuthullin,  was  the  fon  of  Caithbait,  princs  of  the  Ton- 
gorma  or  die.  ifland  nf  blue  waves,  probably  one  of  the  Hebrides.  His  mother  was 
Fioncoma  the  daughter  of  Congal.  He  had  a  fon  by  Foba  of  Conachaj  -ncffar,  who 
was  afterwards  petty  king  of  Ulfler.  For  his  fervices  in  the  war  againft  Swaran  he 
had  lands  conferred  on  him,  which,  from  hi^  name,  were  called  Tir-chonnuil  or 
Tir-connel,  z.  e.  the  land  of  Connal. 


T46  F    I    N    G     A    L  . 

on  fight,  my  heart  is  for  the  peace  of  Erin*.  Behold, 
thou  firil  in  Cormac's  war,  the  fable  fleet  of  Swaran.  His 
marts  are  many  on  our  coaft,  like  reeds  in  the  lake  of  Le- 
go. His  fhips  are  forefts  cloathed  with  mift,  when  the 
trees  yield  by  turns  to  the  fqually  wind.  Many  are  his 
chiefs  in  battle.  Connal  is  for  peace  !  Fingal  would  fhun 
his  arm,  the  firfl  of  mortal  men!  Fingal,  who  fcatters  the 
mighty,  as  ftormy  winds  the  heath ;  when  ftreams  roar 
thro'  echoing  Cona;  and  night  fettles  with  all  her  clouds 
on  the  hill !" 

"Fly,  thou  man  of  peace,"  faid  Calmarf,  "  fly,'* 
faid  the  fon  of  Matha ;  "  go,  Connal,  to  thy  filent  hills, 
where  the  fpear  never  brightens  in  war!  Purfue  the  dark- 
brown  deer  of  Cromla:  ftop  with  thine  arrows  the  bound- 
ing roes  of  Lena.  But,  blue-eyed  fon  of  Semo,  Cuthul- 
lin,  ruler  of  the  field,  fcatter  thou  the  fons  of  Lochlin  ]| ; 
roar  thro'  the  ranks  of  their  pride.  Let  no  veflfel  of  the 
kingdom  of  Snow  bound  on  the  dark-rolling  waves  of 
Inis-tore  § .  Rife,  ye  dark  winds  of  Erin,  rife !  roar,  whirl- 
winds of  Sara  of  hinds  !  Amid  the  tempeft  let  me  die, 
torn,  in  a  cloud,  by  angry  ghofts  of  men;  amid  the  tem- 
pefl;  let  Calmar  die,  if  ever  chace  was  fport  to  him,  fa 
much  as  the  battle  of  fhields  !" 

"  Calmar!"  Connal  flow  replied,  "  I  never  fled,, 
young  fon  of  Matha!  I  was  fvvift  with  my  friends  in  fight; 
but  fmall  is  the  fame  of  Connal  T  The  battle  was  won  in 
my  prefence  ;  the  valiant  overcame  !  But,  fon  of  Semo, 
hear  my  voice ;  regard  the  ancient  throne  of  Cormac. 
Give  wealth  and  half  the  land  for  peace,  till  Fingal  fiiall 
arrive  on  our  coaft.  Or,  if  war  be  thy  choice,  I  lift  the 
fword  and  fpear.  My  joy  fliall  be  in  the  midfl;  of  thou- 
fands ;   my  foul  fhall  lighten  thro'  the  gloom  of  the  fight  !'* ' 

"  To  me,"  Cuthullin  replies,  "  pleafant  is  the  noife  oft 
arms !  pleafant  as  the  thunder  of  heaven,  before  the  fliower ; 

oft 

*  'Erin;  a  name  of  Ireland  ;  from  far  or  iar  Weft,  and  man  ifland.  This  name 
was  not  always  confined  to  Ireland,  for  there  is  the  higheft  probability  that  the  lerne 
of  the  ancients  was  Britain  to  the  North  of  the  Forth.  For  lerne  is  faid  to  be  to- 
the  North  of  Britain,  which  could  not  be  meant  of  Ireland. 

STRABO,  i.  2'.  &4.  CASAUB.  1.  i.    . 

+  Calm-er,  ajlrong  man. 

\  The  Galic  name  of  Scandinavia  in  general. 

^  The  Orkney  iflands. 


Book  I.  An   EPIC   POEM.  147 

of  fpring  !  But,  gather  all  the  fliining  tribes,  that  I  may 
view  the  fons  of  war  !  Let  them  pals  along  the  heath, 
"bright  as  the  iun-fhine  before  a  ftorm ;  when  the  weft 
wind  colleds  the  clouds,  and  Morven  echoes  over  all  her 
oaks  !  But  where  are  my  friends  in  battle  ?  the  fupport- 
ers  of  my  arm  in  danger?  Where  art  thou,  white-bofom'd 
Cathbar?  Vv/'here  is  that  cloud  in  war,  Duchomar  *  ?  Haft 
thou  left  me,  O  Fergus  |  !  in  the  day  of  the  ftorm  ?  Fer- 
gus, fiift  in  our  joy  at  the  feaft !  Ion  of  Roiia  !  arm  of 
death!  conieft  thou  like  a  roe  from  Malmor  ?  Hke  a  hart 
from  thy  echoing  hills  ?  Hail,  thou  fon  of  Roffa !  what 
(hades  the  foul  of  war  ?'* 

"  Four  ftones  |j,"  replied  the  chief,  "rife  on  the  grave 
of  Cathba.  Thefe  hands  have  laid  in  earth  Duchomar, 
that  cloud  in  war !  Cathba,  fon  of  Torman  !  tbou  wert 
a  fun-beam  in  Erin.  And  thou,  O  valiant  Duchomar,  a 
mift  of  the  marftiy  Lano;  when  it  moves  on  the  plains  of 
autumn,  bearing  the  death  of  thoufands  along.  Morna ! 
faireft  of  maids !  calm  is  thy  fleep  in  the  cave  of  the  rock! 
Thou  haft  fallen  in  darknefs,  like  a  ftar,  that  ftioots  acrofs 
the  defart ;  when  the  traveller  is  alone,  and  mourns  the 
tranfient  beam !" 

"  Say,"  faid  Semo's  blue-eyed  fon,  "  fiiy,  how  fell  the 
chiefs  of  Erin  ?  Fell  they  by  the  fons  of  Lochlin,  ftriving 
in  the  battle  of  heroes  ?  Or  what  confines  the  ftrong  in 
arms  to  the  dark  and  narrow  houfe  ?" 

"  Cathba,"  replied  the  hero,  "  fell  by  the  fword  of 
Duchomar  at  the  oak  of  the  noify  ftreams.  Duchomar 
came  to  Tura's  cave ;  he  fpoke  to  the  lovely  Morna. 
Morna  §,  faireft  among  women,  lovely  daughter  of  ftrong- 
armed  Corma !  why  in  the  circle  of  ftones  ?  in  the  cave 
of  the  rock,  alone?  The  ftream  murmurs  along.  The  old 
tree  groans  in  the  wind.     The  lake  is  troubled  berore 

thee  ; 

*  Dubhchomar,  a  black  well-made  man, 

t  F^ar-guth,   the  man  of  tlie  word;  or  a  commander  of  an  army. 

II  This  paffage  alludes  to  the  manner  of  burial  among  the  ancient  Scots.  They 
opened  a  grave  lix  or  eight  feet  deep  :  the  bottom  was  lined  with  fine  clay  :  and 
on  this  they  laid  the  body  of  the  decenfed,  and,  if  a  warrior,  his  fword,  and  the 
heads  of  twelve  arrows  by  his  fide.  Above  they  hiid  another  ftratum  of  clay,  in 
which  thev  placed  the  horn  of  a  deer,  the  fymbol  of  hunting.  The  whole  was  co- 
vered wuh  a  fine  mold,  and  four  ftones  placed  on  end  to  mark  the  extent  of  the 
grave.     Thefe  are  the  four  Uones  alluded  to  here. 

S  Muirne,  or  Morna,  a  woman  bdcved  hy  cdl. 


148  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

thee  ;  dark  are  the  clouds  of  the  fky  !  But  thou  art  fnow 
on  the  heath;  thy  hair  is  the  mift  of  Cromla;  when  it  curls* 
on  the  hill;  when  it  fliines  to  the  beam  of  the  weft!  Thy 
breafts  are  two  fmooth  rocks  feen  from  Branno  of  ftreams. 
Thy  arms,  like  two  white  pillars,  in  the  halls  of  the  great 
Fingal.'* 

"  From  whence,"  the  fair-haired  maid  replied,  "  from 
whence,  Duchomar,  moft  gloomy  of  men  ?  Dark  are  thy 
brows  and  terrible!  Red  are  thy  rolling  eyes!  Does  Swa- 
ran  appear  on  the  fea  ?  What  of  the  foe,  Duchomar  ?'* 
"  From  the  hill  I  return,  O  Morna,  from  the  hill  of  the 
dark-brown  hinds.  Three  have  I  flain  with  my  bended 
yew  ;  three,  with  my  long  bounding  dogs  of  the  chace. 
Lovely  daughter  of  Cormac,  I  love  thee  as  my  foul !  I 
have  flain  one  ftately  deer  for  thee.  High  was  his  branchy 
head;  and  fleet  his  feet  of  wind."  "  Duchomar  !"jj  calm 
the  maid  replied,  "  I  love  thee  not,  thou  gloomy  man  1 
Hard  is  thy  heart  of  rock;  dark  is  thy  terrible  brow.  But 
Cathba,  young  fon  of  Torman*,  thou  art  the  love  of 
Morna.  Thou  art  a  fun-beam,  in  the  day  of  the  gloomy 
ftorm.  Saweft  thou  the  fon  of  Torman,  lovely  on  the  hill 
of  his  hinds  ?  Here  the  daughter  of  Cormac  waits  the 
coming  of  Cathba !" 

"  Long  fliall  Morna  wait,"  Duchomar  faid  ;  "  long 
fliall  Morna  wait  for  Cathba!  Behold  this  fword  unflieath- 
ed!  Here  wanders  the  blood  of  Cathba.  Long  fhall  Mor- 
na wait.  He  fell  by  the  ftream  of  Branno  !  On  Croma  I 
will  raife  his  tomb,  daughter  of  blue-fliielded  Cormac  ! 
Turn  on  Duchomar  thine  eyes  ;  Jiis  arm  is  ftrong  as  a 
fcorm."  "  Is  the  fon  of  Torman  fallen  ?"  faid  the  wildly 
burfting  voice  of  the  maid.  "  Is  he  fallen  on  his  echoing 
hills,  the  youth  with  the  breaft  of  fnow  ?  the  firft  in  the 
chace  of  hinds  ?  the  foe  of  the  ftrangers  of  ocean  ?  Thou.  1 
art  dark  I  to  me,  Duchomar,  cruel  is  thine  arm  to  Mor- 
na !  Give  me  that  fword,  my  foe  !  I  love  the  wandering  , 
blood  of  Cathba !" 

"  He  gave  the  fword  to  her  tears.  She  pierced  his  manly  ' 

breaft! 

*  Torman,  thunder.     This  is  the  true  origin  of  the  Jupiter  Taramis  of  the  an- 
cients. 

t  She  alludes  to  his  name,  the  dark  vian. 


Book  I.  An   EPIC   POEM.  149 

breafl; !  He  fell,  like  the  bank  of  a  mountaln-ftream,  and 
flretching  forth  his  hand,  he  fpoke.  "  Daughter  of  blue- 
fhielded  Cormac  !  thou  haft  flain  me  in  youth  !  The 
fword  is  cold  in  my  breaft  ;  Morna,  I  feel  it  cold.  Give 
me  to  Moina  *  the  maid.  Duchomar  was  the  dream  of 
her  night !  She  will  raife  my  tomb ;  the  hunter  fhall  raife 
my  fame.  But  draw  the  fword  from  my  breaft.  Morna, 
the  fteel  is  cold  !'*  She  came,  in  all  her  tears,  ftie  came ; 
fhe  drew  the  fword  from  his  breaft.  He  pierced  her  white 
fide !  He  fpread  her  fair  locks  on  the  ground !  Her  burft- 
ing  blood  founds  from  her  fide:  her  white  arm  is  ftained 
with  red.  Rolling  in  death  ftie  lay.  The  cave  re-echoed 
to  her  fighs." 

"  Peace,"  faid  Cuthullin,  "  to  the  fouls  of  the  heroes! 
their  deeds  were  great  in  fight.  Let  them  ride  around  f 
me  on  clouds.  Let  them  ftiew  their  features  of  war.  My 
foul  ftiall  then  be  firm  in  danger;  mine  arm  like  the  thun- 
der of  heaven  !  But  be  thou  on  a  moon-beam,  O  Morna! 
near  the  window  of  my  reft  ;  when  my  thoughts  are  of 
peace;  when  the  din  of  arms  is  paft.  Gather  the  ftrength 
of  the  tribes  !  Move  to  the  wars  of  Erin  !  Attend  the  car 
of  my  battles  !  Rejoice  in  the  noife  of  my  courfe  I  Place 
three  fpcars  by  my  fide:  follow  the  bounding  of  my  fteeds ! 
That  my  foul  may  be  ftrong  in  my  friends,  when  battle 
darkens  round  the  beams  of  my  fteel  !" 

As  ruflies  a  ftream  of  foam  from  the  dark  fliady  deep 
of  Cromla ;  when  the  thunder  is  travelling  above,  and 
dark-brown  night  fits  on  half  the  hill  :  through  the 
breaches  of  the  tempeft  look  forth  the  dim  faces  of  ghofts; 
fo  fierce,  fo  vaft,  fo  terrible  ruftied  on  the  fons  of  Erin. 
The  chief,  like  a  whale  of  ocean,  whom  all  his  billows 
purfue,  poured  valour  forth,  as  a  ftream,  rolling  his  might 
along  the  fliore.  The  fons  of  Lochlin  heard  the  noife,  as 
the  found  of  a  winter-ftorm.  Swaran  ftruck  his  bofiy 
fliield:  he  called  the  fon  of  Arno,  "  What  murmur  rolls 
along  the  hill,  like  the  gathered  flies  of  the  eve  ?  The 
fons   of  Erin  defcend,    or  ruftling   winds    roar   in  the, 

diftant 

*  Mo'xn^,  fof tin  temper  and  per/on. 

t  It  was  the  opinion  then,  as  ind-;ed  it  is  to  this  day,  of  fome  of  the  Highland- 
ers, that  the  fouls  of  the  deceafed  hovered  round  their  living  friends;  and  fotne- 
times  appeared  to  them  when  they  were  about  to  enter  on  any  great  undertaking. 


150  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

diftant  wood  !  Such  is  the  noife  of  Gormal,  before  the 
white  tops  of  my  waves  arife.  O  fon  of  Arno,  afcend  the 
hill ;  view  the  dark  face  of  the  heath  ! 

He  went.  He,  trembling,  fwift  returned.  His  eyes  rol- 
led wildly  round.  His  heart  beat  high  againft  his  fide. 
His  words  were  faultering,  broken,  flow.  "  Arife,  fon  of 
ocean,  arife,  chief  of  the  dark-brown  Ihields !  I  fee  the 
dark,  the  mountain  ftream  of  battle  !  the  deep-moving 
ftrength  of  the  fons  of  Erin !  The  car,  the  car  of  war 
comes  on,  like  the  flame  of  death!  the  rapid  car  of  Cuthul- 
lin,  the  noble  fon  of  Semo !  It  bends  behind  like  a  wave 
near  a  rock  ;  like  the  fun-ilreaked  mift  of  the  heath.  Its 
fides  are  embofled  with  ftones,  and  fparkle  like  the  fea 
round  the  boat  of  night.  Of  poliflied  yew  is  its  beam  ; 
its  feat  of  the  fmootheft  bone.  The  fides  are  repleniflied 
with  fpears;  the  bottom  is  the  footltool  of  heroes!  Before 
the  right  fide  of  the  car  is  feen  the  fnorting  horfe  !  The 
high-maned,  broad-breafl:ed,  proud,  wide-leaping,  fl:rong 
fteed  of  the  hill.  Loud  and  refounding  is  his  hoof:  the 
fpreading  of  his  mane  above  is  like  a  fl:ream  of  fmoke  on 
a  ridge  of  rocks.  Bright  are  the  fides  of  the  deed  !  his 
name  is  Sulin-Sifadda ! 

"  Before  the  left  fide  of  the  car  is  feen  the  fnorting 
horfe!  The  thin-maned,  high-headed,  ftrong  hoofed, 
fleet,  bounding  fon  of  the  hill :  his  name  is  Dufronnal, 
among  the  fl:ormy  fons  of  the  fword !  A  thoufand  thongs 
bind  the  car  on  high.  Hard  poliflied  bits  fliine  in  a  wreath 
of  foam.  Thin  thongs,  bright  fl:udded  with  gems,  bend 
on  the  fl:ately  necks  of  the  lleeds  ;  the  fl:eeds  that,  like 
v/reathes  of  mill,  fly  over  the  fl:reamy  vales!  The  wildnefs 
of  deer  is  in  their  courfe,  the  fl:rength  of  eagles  defcending 
on  the  prey.  Their  noife  is  like  the  blall  of  winter,  on 
the  fides  of  the  fnow-headed  Gormal. 

i-  Within  the  car  is  feen  the  chief;  the  ftrong-armed  fon 
of  the  fword.  The  hero's  name  is  Cuthullin,  fon  of  Semo 
king  of  fliells.  His  red  cheek  is  like  my  poliflied  yew. 
The  look  of  his  blue-rolling  eye  is  wide,  beneath  the  dark 
arch  of  his  brow.  His  hair  flies  from  his  head  like  a  flame, 
as  bending  forward  he  wields  the  fpear.  Fly,  king  of 
ocean,  fly!  He  comes,  like  a  fl:orm,  along  the  ilreamy  vale!'* 

«  When 


Book  I.  An   EPIC   POEM.  i5f 

"  When  did  I  fly,"  replied  the  king?  "When  fled 
Swaran  from  the  battle  of  fptars  ?  When  did  I  fhrink 
from  danger,  chief  of  the  little  foul  ?  I  met  the  ftorm  of 
Gormal,  when  the  foam  of  my  waves  beat  high.  I  met 
the  itorm  of  the'cloLids:  fhall  Swaran  fly  from  a  hero? 
Were  Fingal  himfelf  before  me,  my  foul  fliould  not  dark- 
en with  fear.  Arife  to  battle,  my  thoufands!  pour  round 
me  like  the  echoing  main.  Gather  round  the  bright  fl;eel 
of  your  king  ;  fl:rong,  as  the  rocks  of  my  land,  that  meet 
the  ftorm  with  joy,  and  ftretch  their  dark  pines  to  the 
wind !" 

Like  autumn's  dark  ftorms,  pouring  from  two  echoing 
hills,  toward  each  other  approached  the  heroes.  Like 
two  deep  ftreams  from  high  rocks  meeting,  mixing,  roar- 
ing on  the  plain ;  loud,  rough  and  dark  in  battle  meet 
Lochlin  and  Inis-fail.  Chief  mixes  his  ftrokes  with  chief, 
and  man  with  man;  fteel,  clanging,  founds  onfteel.  Hel- 
mets are  cleft  on  high.  Blood  burfts  and  fmokes  around. 
Strings  murmur  on  the  poliflied  yews.  Darts  rufh  along 
the  fl^:y.  Spears  fall  like  the  circles  of  light,  which  gild 
the  face  of  night.  As  the  noife  of  the  troubled  ocean, 
when  roll  the  waves  on  kigh  :  as  the  laft  peal  of.  thunder 
in  heaven,  fuch  is  the  din  of  war!  Though  Cormac's  hun- 
dred bards  were  there,  to  give  the  fight  to  fong ;  feeble 
was  the  voice  of  a  hundred  bards  to  fend  the  deaths  to 
future  times  !  For  many  were  the  deaths  of  heroes;  wide 
poured  the  blood  of  the  brave ! 

Mourn,  ye  fons  of  fong,  mourn  the  death  of  the  noble 
Sithallin  *.  Let  the  fighs  of  Fiona  rife,  on  the  lone 
plains  of  her  lovely  Ardan.  They  fell,  like  two  hindr  of 
the  defart,  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  Swaran;  when,  in 
the  midft  of  thoufands,  he  roared,  like  the  flirill  fpirit  of 
a  ftorm.  He  fits  dim,  on  the  clouds  of  the  north,  and 
enjoys  the  death  of  the  mariner.  Nor  flept  thy  hand  by 
thy  lide,  chief  of  the  ifle  of  mift  | !  many  were  the  deaths 
of  thine  arm,  Cuthullin,  thou  fon  of  Semo !  His  fword 
was  like  the  beam  oi  heaven,  when  it  pierces  the  fons  of 

the 

*  SiihM'in  f\nr\\fiQs  a /ia?idfome  man ;  Fiona,  a  foir  maid;  and  Ardan,  pride. 
t  Tlie  Ifle  of  Sky ;  not  improperly  called  the  t^c  qfmijl,  as  its  high  hil!s,  wbicfc 
catch  the  clouds  from  th^  wcflern  ocean,  occafioii  almoft  conunu.-il  rain.. 


152  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

the  vale ;  when  the  people  are  blafted  and  fall,  and  all 
the  hills  are  burning  around.  Dufronnal  *  fnorted  over 
the  bodies  of  heroes.  Sifadda  f  bathed  his  hoof  in  blood. 
The  battle  lay  behind  them,  as  groves  overturned  on  the 
defart  of  Cromla  ;  when  the  blafl  has  pafTed  the  heath, 
laden  with  the  fpirits  of  night ! 

Weep  on  the  rocks  of  roaring  winds,  O  maid  of  Ini- 
ftore  II !  Bend  thy  fair  head  over  the  waves,  thou  lovelier 
than  the  ghoft  of  the  hills;  when  it  moves,  in  a  fun-beam, 
at  noon,  over  the  filence  of  Morven  !  He  is  fallen  !  thy 
youth  is  low !  pale  beneath  the  fword  of  Cuthullin  !  No 
more  Ihall  valour  raife  thy  love  to  match  the  blood  of 
kings.  Trenar,  graceful  Trenar  died,  O  maid  of  Iniflore. 
His  grey  dogs  are  howling  at  home ;  they  fee  his  paffing 
ghoft.  His  bow  is  in  the  hall  unftrung.  No  found  is  in 
the  hill  of  his  hinds  ! 

As  roll  a  thoufand  waves  to  the  rocks,  fo  Swaran's  holl: 
came  on.  As  meets  a  rock  a  thoufand  waves,  fo  Erin 
met  Swaran  of  fpears.  Death  raifes  all  his  voices  around, 
and  mixes  with  the  founds  of  fliields.  Each  hero  is  a  pillar 
of  darknefs;  the  fword,  a  beam  of  fire  in  his  hand.  The 
field  echoes  from  wing  to  wing,  as  a  hundred  hammers 
that  rife,  by  turns,  on  the  red  fon  of  the  furnace.  Who 
are  thefe  on  Lena's  heath,  thefe  fo  gloomy  and  dark  ? 
Who  are  thefe  like  two  clouds,  and  their  fwords  like  light- 
ning above  them  ?  The  little  hills  are  troubled  around  ; 
the  rocks  tremble  with  all  their  mofs.  Who  is  it  but 
ocean's  fon,  and  the  car-borne  chief  of  Erin  ?  Many  are 
the  anxious  eyes  of  their  friends,  as  they  fee  them  dim  on 
the  heath.  But  night  conceals  the  chiefs  in  clouds,  and 
ends  the  dreadful  fight ! 

It  was  on  Cromla's  ihaggy  fide  that  Dorglas  had  placed 

the 

*  One  of  Cuthullin's  horfes,     Dubhftron  gheal. 

+  Sith-fadda,  i.  e.  s  long  jlride. 

\  The  maid  of  Inifiore  was  the  daughter  of  Golro  \\Xig  of  Iniftore  or  Orkney 
Iflands.  Trenar  was  brother  to  the  king  of  Inifcon,  fuppofed  to  be  one  of  the 
iflands  of  Shetland.  The  Orkneys  and  Shetland  were  at  that  time  fubjea  to  the 
king  of  Lochlin.  We  find  that  the  dogs  of  Trenar  are  fenfible  at  home  of  the 
death  of  their  mafter,  the  very  inftant  he  is  killed.  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  times, 
that  the  fouls  of  heroes  went  immediately  after  death  to  the  hills  of  their  country, 
and  the  fcenes  they  frequented  the  moft  happy  time  of  their  life.  It  was  thought 
too  that  dogs  and  horfes  faw  the  ghoib  of  the  deceafed. 


Book  I.         An  EPIC   POEM.  153 

the  deer* ;  the  early  fortune  of  the  chace,  before  the  he- 
roes left  the  hill.  A  hundred  youths  colled  the  heath  ; 
ten  warriors  wake  the  fire ;  three  hundred  chufe  the  po- 
lifh'd  ftones.  The  feaft  is  fmoking  wide!  CuthuUin,  chief 
of  Erin's  war,  refumed  his  mighty  foul.  He  flood  upon 
his  beamy  fpear^  and  fpoke  to  the  fon  of  fongs ;  to  Carril 
of  other  times,  the  grey-haired  fon  of  Kinfena  f .  "  Is 
this  feaft  fpread  for  me  alone,  and  the  king  of  Lochlin  on 
Erin's  fhore ;  far  from  the  deer  of  his  hills,  and  founding 
halls  of  his  feafts  ?  Rife,  Carril  of  other  times;  carry  my 
words  to  Swaran.  Tell  him,  from  the  roaring  of  waters, 
that  Cuthullin  gives  his  feaft.  Here  let  him  liften  to  the 
found  of  my  groves,  amidft  the  clouds  of  night  ;  for  cold 
and  bleak  the  bluftering  winds  rufh  over  the  foam  of  his 
feas.  Here  let  him  praife  the  trembling  harp,  and  hear 
the  fongs  of  heroes  !" 

Old  Carril  went,  with  fofteft  voice.  He  called  the 
king  of  dark-brown  fhields  !  "  Rife  from  the  fkins  of  thy 
chace,  rife,  Swaran  king  of  groves  !  Cuthullin  gives  the 
joy  of  fhells.  Partake  the  feaft  of  Erin's  blue-eyed  chief!" 
He  anfwered  like  the  fullen  found  of  Cromla  before  a 
ftorm.  "  Though  all  thy  daughters,  Inis-fail  !  fnould 
ftretch  their  arms  of  fnow ;  fhould  raife  the  heavings  of 
their  breafts,  and  foftly  roll  their  eyes  of  love ;  yet,  fixed 
as  Lochlin's  thoufand  rocks,  here  Swaran  fhould  remain; 
till  morn,  with  the  young  beams  of  the  eaft,  fhall  light 
me  to  the  death  of  Cuthullin.  Pleafant  to  my  ear  is  Loch- 
lin's wind !  It  rufhes  over  my  feas  !  It  fpeaks  aloft  in  all 
my  fhrouds,  and  brings  my  green  forefls  to  my  mind : 
The  green  forefts  of  Gormal,  which  often  echoed  to  my 
winds,  when  my  fpear  was  red  in  the  chace  of  the  boar* 
Let  dark  Cuthullin  yield  to  me  the  ancient  throne  of  Cor- 
U  mac  ', 

*  The  ancient  manner  of  preparing  feafls  after  hunting,  is  handed  down  by  tra- 
dition. A  pit  lined  with  fmooth  ftones  was  made;  and  near.it  flood  a  heap  of 
fmooth  flat  ftones  of  the  flint  kind.  The  ftones  as  weil  as  the  pit  were  properly 
heated  with  heath.  Then  they  laid  fome  venifon  in  the  bottom,  and  a  flratum  of 
the  ftones  above  it;  and  thus  they  did  alternately  till  the  pit  was  full.  The  whole 
was  covered  over  with  heath  to  confine  the  fleam.  Whether  this  is  probable,  I 
cannot  fay;  but  fome  pits  are  fliewn,  which  the  vulgar  fay,  were  uied  in  that 
manner. 

+  Cean-fcana,  i.e.  the Aedd of  t/ie people. 


154  F    I    N    G    A    L: 

mac ;  or  Erin's  torrents  fliall  fliew  from  their  hills  the  red 
foam  of  the  blood  of  his  pride !" 

"  Sad  is  the  found  of  Swaran's  voice,"  faid  Carril  of 
other  times  !  "  Sad  to  himfelf  alone,"  faid  the  blue-eyed 
fon  of  Semo.  "  But,  Carril,  raife  the  voice  on  high  ; 
tell  the  deeds  of  other  times.  Send  thou  the  night  away 
in  fong;  and  give  the  joy  of  grief.  For  many  heroes  and 
maids  of  love  have  moved  on  Inis-fail :  And  lovely  are 
the  fongs  of  woe  that  are  heard  in  Albion's  rocks;  when 
the  noife  of  the  chace  is  pafl,  and  the  ftreams  of  Cona 
anfwer  to  the  voice  of  OlHan.*" 

"  In  other  days|,"  Carril  replies,  "  came  the  fons  of 
ocean  to  Erin.  A  thoufand  veflels  bounded  on  waves  to 
Ullin's  lovely  plains.  The  fons  of  Inis-fail  arofe,  to  meet 
the  race  of  dark-brown  iliields.  Cairbar,  firft  of  men  1 
was  there  ;  and  Grudar,  ftately  youth  !  Long  had  they 
ftrovc  for  the  fpotted  bull,  that  lowed  on  Golbun's ||  echo- 
ing heath.  Each  claimed  him  as  his  own.  Death  was  often 
at  the  point  of  their  fteel.  Side  by  fide  the  heroes  fought : 
the  ifrangers  of  ocean  fled.  Whole  name  was  fairer  on 
the  hili,  than  the  name  of  Cairbar  and  Grudar  ?  But,  ah  ! 
why  ever  lowed  the  bull  on  Golbun's  echoing  heath  r 
They  faw  him  leaping  like  fnow  :  the  wrath  of  the  chiefs 
returned  ! 

"  On  Lubar's§  gralfy  banks  they  fought:  Grudar  fell 
in  his  blood.  Fierce  Cairbar  came  to  the  vale,  where 
Braffolis^,  fairefl  of  his  fillers,  all  alone,  raifed  the  fong 
of  grief.  She  fung  of  the  actions  of  Grudar,  the  youth  of 
her  fecret  foul :  flie  mourned  him  in  the  field  of  blood  ; 
but  ftiil  (he  hoped  for  his  return.  Her  white  bofom  is 
feen  from  her  robe,  as  the  moon  from  the  clouds  of  night, 

when- 

*  The  Cona  here  mentioned  is  that  fmall  river  that  rum  through  Glenco  in  Ar- 
gylefliire.  One  of  the  hills  which  environ  that  romantic  valley  is  ftill  called  Scor- 
nafena,  or  the  iiill  of  Fingal's  people.  .    , 

t  This  cpifode  is  introduced  with  propriety.  Calmar  and  Connal,  two  of  the 
Iilfh  heroes,  had  difputed  warmly  before  the  battle  about  engaging  the  enemy.. 
Carril  endeavours  to  reconcile  them  with  the  ftory  of  Cairbar  and  Grudar;  who; 
tho' enemies  before,  fought  Jide  i>y  Jide'm  the  war.  The  poet  obtained  his  aim„ 
for  we  find  Calmar  and  Connal  perfeftly  reconciled  in  the  third  book. 

II  Golb-bhean,  as  well  as  Cromleach,  iigfi'iHes  a  crooked  full , 

^  Lubar,  a  river  in  Ulfier.     Lal.-har,  loud,  noify. 

^  Braffolis  fignifies  a  woirian  witk  a  ivhiu  bieafl. 


Book  I.  An   EPIC   POEM.  155 

when  its  edge  heaves  white  on  the  view,  from  the  dark- 
neis  which  covers  its  orb.  Her  voice  was  fofter  than  the 
harp,  to  raife  the  fong  of  grief.  Her  foul  was  fixed  on 
Grudar.  The  fecret  look  of  her  eye  was  his.  "  When 
flialt  thou  come  in  thine  arms,  thou  mighty  in  the  war  ?'* 

"  Take,  BraffoHs,"  Cairbar  came  and  faid,  "  take, 
BraffoHs,  this  fhield  of  blood.  Fix  it  on  high  within  my 
hall,  the  armour  of  my  foe  i"  Her  foft  heart  beat  againll 
her  fide.  Diftrafted,  pale,  (he  flew.  She  found  her  youth 
in  all  his  blood  :  flie  died  on  Cromla's  heath.  Here  refts 
their  duft,  Cuthullin  :  thefe  lonely  yews  fprung  from 
their  tombs,  and  fliade  them  from  the  florm.  Fair  was 
BraffoHs  on  the  plain !  Stately  was  Grudar  on  the  hill  ! 
The  bard  fliall  preferve  their  names,  and  fend  ihem  down 
to  future  times  !" 

"  Pleasant  is  thy  voice,  O  Carril  !"  faid  the  blue- 
eyed  chief  of  Erin.  "  Pleafant  are  the  words  of  other 
times  !  They  are  like  the  calm  fhower  of  fpring  ;  when 
the  fun  looks  on  the  field,  and  the  fight  cloud  flies  over 
the  hills.  O  flrike  the  harp  in  praife  of  my  love,  the 
lonely  fun-beam  of  Dunfcaith.  Strike  the  harp  in  praife 
of  Bragela ;  flie  that  I  left  in  the  ifle  of  miit,  the  fpoufe 
of  Semo's  fon ! — Doft  thou  raife  thy  fair  face  from  the 
rock,  to  find  the  fails  of  Cuthullin  ?  The  fea  is  rolling 
diftant  far  ;  its  white  foam  deceives  thee  for  my  fails. 
Retire,  for  it  is  night,  my  love  ;  the  dark  winds  ligh  in 
thy  hair.  Retire  to  the  halls  of  my  feafls  ;  think  of  the 
times  that  are  pad.  I  will  not  return  till  the  ftorm  of  war 
is  ceafed,  O  Connal,  fpeak  of  war  and  arms,  and  fend 
her  from  my  mind.  Lovely,  with  her  flowing  hair,  is  the 
white-bofomed  daughter  of  Sorglan." 

CoNNAL,  flow  to  fpeak,  repfied,  "  Guard  againfi  the 
race  of  ocean.  Senci  thy  troop  of  night  abroad,  and 
watch  the  fl:rength  of  Swaran.  Cuthullin  !  I  am  for 
peace,  till  the  race  of  Selma  come  ;  till  Fingal  come,  the 
firfl:  of  men  !  and  beam,  like  the  fun,  on  our  fields."  The 
hero  fl:ruck  the  fliield  of  alarms;  the  warriors  of  the  night 
moved  on.   The  reft:  lay  in  the  heath  of  the  deer,  and  flept 

beneath 


156  F    I    N    G    A    L. 

beneath  the  dulky  wind.  The  ghofls*  of  the  lately  dead 
were  near,  and  fwam  on  the  gloomy  clouds :  And,  far 
diftant,  in  the  dark  filence  of  Lena,  j^he  feeble  voices  of 
death  were  faintly  heard. 

*  It  was  long  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  Scots,  that  a  ghoft  was  heard  flirieking 
near  the  place  where  a  death  was  to  happen  foon  after.  The  accounts  given,  to 
this  day,  among  the  vulgar,  of  this  extraordinary  matter,  are  very  poetical.  The 
ghoft  comes  mounted  on  a  meteor,  and  furrounds  twice  or  thrice  the  place  deftined 
for  the  perfon  to  die ;  and  then  goes  along  the  road  through  which  the  funeral  is  tQ 
pafs,  fhrieking  at  intervals ;  at  laft,  the  meteor  and  ghoft  difappear  above  the  bu- 
rial place. 


FINGAL: 


N 


AN    ANCIENT 

EPIC         POEM. 
BOOK    11. 


ARGUMENT. 

THE  ghoft  of  Crugal,  one  of  the  IriQi  heroes  who  was  killed  in  battle,  appearing 
to  Connal,  foretels  the  defeat  of  Cuthullin  in  the  next  battle;  and  carneflly  ad- 
vifes  him  to  make  peace  with  Swaran.  Connal  communicates  the  vifion;  but 
Cuthullin  is  inflexible  ;  from  a  principle  of  honour  he  wonld  not  be  the  firft  to 
I'ue  for  peace,  and  he  refolved  to  continue  the  war.  Morning  comes;  Swaiaa 
propofes  difhonourable  terms  to  Cuthullin,  which  are  rejefted.  The  battle  be- 
gins, and  is  obflinately  fought  for  fome  time,  until,  upon  the  flight  of  Grumal, 
the  whole  Irifh  army  gave  way.  Cuthullin  and  Connal  cover  their  retreat: 
Carril  leads  them  to  a  naighbouring  hill,  whither  they  are  foon  followed  by  Cuj 
thuUin  himfelf,  who  defcries  the  fleet  of  Fingal  making  towards  the  coaft;  but, 
night  coming  on,  he  lofl:  fight  of  it  again.  Cuthullin,  dejefted  after  his  defeat, 
attributes  his  ill  fuccefs  to  the  death  of  Ferda  his  friend,  whom  he  had  killed 
fome  time  before.  Carril,  to  fhew  that  ill  fuccefs  did  not  always  attend  thofs 
who  innocently  killed  their  friends,  introduces  the  epifode  of  Comal  andGalvina. 


CONNAL*  lay  by  the  found  of  the  mountain  flream, 
beneath  the  aged  tree.  A  ftone,  with  its  mofs,  fup- 
ported  his  head.  Shrill,  through  the  heath  of  Lena,  he 
heard  the  voice  of  night.  At  diflance  from  the  heroes  he 
lay  ;  the  fon  of  the  Iword  feared  no  foe  ! — The  hero  be- 
held, in  his  reft,  a  dark-red  ftream  of  fire  rulhing  down 
from  the  hill.  Crugal  fat  upon  the  beam ;  a  chief  who 
fell  in  fight.  He  fell  by  the  hand  of  Swaran,  ftriving  in 
the  battle  of  heroes.    His  face  is  like  the  beam  of  the 

fetting 

*  The  fcene  here  defcribcd  will  appear  natural  to  thofe  who  have  been  in  the 
kighlands  of  Scotland.  The  poet  removes  him  to  a  diftance  from  the  army,  to  add 
more  horror  to  the  dekription  of  Crugal's  ghoft  by  the  lonelinefs  of  the  place. 


158  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

fetting  moon.  His  robes  are  of  the  clouds  of  the  hill. 
His  eyes  are  two  decaying  flames.  Dark  is  the  wound  of 
his  bread.  "  Crugal/'  faid  the  mighty  Connal,  "  fon 
of  Dedgal,  famed  on  the  hill  of  hinds  !  why  fo  pale  and 
fad,  thou  breaker  of  the  fliields  ?  Thou  haft  never  been 
pale  for  fear  !  What  difturbs  the  departed  Crugal?"  Dim, 
and  in  tears,  he  ftood,  and  ftretched  his  pale  hand  over 
the  hero.  Faintly  he  raifed  his  feeble  voice,  like  the  gale 
of  the  reedy  Lego  ! 

"  My  fpirit,  Connal,  is  on  my  hills :  my  corfe  on  the 
fands  of  Erin.  Thou  fhalt  never  talk  with  Crugal,  nor 
find  his  lone  fteps  on  the  heath.  I  am  light  as  the  blafl: 
of  Cromla — I  move  like  the  fhadow  of  mift  !  Connal,  fon 
of  Colgar,  I  fee  a  cloud  of  death  :  it  hovers  dark  over  the 
plains  of  Lena.  The  fons  of  green  Erin  muft  fall.  Re- 
move from  the  field  of  ghofts.'*  Like  the  darkened  moon, 
he  retired,  in  the  midit  of  the  whiftling  blaft.  "  Stay," 
faid  the  mighty  Connal,  "  ftay,  my  dark-red  friend.  Lay 
by  that  beam  of  heaven,  fon  of  the  windy  Cromla  !  What 
cave  is  thy  lonely  houfe  ?  What  green-headed  hill  the 
place  of  thy  repofe  ?  Shall  we  not  hear  thee  in  the  ftorm  ? 
— in  the  noife  of  the  mountain-ftream  ? — when  the  feeble 
fons  of  the  wind  come  forth,  and,  fcarcely  feen,  pafs  over 
the  defart  ?" 

The  foft- voiced  Connal  rofe,  in  the  midft  of  his  found- 
ing arms.  He  ftruck  his  fhield  above  CuthulHn.  The 
fon  of  battle  waked.  "  Why,"  faid  the  ruler  of  the  car, 
*'  comes  Connal  through  m.y  night  ?  My  fpear  might  turn 
againft  the  found  ;  and  Cuthullin  mourn  the  death  of  his 
friend.  Speak,  Cormal;  fon  of  Colgar,  fpeak;  thy  coun- 
fel  is  the  fun  of  heaven  !"  "  Son  of  Semo  !"  replied  the 
chief,  "  the  ghoft  of  Crugal  came  from  his  cave.  The 
flars  dim-twinkled  through  his  form.  His  voice  was  like 
the  found  of  a  diftant  ftream.  He  is  a  meffenger  of  death  ! 
He  fpeaks  of  the  dark  and  narrow  houfe  !  Sue  for  peace, 
O  chief  of  Erin  !  or  fly  over  the  heath  of  Lena." 

"  He  fpoke  to  Connal,"  repHed  the  hero,  "  though 
ftars  dim-twinkled  through  his  form ! — Son  of  Colgar,  it 
was  the  vv'ind  that  murmured  acrofs  thy  ear.     Or,  if  it 

was 


Book  II.        An   EPIC    POEM.  359 

was  the  form*  of  Crugal,  why  didft  thou  not  force  him 
to  my  fight  ?  Haft  thou  enquired  where  is  his  cave  ?  the 
houfe  of  that  fon  of  wind  ?  My  fword  might  find  that 
voice,  and  force  his  knowledge  from  Crugal.  But  fmall 
is  his  knowledge,  Connal.  He  was  here  to-day  :  he  could 
not  have  gone  beyond  our  hills  !  who  could  tell  him  there 
of  our  fall  f"  "  Gholls  fly  on  clouds  and  ride  on  winds," 
faid  Connal's  voice  of  wifdom.  "  They  reft  together  in 
their  caves,  and  talk  of  mortal  men." 

"  Then  let  them  talk  of  mortal  men  ;  of  every  man 
but  Erin's  chief.  Let  me  be  forgot  in  their  cave.  I  will 
not  fly  from  Swaran  !  If  fall  I  muft,  my  tomb  ftiall  rife, 
amidft  the  fame  of  future  times.  The  hunter  fhall  flied  a 
tear  on  my  ftone  ;  forrow  fhall  dwell  round  the  high- 
bofomed  Bragela.  I  fear  not  death  :  to  fly  I  fear  !  Fin- 
gal  has  feen  me  viftorious  ! Thou  dim  phantom  of 

the  hill,  fliew  thyfelf  to  me  !  Come  on  thy  beam  of  hea- 
ven, fhew  me  my  death  in  thine  hand  ;  yet  I  will  not  fly, 

thou  feeble  fon  of  the  wind  I Go,  fon  of  Colgar,  ftrike 

the  fliield.  It  hangs  between  the  fpears.  Let  my  warriors 
rife  to  the  found,  in  the  midft  of  the  battles  of  Erin. 
Though  Fingal  delays  his  coming,  with  the  race  of  his 
ftormy  ifles  ;  we  fliall  fight,  O  Colgar's  fon,  and  die  in 
the  battle  of  heroes  !" 

The  found  fpreads  wide.  The  heroes  rife,  like  the 
breaking  of  a  blue-rolling  wave.  They  ftood  on  the  heath, 
like  oaks  with  all  their  branches  round  them  ;  when  they 
echo  to  the  ftream  of  froft",  and  their  withered  leaves  arc 
Tuftling  to  the  wind  !  High  Cromla's  head  of  clouds  is 
grey.  Morning  trembles  on  the  half-enlightened  ocean. 
The  blue  mill  fwims  flowly  by,  and  hides  the  fons  of 
Inis-fail. 

"  Rise  ye,"  faid  the  king  of  the  dark-brovm  fiiields, 
"  ye  that  came  from  Lochlin's  waves.  The  fons  of  Erin 
have  fled  from  our  arms ;  purfue  them  over  the  plains  of 
Lena  !  Morla,  go  to  Cormac's  hall.  Bid  them  yield  to 
Swaran  ;  before  his  people  fink  to  the  tomb,  and  filence 

fpread 

*  The  poet  teaches  us  the  opinions  that  prevailed  in  his  time  concerning  ilie  fta'.e 
of  feparate  fouls.  From  Connal's  exprefion,  "  That  the  ftars  dim-twinkled  through 
the  form  of  Crugal,"  and  Cuthullm's  reply,  we  ma,'  gather  that  they  both  thought 
the  foul  was  materia! :  fomeihins  like  the  sisi^Aov  of  the  ancier.t  G.-eeks. 


i6o  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

fpread  over  his  ifle."  They  rofe  ruflling  like  a  flock  of 
fea-fowl,  when  the  waves  expel  them  from  the  fhore. 
Their  found  was  like  a  thoufand  ftreams  that  meet  in  Co- 
na's  vale,  when,  after  a  flormy  night,  they  turn  their  dark 
eddies,  beneath  the  pale  light  of  the  morn. 

As  the  dark  fliades  of  autumn  fly  over  the  hills  of  grafs; 
fo,  gloomy,  dark,  fucceffive  came  the  chiefs  of  Lochlin's 
echoing  woods.  Tall,  as  the  fl:ag  of  Morven,  moved  fl:ate- 
ly  before  them,  the  king.  His  fliining  ftiield  is  on  his 
fide,  like  a  flame  on  the  heath  at  night;  when  the  world 
is  filent  and  dark,  and  the  traveller  fees  fome  ghoft  fport- 
ing  in  the  beam!  Dimly  gleam  the  hills  around,  and  fliew 
indiftinftly  their  oaks !  A  blafl:  from  the  troubled  ocean 
removed  the  fettled  mifl:.  The  fons  of  Erin  appear,  like 
a  ridge  of  rocks  on  the  coaft  ;  when  mariners,  on  fhores 
unknown,  are  trembling  at  veering  winds  ! 

"  Go,  Morla,  go,"  faid  the  king  of  Lochlin,  "  offer 
peace  to  thefe!  Offer  the  terms  we  give  to  kings,  when  na- 
tions bow  down  to  our  fwords ;  when  the  valiant  are  dead  in 
war;  when  virgins  weep  on  the  field  !"  Tall  Morla  came, 
the  fon  of  Swarth,  and  ftately  flirode  the  youth  along! 
He  fpoke  to  Erin's  blue-eyed  chief,  among  the  leflTer  he- 
roes. "  Take  Swaran's  peace,"  the  warrior  fpoke,  "  the 
peace  he  gives  to  kings,  when  nations  bow  to  his  fword* 
Leave  Erin's  dreamy  plains  to  us,  and  give  thy  fpoufe  and 
dog.  Thy  fpoufe  high-bofom'd,  heaving  fair! — thy  dog 
that  overtakes  the  wind  !  Give  thefe  to  prove  the  weak- 
nefs  of  thine  arm  :  live  then  beneath  our  power  !" 

"  Tell  Swaran,  tell  that  heart  of  pride,  Cuthullin  never 
yields.  I  give  him  the  dark-rolling  fea;  I  give  his  people 
graves  in  Erin.  But  never  fliall  a  llranger  have  the  pleaf- 
ing  fun-beam  of  my  love.  No  deer  fliall  fly  on  Lochlin's 
hills  before  fwift-footed  Lmith."  "  Vain  ruler  of  the  car," 
faid  Morla,  *•  wilt  thou  then  fight  the  king  ?  The  king, 
whofe  fliips  of  many  groves  could  carry  off"  thine  ifle  ?  So 
little  is  thy  green-hilled  Erin  to  him  who  rules  the  fliormy 
waves  !"  "  In  words  I  yield  to  many,  Morla.  My  fword 
/hall  yield  to  none.     Erin  fliall  own  the  fvvay  of  Cormac, 

while  Connal  and  Cuthullin  live  ! O  Connal,  firfl:  of, 

mighty  men,  thou  hear'fl  the  words  of  Morla.    Shall  thy 

thought^ 


Book  II.        An  EPIC    POEM.  161 

thoughts  then  be  of  peace,  thou  breaker  of  the  fl>«ields  ? 
Spirit  of  fallen  Crugal !  why  didll  thou  threaten  us  with 
death  ?  The  narrow  houfe  will  receive  me,  in  the  midll 
of  the  light  of  renown.  Exalt,  ye  fons  of  Erin,  exalt  the: 
fpear,  and  bend  the  bow:  rufh  on  the  foe  in  darknefs,  as 
the  fpirits  of  ftormy  nights !" 

Then  difmal,  roaring,  fierce,  and  deep  the  gloom  of 
battle  poured  along ;  as  mill  that  is  rolled  on  a  valley, 
when  ftorms  invade  the  filent  fun-lliine  of  heaven !  Cu- 
thullin  moves  before  in  arms,  like  an  angry  ghoft  before 
a  cloud  ;  when  meteors  inclofe  them  with  fire;  when  the 
dark  winds  are  in  his  hand.  Carril,  far  on  the  heath, 
bids  the  horn  of  battle  found.  He  raifes  the  voice  of  fong, 
and  pours  his  foul  into  the  minds  of  the  brave. 

"-  Where,"  faid  the  mouth  of  the  fong,  "  where  is 
the  fallen  Crugal  ?  He  lies  forgot  on  earth  ;  the  hall  of 
ihells*  is  filent.  Sad  is  the  fpoufe  of  Crugal  !  She  is  a 
llranger  -{-  in  the  hall  of  her  grief.  But  who  is  flie,  thatj 
like  a  fun-beam,  flies  before  the  ranks  of  the  foe?  It.  is 
Degrena  (I,  lovely  fair,  the  fpoufe  of  fallen  Crugal.  Her' 
hair  is  oh  the  wind  behind.  rHer  eye  is  red;  her  voice  isi 
fhrill.  Pale,  empty  is  thy  Crugal  now !  His  form  is  in 
the  cave  of  the  hill.  He  comes  to  the  ear  of  reft  :  he 
raifes  his  feeble  voice;  like  the  humming  of  the  mountain- 
bee;  like  the  coUefted  flies  of  the  eve!  But  Degrena  falls 
like  a  cloud  of  the  morn;  the  fword  of  Lochlin  is  in  her 
fide.  Cairbar,  flie  is  fallen,  the  rifing  tliought  of  thy 
youth.  She  is  fallen,  O  Cairbar,  the  thought  of  thy 
youthful  hours  !" 

Fierce  Cairbar  heard  the  mournful  found.  He  ruihed 
along  like  ocean's  whale.  He  faw  the  death  of  his  daugh- 
ter :  he  roared  in  the  midft  of  thoufands.  His  fpear  met 
a  foil  of  Lochlin  ;  battle  fpreads  from  wing  to  wing  !  As 
a  hundred  winds  in  Lochlin's  groves:  as  fire  in  the  pines 
of  a  hundred  hills  ;  fo  loud,  fo  ruinous,  fo  vaft  the  ranks 
X  of 

*  The  ancient  Scots,  as  well  as  the  prefent  Highlanders,  drunk  in  (hells;  hence 
it  is  th;u  we  fo  often  meet,  in  the  old  poetry,  with  the  chief  cfJficUs,  and  the  kail 
ofJJulls. 

t  Crugal  had  married  Degrena  but  a  little  time  before  the  battle,  confcqucntly 
Ck-  m  ly  with  pioptiety  be  called  a  ftranger  in  the  hall  of  her  giicf, 

'   IDco-^ieiia  figiiifies  a^w-^£«w. 


i62  F    I    N     G     A    L  : 

of  men  are  hewn  down.  Cuthullin  cut  off  heroes  Hkc 
thiflles  ;  Swaran  wafted  Erin.  Curach  fell  by  his  hand, 
Cairbar  of  the  bofiy  fliield  !  Morglan  lies  in  lading  reft ! 
Ca-olt  ticiiibles  as  he  dies !  His  white  breaft  is  ftained 
with  blood ;  his  yellow  hair  ftretched  in  the  duft  of  his 
narive  land  !  He  often  had  fpread  the  feail  where  he  fell : 
he  oficn  ihere  had  raifed  the  voice  of  the  harp  ;  when  his 
dogs  leapt  around  for  joy,  and  the  youths  of  the  chace 
prepared  the  bow  ! 

SriLL  Swaran  advanced,  as  a  dream,  that  burds  from 
the  defart.  The  little  hills  are  rolled  in  its  courfe  ;  the 
rocks  are  half-funk  by  its  fide !  But  Cuthullin  ilood  be- 
fore hi.n,  like  a  hill  that  catches  the  clouds  of  heaven. 
The  winds  contend  on  its  head  of  pines  :  the  hail  rattles 
on  its  rocks  ;  but,  firm  in  its  ftrength,  it  ftands,  and 
fiiades  the  I'ilent  vale  of  Cona !  So  Cuthullin  fiiaded  the 
fons  of  Eriii,  and  Itcod  in  the  midft  of  thoufands.  Blood 
rifr-s  like  the  fount  of  a  rock,  from  panting  heroes  around^ 
But  Erin  falls  on  either  wing,  like  fnow  in  the  day  of  the 
fun. 

"  O  SONS  of  Erin,"  faid  Grain al,  "  Lochlin  conquers 
on  the  field.  Why  ftrive  we  as  reeds  againft  the  wind  ? 
Fly  to  the  hill  of  dark-brown  hinds."  He  fled  like  the 
Hag  of  Morven  ;  his  fpear  is  a  trembling  beam  of  light 
behind  him.  Few  fled  with  Grumal,  chief  of  the  little 
foul :  they  fell  in  the  battle  of  heroes,  on  Lena's  echoing 
heath.  High  on  his  car,  of  many  gems,  the  chief  of  Erin 
ilood.  He  flew  a  mighty  fon  of  Lochlin,  and  fpoke,  in 
hafte,  to  Connal.  "  O  Connal,  firft  of  mortal  men,  thou 
haft  raught  this  arm  of  death  !  Though  Erin's  fons  have; 
fled,  fliall  we  not  fight  the  foe?  Carril,  fon  of  other  times, 
carry  my  friends  to  that  bufliy  hill.  Here,  Connal,  let  us 
ftand,  like  rocks,  and  fave  our  flying  friends." 

Connal  mounts  the  car  of  gems.  They  ftretch  their 
fi>ields,  like  the  darkened  moon,  the  daughter  of  the  ftar- 
ry  flvies ;  when  flie  moves,  a  dun  circle,  thro'  heaven,  and 
dreadful  change  is  expected  by  men.  Si-fadda  panted  up 
the  hill,  and  Dufronnal,  haughty  fteed.  Like  waves  be- 
hind a  whale,  behind  them  ruflied  the  foe.  Now  on  the 
rifing  fide  of  Cromla  ftood  Erin's  few  fad  fons  j  like  a 

grove 


Book  II.        An   epic   POEAL  163 

grove  through  which  the  flame  had  rufiied,  hurried  on  by 
the  winds  of  the  flormy  night ;  diftant,  withered,  dark 
they  ftand,  with  not  a  leaf  to  fhake  in  the  gale. 

CuTHULLiN  ftood  bcfide  an  oak.  He  rolled  his  red 
eye  in  filence,  ar.d  heard  the  wind  in  his  bufliy  hair;  the 
fcout  of  ocean  came,  Moran  the  fon  of  Fithil,  "  The 
fhips,"  he  cried,  "  the  fhips  of  the  lonely  ifles  !  Fin^al 
comes,  the  tirft  of  men,  the  breaker  of  the  fliields !  The 
waves  foam  before  his  black  prows  !  His  malts  with  fails 
are  like  groves  in  clouds !"  *'  Blow,"  faid  Cuthullin, 
"  blow,  ye  winds,  that  rufh  along  my  ifle  of  mift.  Come 
to  the  death  of  thoufands,  O  king  of  refounding  Selma ! 
Thy  fails,  my  friend,  are  to  me  the  clouds  of  the  morning; 
thy  fhips,  the  light  of  heaven ;  and  thou  thyfelf  a  pillar 
of  fire  that  beams  on  the  world  by  night.  O  Connal,  firfl 
of  men,  how  pleafnig,  in  grief,  are  our  friends  !  But  the 
night  is  gathering  around !  "VVhere  now  are  the  fliips  of 
Fingal?  Here  let  us  pafs  the  hours  of  darknefs;  here  v\^ifli 
for  the  moon  of  heaven." 

The  winds  come  down  on  the  woods.  The  torrents  rufh 
from  the  rocks.  Rain  gathers  round  the  head  of  Cromla. 
The  red  ftars  tremble  between  the  flying  clouds.  Sad,  by 
the  fide  of  a  fl:ream  whofe  found  is  echoed  by  a  tree,  fad 
by  the  fide  of  a  llream  the  chief  of  Erin  fits.  Connal  fon 
of  Colgar  is  there,  and  Carril  of  othir  times.  "  Unhappy 
is  the  hand  of  Cuthullin,"  faid  the  fon  of  Semo,  "  un- 
happy is  the  hand  of  Cuthullin,  fince  he  flew  his  friend ! 
Ferda,  fon  of  Damman,  I  loved  thee  as  myfelf !" 

"  How,  Cuthullin,  fon  of  Semo !  how  fell  the  breaker 
of  fliields  ?  Well  1  remember,"  faid  Connal,  "  the  fon  of 
the  noble  Damman.  Tall  and  fair,  he  was  like  the  rain- 
bow of  heaven."  "  Ferda  from  Albion  came,  the  chief 
of  a  hundred  hills.  In  Muri's  *  hall  he  learned  the  fword, 
and  won  the  friendfliip  of  Cuthullin.  We  moved  to  the 
chac'e  together  :  one  was  our  bed  in  the  heath  ! 

"  Deugala  was  the  fpoufe  of  Cairbar,  chief  of  the 
plains  of  Ullin.  She  was  covered  with  the  light  of  beau- 
ty, but  her  heart  v/as  the  houfe  of  pride.  She  loved  that 
fun-beam  of  youth,  the  fon  of  noble  Damman.  "  Cair- 
bar," 

•   A  place  in  Ulfter. 


104  F     I     N     G     A     L  : 

bar,"  faid  the  white-armed  Deugala,  "  give  me  half  of 
the  herd.  No  more  I  \yill  remain  in  your  halls.  Divide 
the  herd,  dark  Cairbar!"  "  Let  Cuthullin,"  faid  Cairbar, 
'^'  divide  my  herd  on  the  hill.  His  breaft  is  the  feat  of 
juflice.  Depart,  thou  light  of  beauty!"  I  went  and  divid- 
ed the  herd.  One  fnow-white  bull  remained.  I  gave  that 
ball  to  Cairbar,     The  wrath  of  Deugala  rofe ! 

"  Son  of  Damman,"  bqgun  the  fair,  "  Cuthullin  hath 
pained  my  foul.  I  muft  hear  of  his  death,  or  Lubar's 
iliream  ihall  roll  over  me.  My  pale  ghoft  fhall  wander 
near  thee,  and  mourn  the  wound  of  my  pride.  Pour  out 
the  blood  of  Cuthullin,  or  pierce  this  heaving  breaft." 
'^  Deugala,"  faid  the  fair-haired  youth,  "  how  ^lall  I  flay 
the  fon  of  Semo  ?  He  is  the  friend  of  my  fecret  thoughts. 
Shall  I  then  lift  the  fv.'ord  ?"  She  wept  three  days  before 
the  chief,  on  the  fourth  he  faid  he  would  fight.  "  I  will 
fight  my  friend,  Deugala! 'but  may  I  fall  by  his  fword ! 
Could  I  v/ander  on  the  hill  alone?  Could  I  behold  the 
grave  of  Cuthullin  ?"  We  fought  on  the  plain  of  Muri. 
Our  fwords  avoid  a  wound.  They  Hide  on  the  helmets 
of  fteel ;  or  found  on  the  flippery  fhields.  Deugala  was 
near  with  a  fmile,  and  faid  to  the  fon  of  Damman : 
'"  Thine  arm  is  feeble,  fun-beam- of  ^^outh!  Thy  years  are 
not  ftrong  for  fteel.  Yield  to  the  fon  of  Semo.  He  is  a 
rock  on  Malmor."    0 

"  Tr-iE  tear  is  in  the  eye  of  youth.  He,  faultering,  faid 
to  nie  :  *'  Cuthullin,  raife  thy  bofty  fliicld.  Defend  thee 
from  the  hand  of  thy  friend.  My  foul  is  laden  with  grief ; 
for  I  muft  flay,  the  chief  of  men  1"  I  fighed  as  the  wind 
in  the  cleft  of  a  rock.  I  lifted  high  the  edge  of  my  fteeL 
The  fua-beam  of  battle  Ml :  the  nrll  of  Cuthullin's  friends ! 
Unhappy  is  the  hand  of  Cuthullin  fince  the  hero  fell  i" 

".Mournful  is  thy  tale,  fon  of  the  car,"  faid  Carril 
of  other  times.  "  It  fends  m.y  foul  back  to  the  ages  of 
old,  to  the  days  of  other  years.  Often  have  I  heard  of 
Comal,  who  flew  the  friend  he  loved  ;  yet  vidory  attend- 
ed his  fteei :  -the  battle  was  confumed  in  his  prefence  ! 

"  GoMAL  was  a  fon  of  Albion;  the  chief  of  an  hun- 
dred hills !  His  deer  drunk  of  a  thoufand  ftreams.  A 
Ehoufand  rocks  replied  to  the  voice  of  his  dogs.    His  face 

was 


Book  II.        An   EPIC   POEM.  165 

was  the  mildnefs  of  youth  ;  his  hand,  the  death  of  heroes. 
One  was  his  love,  and  fair  was  flie !  tlie  daughter  of 
mighty  Conloch.  She  appeared  like  a  fun-beam  among 
women.  Her  hair  was  the  wing  of  the  raven.  Her  dogs 
were  taught  to  the  chace.  Her  bow-firing  founded  on  the 
winds.  Her  foul  was  fixed  on  Comal.  Often  met  their 
eyes  of  love.  Their  courfe  in  the  chace  was  one.  Happy 
were  their  words  in  fecret. — But  Grumal  loved  the  maid, 
the  dark  chief  of  the  gloomy  Ardven.  He  watched  her 
lone  fleps  in  the  heath  ;  the  foe  of  unhappy  Comal ! 

"  One  day,  tired  of  the  chace,  when  the  mift  had  con- 
cealed their  friends,  Comal  and  the  daughter  of"  Conloch 
met,  in  the  cave  of  Ronan.  It  was  the  v/onted  haunt  of 
Comal.  Its  fides  were  hung  with  his  arms.  A  hundred 
fliields  of  thongs  were  there ;  a  hundred  helms  of  found- 
ing fteel.  "  Reft  here,"  he  faid,  "  my  love  Galbina  ; 
thou  light  of  the  cave  of  Ronan  !  A  deer  appears  on  Mo- 
ra's brow.  I  go  ;  but  I  will  foon  return."  "  I  fear,"  fh.e 
faid,  "  dark  Grumal  my  foe:  he  haunts  the  cave  of  Ronan! 
I  will  reft  among  the  arms  :  But  foon  return,  my  love  !" 

"  He  went  to  the  deer  of  Mora.  The  daughter  of  Con- 
loch would  try  his  love.  She  clothed  her  fair  fides  with 
his  armour ;  fhe  ftrode  from  the  cave  of  Ronan  !  He 
thought  it  v/as  his  foe.  His  heart  beat  high.  His  colour 
changed,  and  darknefs  dimmed  his  eyes.  He  drew  the 
bow.  The  arrow  flew.  Galbina  fell  in  blood  !  He  run 
with  waldnefs  in  his  Heps  :  he  called  the  daughter  of  Con- 
loch. No  anfvver  in  the  lonely  rock.  "  Where  art  thou, 
O  my  love  ?"  He  faw,  at  length,  her  heaving  heart,  beat- 
ing around  the  arrow  he  threw.  "  Q  Conloch's  daughter, 
is  it  thou  r"  He  funk  upon  her  breaft  !  The  hunters  found 
the  haplefs  pair  :  he  afterwards  walked  the  hill.  But  ma- 
ny and  filent  were  his  fteps  round  the  dark  dwelling  of 
his  love. — The  fleet  of  the  ocean  came.  He  fought :  the 
ftrangers  fled.  He  fearched  for  death  along  the  field  :  but 
who  could  flay  the  mighty  Comal !  He  threw  away  his 
dark-brown  fliield.  An  arrow  found  his  manly  breaft. 
He  fleeps  with  his  loved  Galbina,  at  the  noife  of  the  found- 
ing furge  !  Their  green  tombs  are  feen  by  the  mariner, 
when  he  bounds  on  the  waves  of  the  north." 

Y  I  N  G  A  L  : 


I       N       G       A       L 

AN    ANCIENT 

EPIC        POEM. 
BOOK    III.* 


ARGUMENT. 

CUTHULLIN,  pleafed  withthe  ftoryofCarril,  infifts  with  that  bard  for  more 
of  his  longs.  He  relates  the  adions  of  Fingal  in  Lochlin,  and  death  of  Agan- 
decca  the  beautiful  fifter  of  Swaran.  He  had  fcarce  finifhed,  when  Calmar,  the 
fon  of  Matha,  who  had  advifcd  the  firft  battle,  came  wounded  from  the  field, 
and  told  them  of  Swaran's  defign  to  furprife  the  remains  of  the  Irifh  army.  He 
himfelf  propofes  to  withftand  fingly  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy,  in  a  narrow 
pafs,  till  the  Irifli  {hoald  make  good  their  retreat.  Cuthullin,  touched  with  the 
;^allant  propofal  of  Calmar,  refolves  to  accompany  him,  and  orders  Carril  to 
carry  off  the  few  that  remained  of  the  Irifh.  Morning  comes,  Calmar  dies  of 
his  wounds;  and,  the  fhips  of  the  Caledonians  appearing,  Swaran  gives  over  the 
purfuit  of  the  IriQi,  and  returns  to  oppofe  Fingal's  landing.  Cuthullin  afhamed, 
after  his  defeat,  to  appear  before  Fingal,  retires  to  the  cave  of  Tura.  Fingal  en- 
gages the  enemy,  puts  them  to  flight;  but  the  coming  on  of  night  makes  the  vic- 
tory not  decifive.  The  king,  who  had  obferved  the  gallant  behaviour  of  his 
grandfon  Ofcar,  gives  him  advices  concerning  his  conduft  in  peace  and  war.  He 
recommends  to  him  to  place  the  example  of  his  fathers  before  his  eyes,  as  the 
beft  model  for  his  conduft;  which  introduces  the  epifode  concerning  Faina-fol- 
lis,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Craca,  whom  Fingal  had  taken  under  his  pro- 
teclion,  in  his  youth.  Fillan  and  Ofcar  are  difpatched  to  obferve  the  motions 
of  the  enemy  by  night.  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni  defires  the  command  of  the  ar- 
my, in  the  next  battle ;  which  Fingal  promifes  to  give  him.  Some  general  re- 
flections of  the  poet  clofe  the  third  day. 

"  "pLEASANT  are  the  words  of  the  fong,"  fald  Cu- 

A     thullin  !    *'  lovely  the  tales  of  other  times  !  They 

are  like  the  calm  dew  of  the  morning  on  the  hill  of  roes  ; 

when  the  fun  is  faint  on  its  fide,  and  the  lake  is  fettled 

and 

*  The  fecond  nip,ht,  fmce  the  opening  of  the  poem,  continues ;  and  Cuthullin, 
Connal,  and  Carril  ftiU  fit  in  the  place  defcribed  in  the  preceding  book.  The  Ilory 
of  Agandecca  is  introduced  here  with  propriety,  as  great  ufe  is  made  of  it  in  the 
courfc  of  the  poem,  and  as  it,  in  fome  meafure,  brings  about  the  cataftrophe. 


i68  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

and  blue  in  the  vale.  O  Carril,  raife  again  thy  voice:  let 
me  hear  the  fong  of  Selma  ;  v/hich  was  fung  in  my  halls 
of  joy,  vi'hen  Fingal  king  of  (hells  was  there,  and  glowed 
at  the  deeds  of  his  fathers." 

"  Fingal!  thou  dweller  of  battle,"  faid  Carril,  "  early 
were  thy  deeds  in  arms.  Lochlin  was  confumed  in  thy 
wrath,  when  thy  youth  drove  with  the  beauty  of  maids. 
They  fmiled  at  the  fair-blooming  face  of  the  hero  ;  but 
death  was  in  his  hands.  He  was  ftrong  as  the  waters  of 
Lora.  His  followers  were  the  roar  of  a  thoufand  ftreams. 
They  took  the  king  of  Lochlin  in  war  :  they  rellored  him 
to  his  fhlps.  His  big  heart  fwelled  with  pride  :  the  death 
of  the  youth  v/a§  dark  in  his  foul ;  for  none  ever,  but  Fin- 
gal, had  overcome  the  ftrength  of  the  mighty  Starno*.  •■ 
He  fat  in  the  hall  of  his  fhells  in  Lochlin's  woody  land. 
He  called  the  grey-haired  Snivan,  that  often  fung  round 
the  circle  f  of  Loda  ;  when  the  ftone  of  power  heard  his 
voice,  and  battle  turned  in  the  field  of  the  valiant ! 

"  Go,  grey-haired  Snivan,"  Starno  faid  ;  "  go  to  Ard- 
ven's  fea-furrounded  rocks.  Tell  to  the  king  of  Selma  ; 
he  the  fairefl  among  his  thoufands,  tell  him  I  give  him  my  ' 
daughter,  the  lovelieft  maid  that  ever  heaved  a  bread  of 
fnow.  Her  arms  are  white  as  the  foam  of  my  waves  :  her 
foul  is  generous  and  mild.  Let  him  come  v/ith  his  braveib 
heroes,  to  the  daughter  of  the  fecret  hall !"  Snivan  came" 
to  Seima's  hall:  fair-haired  Fingal  attended  his  Heps, 
His  kindled  foul  flew  to  the  maid,  as  he  bounded  on  the 
waves  of  the  north.  "  Welcome,"  faid  the  dark-brown 
Starno,  "  welcome,  king  of  rocky  Morven  :  welcome, 
bis  heroes  of  might  ;  fons  of  the  diftant  iile  !  Three  days 
vi  ithin  my  halls  fliall  ye  fead  ;  three  days  purfue  my  boars  ; 
that  your  fame  may  reach  the  maid  who  dwells  in  the  fe- 
cret hall." 

"  Starno  defigned  their  death.  He  gave  the  feall  of 
fliells.  Fingal,  who  doubted  the  foe,  kept  on  his  arms  of 
fteel.  The  fons  of  death  were  afraid  :  they  fled  from  the 
eyes  of  the  king.     The  voice  of  fprightly  mirth  arofe. 

The 

*  Starno  was  the  father  of  Swaran  as  well  as  Agandecca.  His  fierce  and  cruel" 
charatler  is  well  marked  in  other  poems  concerning  the  times. 

+  This  paflagc  moft  certainly  alludes  to  the  religion  of  Lochlin,  and  tlicjionc  o* 
f-i'U'cr  here  meniioned  is  the  image  of  one  of  the  deities  of  Scandinavia. 


Book  III.        An  EPIC   POEM.  i6g 

The  trembling  harps  of  joy  were  llrung.  Bards  fung  the 
battle  of  heroes  :  they  fung  the  heaving  bread  of  love. 
UUin,  Fingal's  bard,  was  there ;  the  fweet  voice  of  re- 
founding  Cona.  He  praifed  the  daughter  of  Lochlin  ; 
and  Morven's  *  high-defcended  chief.  The  daughter  of 
Lochlin  overheard.  She  left  the  hall  of  her  fecret  figh ! 
She  came,  in  all  her  beauty,  like  the  moon  from  the  cloud 
of  the  eaft.  Lovelinefs  was  around  her  as  light.  Her  fteps 
were  the  mufic  of  fongs.  She  faw  the  youth,  and  loved 
him.  He  was  the  ftolen  figh  of  her  foul.  Her  blue  eye 
rolled  on  him  in  fecret  :  ihe  blefl  the  chief  of  refounding 
Morven. 

"  The  third  day,  with  all  its  beams,  fhone  bright  on 
the  wood  of  boars.  Forth  moved  the  dark-browed  Starno ; 
and  Fingal,  king  of  fhields.  Half  the  day  they  fpent  in 
the  chace  :  the  fpear  of  Selma  was  red  in  blood.  It  was 
then  the  daughter  of  Starno,  with  blue  eyes  rolling  in 
tears  ;  it  was  then  Hie  came  with  her  voice  of  love,  and 
fpoke  to  the  king  of  Morven,  "  Fingal,  high-defcended 
chief,  truft  not  Starno's  heart  of  pride.  Within  that 
wood  he  has  placed  his  chiefs.  Beware  of  the  wood  of 
death.  But,  remember,  fon  of  the  ifle,  remember  Agan- 
decca  :  fave  me  from  the  wrath  of  my  father,  king  of  the 
windy  Morven !" 

"  The  youth,  with  unconcern,  went  on  ;  his  heroes  by 
his  fide.  The  fons  of  death  fell  by  his  hand  ;  and  Gor- 
mal  echoed  around !  Before  the  halls  of  Starno  the  fons 
of  the  chace  convened.  The  king's  dark  brows  were  like 
clouds  ;  his  eyes,  like  meteors  of  night.  "  Bring  hither," 
he  faid,  "  Agandecca  to  her  lovely  king  of  Morven  !  His 
hand  is  flained  with  the  blood  of  my  people  ;  her  words 
have  not  been  in  vain  1"  She  came  with  the  red  eye 
of  tears.  She  came  with  loofely  flowing  locks.  Her 
white  breaft  heaved  with  broken  fighs,  like  the  foam  of 
the  ftreamy  Lubar.  Starno  pierced  her  fide  with  fteel. 
She  fell,  like  a  wreath  of  fnow,  which  Aides  from  the 
rocks  of  Ronan ;  when  the  woods  are  ftill,  and  echo 
deepens  in  the  vale  1  Then  Fingal  eyed  his  valiant  chiefs  : 
Y  his 

*  All  the  norih-weft  coaft  of  Scotland  probably  went  of  old  under  the  name  of 
Morven,  which  fignifies  a  ridge  of  very  high  hills. 


170  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

his  valiant  chiefs  took  arms.  The  gloom  of  battle  roared  i 
Lochlin  fled  or  died.  Pale,  in  his  bounding  (hip,  he  clofed 
the  maid  of  the  fofteft  foul.  Her  tomb  afcends  on  Ard- 
ven  :  the  fea  roars  round  her  narrow  dwelling." 

"  Blessed  be  her  foul,"  faid  Cuthullin ;  "  blefled  be 
the  mouth  of  the  fong  !  Strong  was  the  youth  of  Fingal ; 
flrong  is  his  arm  of  age.  Lochlin  fhali  fall  again  before 
the  king  of  echoing  Morven.  Shew  thy  face  from  a  cloud, 
O  moon ;  light  his  white  fails  on  the  wave :  And  if  any 
ftrong  fpirit*  of  heaven  fits  on  that  low-hung  cloud  ;  turn 
his  dark  Ihips  from  the  rock,  thou  rider  of  the  ftorm  !" 

Such  were  the  words  of  Cuthullin  at  the  found  of  the 
mountain-flream ;  when  Calmar  afcended  the  hill,  the 
wounded  fon  of  Matha.  From  the  field  he  came  in  his 
blood.  He  Ijpaned  on  his  bending  fpear.  Feeble  is  the 
arm  of  battle  !  but  ftrong  the  foul  of  the  hero  !  "  Wel- 
come! O  fon  of  Matha,"  faid  Connal,  "  welcome  art  thou 
to  thy  friends  !  Why  burfts  that  broken  figh,  from  the 
brealt  of  him  who  never  feared  before  ?"  "  And  never, 
Connal,  will  he  fear,  chief  of  the  pointed  fteel !  My  foul 
brightens  in  danger  ;  in  the  noife  of  arms.  I  am  of  the 
race  of  battle.     My  fathers  never  feared. 

''  CoRMAR  was  the  firft  of  my  race.  He  fported  thro' 
the  ftorm  of  waves.  His  black  fl^iff  bounded  on  ocean  ; 
he  travelled  on  the  wings  of  the  wind.  A  fpirit  once  em- 
broiled the  night.  Seas  fwell  and  rocks  refound.  Winds 
drive  along  the  clouds.  The  lightning  flies  on  wings  of 
fire.  He  feared,  and  came  to  land  ;  then  bluflied  that  he 
feared  at  all.  He  ruihed  again  among  the  waves  to  find 
the  fon  of  the  wind.  Three  youths  guide  the  bounding 
bark ;  he  ftood  with  fword  unfheathed.  When  the  low- 
hung  vapour  paflTed,  he  took  it  by  the  curling  head.  He 
fearched  its  dark  womb  with  his  fteel.  The  fon  of  the 
wind  forfook  the  air.  The  moon  and  ftars  returned  ! — 
Such  was  the  boldnefs  of  my  race.  Calmar  is  like  his  fa- 
thers. 

*  This  is  the  only  pafTage  in  the  poem  that  has  the  appearance  of  religion.  But 
Cuthullin's  apoftrophe  to  this  fpirit  is  accompanied  with  a  doubt,  fo  that  it  is  not 
eafy  to  determine  whether  the  hero  meant  a  fuperior  being,  or  the  ghofts  of  de- 
ceafed  warriors,  who  were  fuppofod  in  tliofe  times  to  rule  the  ftorms,  and  totranf- 
port  themfelves  in  a  gull  of  wind  from  one  country  to  another. 


Book  III.        An   EPIC   POEM.  171 

thers.    Danger  flies  from  the  lifted  fword.    They  bed  fuc- 
ceed  who  dare  ! 

•<  But  now,  ye  fons  of  green  Erin,  retire  from  Lena's 
bloody  heath.  Collect  the  fad  remnant  of  our  friends, 
and  join  the  fword  of  Fingal.  I  heard  the  found  of  Loch- 
lin's  advancing  arms !  Calmar  will  remain  and  fight.  My 
voice  fhali  be  fuch,  my  friends,  as  if  thoufands  were  be- 
hind me.  But,  fon  of  Semo,  remember  me.  Remember 
Calmar's  lifelefs  corfe.  When  Fingal  fiiall  have  waft- 
ed the  field,  place  me  by  fome  ftone  of  remembrance, 
-that  future  times  may  hear  my  fame ;  that  the  motlier  of 
•Calmar  may  rejoice  in  my  renown." 

"  No  :  fon  of  Matha,"  faid  Cuthullln,  "  I  will  never 
leave  thee  here.  My  joy  is  in  unequal  fight;  my  foul  in- 
creafes  in  danger.  Connal,  and  Carril  of  other  times, 
carry  off  the  fad  fons  of  Erin.  When  the  battle  is  over, 
fearch  for  us  in  the  narrow  way.  For  near  this  oak  we  fliall 
fall,  in  the  ftream  of  the  battle  of  thoufands  !  O  Fithil's 
fon,  with  flying  fpeed  rufli  over  the  heath  of  Lena.  Tell 
to  Fingal  that  Erin  is  fallen.  Bid  the  king  of  Morven 
come.  O  let  him  come,  lilce  the  fun  in  a  florm,  to  light- 
en, to  reftore  the  ifle  !" 

Morning  is  gTey  on  Cromla.  The  fons  of  the  fea 
afcend.  Calmar  flood  forth  to  meet  tliem  in  the  pride  of 
his  kindling  foul.  But  pale  vv^as  the  face  of  the  chief.  He 
leaned  on  his  fathers  fpear  ;  that  fpear  vv^hich  he  brought 
from  Lara,  when  the  foul  of  his  mother  was  fad;  the  foul 
of  the  lonely  Alcletha,  waining  in  the  forrow  of  years. 
But  flowly  now  the  hero  falls,  like  a  tree  on  the  plain. 
Dark  Cuthullin  ftands  alone,  like  a  rock  in  a  fandy  vale; 
the  fea  comes  with  its  waves,  and  roars  on  its  hardened 
fides.  Its  head  is  covered  with  foam ;  the  hills  are  echo- 
ing around. 

Now,  from  the  grey  mifl  of  the  ocean,  the  white-failed 
fhips  of  Fingal  appear.  High  is  the  grove  of  their  mafts, 
as  they  nod,  by  turns,  on  the  rolling  wave.  Swaran  faw 
them  from  the  hill.  He  returned  from  the  fons  of  Erin. 
As  ebbs  the  refounding  fea,  through  the  hundred  ifles  of 
Iniftore  ;  fo  loud,  fo  vafl,  fo  immenfe  returned  the  fons  of 
Lochlin  againil  the  king.     But  bending,  weeping,  fiid, 

and 


172  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

and  flow,  and  dragging  his  long  fpear  behind,  Cuthullin 
funk  in  Cromla's  wood,  and  mourned  his  fallen  friends. 
He  feared  the  face  of  Fingal,  who  was  wont  to  greet  him 
from  the  fields  of  renown  ! 

"  How  many  lie  there  of  my  heroes  !  the  chiefs  of 
Erin's  race  !  they  that  were  chearful  in  the  hall,  when 
the  found  of  the  fliells  arofe  !  No  more  fhall  I  find  their 
fleps  in  the  heath.  No  more  ihall  I  hear  their  voice 
in  the  chace.  Pale,  filent,  low  on  bloody  beds,  are  they 
who  were  my  friends  !  O  fpirirs  of  the  lately  dead,  meet 
Cuthullin  on  his  heath.  Speak  to  him  on  the  wind,  when 
the  ruftling  tree  of  Tura's  cave  refounds.  There,  far  re- 
mote, I  fliall  lie  unknown.  No  bard  Ihall  hear  of  me.  No 
grey  ftone  lliall  rife  to  my  renown.  Mourn  me  with  the 
dead,  O  Bragela  !  departed  is  my  fame."  Such  were  the 
words  of  Cuthullin,  when  he  funk  in  the  woods  of 
Cromla  ! 

Fingal,  tall  in  his  fhip,  ftretched  his  bright  lance  be- 
fore him.  Terrible  was  the  gleam  of  the  fteel :  it  was  like 
the  green  meteor  of  death,  fetting  in  the  heath  of  Malmor, 
when  the  traveller  is  alone,  and  the  broad  moon  is  dark- 
ened in  heaven. 

"  The  battle  is  paft,"  faid  the  king.  "  I  behold  the 
blood  of  my  friends.  Sad  is  the  heath  of  Lena !  mourn- 
ful the  oaks  of  Cromla.  The  hunters  have  fallen  in  their 
flrength  :  the  fon  of  Semo  is  no  more.  Ryno  and  Fillan, 
my  fons,  found  the  horn  of  Fingal.  Afcend  that  hill  on 
the  fnore  ;  call  the  children  of  the  foe.  Call  them  from 
the  grave  of  Lamdarg,  the  chief  of  other  times.  Be  your 
voice  like  that  of  your  father,  when  he  enters  the  battles 
of  his  flrength.  I  wait  for  the  mighty  ftranger.  I  wait 
on  Lena's  fhore  for  Swaran.  Let  him  come  with  all  his 
race  ;  flrong  in  battle  are  the  friends  of  the  dead  !" 

Fair  Ryno,  as  lightning,  gleamed  along  :  dark  Fillan 
rufhed  like  the  fliade  of  autumn.  On  Lena's  heath  their 
voice  is  heard.  The  fons  of  ocean  heard  the  horn  of  Fin- 
gal. As  the  roaring  eddy  of  ocean  returning  from  the 
kingdom  of  fnows  ;  fo  flrong,  fo  dark,  fo  fudden  came 
down  the  Tons  of  Lochlin.  The  king  in  their  front  ap- 
pears, ill  the  difmal  pride  of  his  arms !    Wrath  burns  on 

his 


Book  III.        An   EPIC   POEM.  173 

his  dark-brown  face :  his  eyes  roll  in  the  fire  of  his  va- 
lour. Fingal  beheld  the  fon  of  Starno  :  he  remembered 
Agandecca.  For  Swaran  with  the  tears  of  youth  had 
mourned  his  white-bofomed  filler.  He  fent  Ullin  of  fongs 
to  bid  him  to  the  feafl  of  fhells  :  For  pleafant  on  Fingal's 
foul  returned  the  memory  of  the  firfl  of  his  loves  I 

Ullin  came  with  aged  fleps,  and  fpoke  to  Starno's  fon. 
*'  O  thou  who  dwelled  afar,  furrounded,  like  a  rock, 
with  thy  waves  !  come  to  the  feaft  of  the  king,  and  pafs 
the  day  in  reft.  To-morrow  let  us  fight,  O  Swaran,  and 
break  the  echoing  fhields.'*  "  To-day,"  faid  Starno's 
wrathful  fon,  "  we  break  the  echoing  lliields:  to-morrow 
my  feaft  fliall  be  fpread ;  but  Fingal  fhall  lie  on  earth." 
"  To-morrow  let  his  feaft  be  fpread,"  faid  Fingal  with  a 
fmile.  "  To-day,  O  my  fons,  we  Ihall  break  the  echoing 
fhields.  Offian,  ftand  thou  near  my  arm.  Gaul,  lift  thy 
terrible  fword.  Fergus,  bend  thy  crooked  yew.  Throw, 
Fillan,  thy  lance  through  heaven.  Lift  your  fhields,  like 
the  darkened  moon.  Be  your  fpears  the  meteors  of  death. 
Follow  me  in  the  path  of  my  fame.  Equal  my  deeds  in 
battle." 

As  a  hundred  winds  on  Morven  ;  as  the  ftreams  of  a 
hundred  hills  ;  as  clouds  fly  fucceflive  over  heaven  ;  as 
the  dark  ocean  affails  the  fhore  of  the  defart :  fo  roaring, 
fo  vaft,  fo  terrible  the  armies  mixed  on  Lena's  echoing 
heath.  The  groan  of  the  people  fpread  over  the  hills :  it 
was  like  the  thunder  of  night,  when  the  cloud  burfts  on 
Cona,  and  a  thoufand  ghofts  fhriek  at  once  on  the  hollow 
wind.  Fingal  ruflied  on  in  his  ftrength,  terrible  as  the 
fpirit  of  Trenmor ;  when,  in  a  whirlwind,  he  comes  to 
Morven,  to  fee  the  children  of  his  pride.  The  oaks  re- 
found  on  their  mountains,  and  the  rocks  fall  down  before 
him.  Dimly  feen,  as  lightens  the  night,  he  ftrides  largely 
from  hill  to  hill.  Bloody  was  the  hand  of  my  father,  when 
he  whirled  the  gleam  of  his  fword.  He  remembers  the 
battles  of  his  youth.    The  field  is  wafted  in  his  courfe  ! 

Ryno  went  on  like  a  pillar  of  fire.  Dark  is  the  brow 
of  Gaul.  Fergus  ruflied  forward  with  feet  of  wind  ;  Fil- 
lan, like  the  mift  of  the  hill.  Ofllan,  like  a  rock,  came 
down.    I  exulted  ip  the  ftrength  of  the  king.    Many  were 

the 


174  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

the  deaths  of  my  arm !  difmal  the  gleam  of  my  fword  ! 
My  locks  were  not  then  fo  grey  ;  nor  trembled  my  hands 
with  age.  My  eyes  were  not  clofed  in  darknefs  ;  my  feet 
failed  not  in  the  race  ! 

Who  can  relate  the  deaths  of  the  people  ?  who,  the 
deeds  of  mighty  heroes  ? — when  Fingal,  burning  in  his 
wrath,  confumed  the  fons  of  Lochlin  ?  Groans  fwelled 
on  groans,  from  hill  to  hill,  till  night  had  covered  ail. 
Pale,  (taring  like  a  herd  of  deer,  the  fons  of  Lochlin  con- 
vene on  Lena.  We  fat  and  heard  the  fprightly  harp,  at 
Lubar's  gentle  flream.  Fingal  himfelf  was  next  to  the  foe. 
He  liftened  to  the  tales  of  his  bards.  His  godlike  race 
were  in  the  fong  ;  the  chiefs  of  other  times  !  Attentive, 
leaning  on  his  fhield,  the  king  of  Morven  fat.  The  wind 
whiftled  through  his  locks  ;  his  thoughts  are  of  the  days 
of  other  years.  Near  him,  on  his  bending  fpear,  my 
young,  my  valiant  Ofcar  flood.  He  admired  the  king  of 
Morven  :  his  deeds  were  fwelling  in  his  foul  ! 

"  Son  of  my  fon,"  begun  the  king  ;  "  O  Ofcar,  pride 
of  youth  !  I  faw  the  fhining  of  thy  fword :  I  gloried 
in  my  race.  Purfue  the  fame  of  our  fathers  :  be  thou  what 
they  have  been  ;  when  Trenmor  lived,  the  firft  of  men ! 
and  Trathal,  the  firfh  of  heroes  !  They  fought  the  battle 
in  their  youth :  they  are  the  fong  of  bards.  O  Ofcar  ! 
bend  the  flrong  in  arm ;  but  fpare  the  feeble  hand.  Be 
thou  a  flream  of  many  tides  againfl  the  foes  of  thy  people  ; 
but  like  the  gale,  that  moves  the  grafs,  to  thofe  who  afk 
thine  aid.  So  Trenmor  lived ;  fuch  Trathal  was  ;  and 
fuch  has  Fingal  been.  My  arm  was  the  fupport  of  the  in- 
jured: the  weak  refled  behind  the  lightning  of  my  fteel. 

"  Oscar  !  I  was  young,  like  thee,  when  lovely  Faina- 
follis  came  :  that  fun-beam  !  that  mild  light  of  love  !  the 
daughter  of  Craca's*  king  !  I  then  returned  from  Cona's 
heath,  and  few  were  in  my  train.  A  white-failed  boat 
appeared  far  off:  we  faw  it  like  a  mifl,  that  rode  on  ocean's 
wind.  It  foon  approached.  We  faw  the  fair.  Her  white 
breafl  heaved  with  fighs.    The  wind  was  in  her  loofe 

dark 

*  What  the  Craca  here  mentioned  was,  is  not,  at  this  difiance  of  time,  eafy  to 
determine.  The  moft  probable  opinion  is,  that  it  was  one  of  the  Shetland  ifles. 
There  is  a  flory  concerning  a  daughter  of  the  king  of  Craca  in  the  fixtb  book. 


Book  III.        An   EPIC   POEM.  175 

da:*k  hair:  her  rofy  cheek  had  tears.  "Daughter  of 
benuty,'*  calm  I  faid,  "  what  figh  is  in  thy  breaft  ?  Can 
I.  young  as  I  am,  defend  thee,  daughter  of  the  fea  ?  My 
fword  is  not  unmatched  in  war,  but  dauntlels  is  my  heart.'* 

"  To  thee  I  fly,"  with  fighs  fhe  faid,  "  O  prince  of 
mighty  men  !  To  thee  I  fly,  chief  of  the  generous  jfhells, 
fupporter  of  the  feeble  hand  ! — The  king  of  Craca's  echo- 
ing iile  owned  me  the  fun-beam  of  his  race.  Cromala's 
hills  have  heard  the  fighs  of  love  for  unhappy  Fainafollis  ! 
Sora's  chief  beheld  me  fair  ;  he  loved  the  daughter  of 
Craca.  Tiis  fword  is  a  beam  of  light  upon  the  warrior's 
fide.  But  dark  is  his  brow  ;  and  tempefls  are  in  his  foul. 
I  fliun  him,  on  the  roaring  fea  ;  but  Sora's  chief  purfues." 

"  Rest  thou,"  I  faid,  "  behind  my  Ihield  ;  reft  in 
peace,  thou  beam  of  light !  The  gloomy  chief  of  Sora 
will  fly,  if  Fingal's  arm  is  like  his  foul.  In  fome  lone 
cave  I  might  conceal  thee,  daughter  of  the  fea  !  But  Fin- 
gal  never  flies.  Where  the  danger  threatens,  I  rejoice  in 
the  ftorm  of  fpears."  I  faw  the  tears  upon  her  cheek. 
I  pitied  Craca's  fair. — Now,  like  a  dreadful  wave  afar,  ap- 
peared the  fnip  of  ftormy  Borbar.  His  mafts  high-bended 
over  the  fea  behind  their  flieets  of  fnow.  White  roll  the 
waters  on  either  fide.  The  ftrength  of  ocean  founds. 
"  Come  thou,"  I  faid,  "  from  the  roar  of  ocean,  thou 
rider  of  the  ftorm  !  Partake  the  feaft  within  my  hall.  It 
is  the  houfe  of  fttangers." 

"  The  maid  ftood,  trembling,  by  my  fide.  He  drew 
the  bow.  She  fell.  "  Unerring  is  thy  hand,"  I  faid, 
"  but  feeble  was  the  foe  !"  We  fought,  nor  weak  the 
ftrife  of  death  !  He  funk  beneath  my  fword.  We  laid 
them  in  two  tombs  of  ftone  ;  the  haplefs  lovers  of  youth  ! 
— Such  have  I  been  in  my  youth,  O  Ofcar.  Be  thou  like 
the  age  of  Fingal.  Never  fearch  thou  for  battle  j  nor 
lliun  it  when  it  comes. 

"  Fii,LAN  and  Ofcar  of  the  dark-brown  hair  !  ye,  that 
are  fwift  in  the  race  !  fly  over  the  heath  in  my  preience. 
View  the  fons  of  Lochlin.  Far  oft'  I  hear  the  noife  of 
their  fear,  like  diftant  founds  in  woods.  Go  ;  that  they 
may  not  fly  from  my  fword,  along  the  waves  of  the  north  ; 
for  many  chiefs  of  Erin's  race  lie  here,  on  the  dark  bed 

of 


176  F    I    N    G    A    L. 

of  death.  The  children  of  war  are  low ;  the  fons  of  echo- 
ing Cromla." 

The  heroes  flew  like  two  dark  clouds  :  two  dark  clouds 
that  are  the  chariots  of  ghofhs ;  when  air*s  dark  children 
come  forth  to  frighten  haplefs  men.  It  was  then  that 
Gaul*,  the  fon  of  Morni,  flood  like  a  rock  in  night.  His 
fpear  is  glittering  to  the  ftars;  his  voice  like  many  ftreams. 

"  Son  of  battle,"  cried  the  chief;  "  O  Fingal,  king  of 
fhells  !  let  the  bards  of  many  fongs  footh  Erin's  friends 
to  reft.  Fingal,  flieath  thou  thy  fword  of  death  ;  and  let 
thy  people  fight.  We  wither  away  without  our  fame  ;  our 
king  is  the  only  breaker  of  fhields  !  When  morning  rifes 
on  our  hills,  behold,  at  a  diftance,  our  deeds.  Let  Loch- 
lin  feel  the  fword  of  Morni's  fon  ;  that  bards  may  fmg  of 
me.  Such  was  the  cuftom  heretofore  of  Fingal's  noble 
race.  Such  was  thine  own,  thou  king  of  fwords,  in  bat- 
tles of  the  fpear." 

"  O  SON  of  Morni,"  Fingal  replied,  "  I  glory  In  thy 
fame.  Fight ;  but  my  fpear  ihall  be  near,  to  aid  thee  in 
the  midft  of  danger.  Raife,  raife  the  voice,  ye  fons  of  fong, 
and  lull  me  Into  reft.  Here  will  Fingal  lie,  amidft  the 
wind  of  night.  And  if  thou,  Agandecca,  art  near,  among 
the  children  of  thy  land  :  if  thou  fitteft  on  a  blaft  of  wind, 
among  the  high-lhrowded  mafts  of  Lochlin  ;  come  to  my 
dreams |,  my  fair  one.    Shew  thy  bright  face  to  my  foul." 

Many  a  voice,  and  many  a  harp,  in  tuneful  founds 
arofe.  Of  Fingal's  noble  deeds  they  fung ;  of  Fingal's 
noble  race  :  and  fometimes,  on  the  lovely  found,  was  heard 
the  name  of  Offian.  I  often  fought,  and  often  won,  in 
battles  of  the  fpear.  But  blind,  and  tearful,  and  forlorn  I 
walk  with  little  men  ! — O  Fingal,  with  thy  race  of  war  I 
now  behold  thee  not !  The  wild  roes  feed  on  the  green 
tomb  of  the  mighty  king  of  Morven  !  Bleft  be  thy  foul, 
thou  king  of  fwords,  thou  moft  renowned  on  the  hills 
of  Cona  ! 

*  Gaul,  the  fon  of  Morni,  was  chief  of  a  tribe  that  difputed  long,  the  pre-emU 
nence,  with  Fingal  himfelf.  They  were  t-educed  at  lad  to  obedience,  and  Gaul, 
from  an  enemy,  turned  Fingal's  befl  friend  and  greateft  hero.  His  charafter  is 
fomething  like  that  of  Ajax  in  the  Iliad  ;  a  heio  of  more  ftrength  than  conduft  iq 
battle.  He  was  very  fond  of  military  fame,  and  here  demands  the  next  battle  to 
himfelf.  The  poet,  by  an  artifice,  removes  Fingal,  that  his  return  may  be  the 
more  magnificent. 

i  The  poet  prepares  us  for  the  dre.im  of  Fingal  in  the  next  book, 


F       I       N       G       A       L 

AN    ANCIENT 

EPIC         POEM. 
BOOK    IV.* 


ARGUMENT. 

THE  aftion  of  the  poem  being  fufpended  by  night,  Offian  takes  that  opportunity 
to  relate  his  own  aftions  at  the  lake  of  Lego,  and  his  courtlhip  of  Everallin,  who 
was  the  mother  of  Ofcar,  and  had  died  fome  time  before  the  expedition  of  Fin- 
gal  into  Ireland.  Her  ghoft  appears  to  him,  and  tells  him  that  Ofcar,  who 
had  been  fent,  the  beginning  of  the  night,  to  obferve  the  enemy,  was  engaged 
with  an  advanced  party,  and  almoft  overpowered.  Oflian  relieves  his  fon ;  and 
an  alarm  is  given  to  Fingal  of  the  approach  of  Swaran.  The  king  rifes,  calls 
his  army  together,  and  as  he  had  promifed  the  preceding  night,  devolves  the 
command  on  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni,  while  he  himfelf,  after  charging  his  fons 
to  behave  gallantly  and  defend  his  people,  retires  to  a  hill,  from  whence  he  could 
have  a  view  of  the  battle.  The  battle  joins ;  the  poet  relates  Ofcar's  great  ani- 
ons. But  when  Ofcar,  in  conjunftion  with  his  father,  conquered  in  one  wing, 
Gaul,  who  was  attacked  by  Swaran  in  peifon,  was  on  the  point  of  retreating  in 
the  other.  Fingal  fends  Ullin  his  bard  to  encourage  him  with  a  war  fong,  but, 
notwithftanding,  Swaran  prevails;  and  Gaul  and  his  army  are  obliged  to  give 
way.  Fingal,  defcending  from  the  hill,  rallies  them  again :  Swaran  defifts  from 
the  purfuit,  pofTelTes  himfelf  of  a  rifing  ground,  reftores  the  ranks,  and  waits  the 
approach  of  Fingal.  The  king,  having  encouraged  his  men,  gives  the  necieffary 
orders,  and  renews  the  battle.  CuthuUin,  who  with  his  friend  Connal,  and  Car- 
ril  his  bard,  had  retired  to  the  cave  of  Tura,  hearing  the  noife,  came  to  the  brow 
of  the  hill,  which  overlooked  the  field  of  battle,  where  he  faw  Fingal  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  He,  being  hindered  by  Connal  from  joimng  Fingal,  who  was 
himfelf  upon  the  point  of  obtaining  a  complete  victory,  fends  Carril  to  congra-> 
tulatc  that  hero  on  his  fuccefs. 

WHO  comes  with  her  fongs  from  the  hill^  like  the 
bow  of  the  fhowery  Lena  ?    It  is  the  maid  of  the 
voice  of  love !  the  white-armed  daughter  of  Toicar  !  Often. 
Z  haft 

*  Fingal  being  afieep,  and  the  aftion  fufpended  by  night,  the  poet  introduces  the 
floryof  his  courtfhip  of  Everalhn  the  daughter  of  Bi anno.    The  epifode  is  necefla- 
^y  to  clear  up  feveral  pafTages  that  follow  in  the  poem  ;  at  the  fajne  time  that  it  na- 
turally 


178  F     I     N     G     A    L  : 

haft  thou  heard  my  fong  ;  often  given  the  tear  of  beauty, 
Doil  thou  come  to  the  wars  of  thy  people  ?  to  hear  the 
aftions  of  Ofcar  ?  When  fhall  I  ceafe  to  mourn,  by  the 
ftreams  of  refounding  Cona  ?  My  years  have  paifed  away 
in  battle.     My  age  is  darkened  with  grief  ! 

Daughter  of  the  hand  of  fnow  !  I  was  not  fo  mourn- 
ful and  blind  ;  I  was  not  fo  dark  and  forlorn,  when  Eve- 
rallin  loved  me  !  Everallin  with  the  dark-brown  hair,  the 
white-bofomed  daughter  of  Branno !  A  thoufand  heroes 
fought  the  maid  :  flie  refufed  her  love  to  a  thoufand.  The 
Ions  of  the  fword  were  defpifed  ;  for  graceful  in  her  eyes 
was  Oflian  I — I  went  in  fuit  of  the  maid,  to  Lego's  fable 
furge.  Twelve  of  my  people  were  there,  the  fons  of  ftrea- 
my  Morven  !  We  came  to  Branno,  friend  of  ftrangers  I 
Branno,  of  the  founding  mail !  "  From  whence,"  he  faid, 
"  are  the  arms  of  Heel  ?  Not  eafy  to  win  is  the  maid,  who 
has  denied  the  blue-eyed  fons  of  Erin  !  But  bleft  be  thou, 
O  fon  of  Fingal !  Happy  is  the  maid  that  waits  thee  ! 
Though  twelve  daughters  of  beauty  were  mine,  thine 
were  the  choice,  thou  fon  of  fame  !" 

FIe  opened  the  hall  of  the  maid,  the  dark-haired  Eve- 
rallin. Joy  kindled  in  our  manly  breads.  We  bleft  the 
maid^ of  Branno. — Above  us  on  the  hill  appeared  the  peo- 
ple of  ftately  Cormac.  Eight  were  the  heroes  of  the  chief. 
The  heath  flamed  wide  with  their  arms.  There  Colla  ; 
there  Durra  of  wounds;  there  mighty  Tofcar,  andTago  ; 
there  Freftal  the  vi£l:orious  ftood  ;  Dairo  of  the  happy 
deeds  ;  Dala,  the  battle's  bulwark  in  the  narrow  way  ! 
The  fword  flamed  in  the  hand  of  Cormac.  Graceful  was 
the  look  of  ihe  hero  !— Eight  were  the  heroes  of  Oftian. 
Ullin,  ftormy  fon  of  war.  Mullo,  of  the  generous  deeds. 
The  noble,  the  graceful  Scelacha.  Oglan,  and  Cerdal 
the  wrathful.  Dumariccan's  brov/s  of  death  !  And  why 
fhould  Ogar  be  the  laft  ?  fo  wide  renown^ed  on  the  hills 
of  Ardven  ! 
■  Ogar  met  Dala  the  ftrong,  face  to  face,  on  the  field 


turally  bnn£;s  on  the  aftion  of  the  book,  which  may  be  fuppofed  to  begin  about  tii- 
middie  of  the  third  nij^ht  from  the  opening  of  the  poem.  This  book,  as  many  of 
Offian's  other  compofitions,  is  addrtlfed  to  the  beautiful  Malvina  the  d^n^hter  nl 
Tofcar.  She  appears  to  have  been  in  love  vith  Ofcar,  and  lo  have  afl'cded  il'i 
company  of  the  father  after  the  death  of  the  fon. 


I  Book  IV.        An   EPIC    POEM.  179 

!  of  heroes.    The  battle  of  the  chiefs  was  like  wind,  on 
i  ocean's  foamy  waves.     The  dagger  is  remembered  by 
i  Ogar;    the  weapon   which    he   loved.      Nine    times    he 
I  drowned  it  in  Dala's  fide.     The  flormy  battle  turned. 
:  Three  times  I  broke  on  Cormac's  fliield  :  three  times  he 
I  broke  his  fpear.    But,  unhappy  youth  of  love  1  I  cut  his 
;  head  away.     Five  times  I  fliook  it  by  the  lock.     The 
:  friends  of  Cormac  fled. — Whoever  would  have  told  me, 
lovely  maid,  when  then  I  ftrove  in  battle,  that  blind,  for- 
,  faken,  and  forlorn   I  now  fhould  pafs  the  night  ;    firm 
,  ought  his  mail  to  have  been  !  unmatched  his  arm  in  war  ! 
On  *  Lena's  gloomy  heath,   the  voice  of  mufic  died 
away.    The  unconftant  blaft  blew  hard.    The  high  oak 
fliook  its  leaves  around.     Of  Everallin  were  my  thoughts, 
when  in  all  the  light  of  beauty  fhe  came  ;  her  blue  eyes 
rolling  in  tears.     She  ftood  on  a  cloud  before  my  fight, 
and  fpoke  with  feeble  voice  :  "  Rife,  Offian,  rife  and  lave 
my  fon  ;  fave  Ofcar  prince  of  men.    Near  the  red  oak  of 
Lubar's  llream,  he  f  ghts  with  Lochlin's  fons."    She  funk 
into  her  cloud  again.    I  covered  me  with  fteel.    My  fpear 
fupported  my  flcps  :    my  rattling  armour  rung.     I  hum- 
med, as  I  was  wont  in  danger,  tlie  fongs  of  heroes  of  old. 
Like  diilant  thunder  Loclilin  heard.    They  fled  ;  my  fon 
purfued. 

I  CAi.LED  him,  like  a  diflant  dream.  ^'^  Ofcar,  return 
over  Lena.  No  farther  purfue  the  foe,"  I  faid,  "  though 
Offian  is  behind  thee."  He  came  ;  and  pleafant  to  my 
car  was  Ofcar's  founding  fleel.  "  Why  didft  thou  ftop 
my  hand,"  he  faid,  "  till  death  had  covered  all  ?  For 
d'ark  and  dreadful  by  the  ftream  they  met  thy  fon  and 
Fillan  !  They  watched  the  terrors  of  the  night.  Our 
fwords  have  conquered  fonie.  But,  as  the  winds  of  night 
pour  the  ocean  over  the  white  fands  of  Mora,  fo  dark  ad- 
vance the  fons  of  Lochlin  over  Lena's  ruflling  heaih  ! 
The  ghofls  of  night  fliriek  afar :  I  have  feen  the  meteors 
of  death !    Let  me  awake  the  king  of  Morven  ;  he  that 

'  fmiles 

'  *  The  poet  returns  to  his  fubjeft.  If  one  coald  fix  the  time  of  the  year  in  which 
the  action  of  the  poem  happened,  from  the  fcene  defcribed  here,  I  fliould  be  tempt- 
ed tcvplacc  it  in  autumn.  The  trees  (bed  their  leaves,  and  the  winds  are  varia- 
abic,  both  which  circumflances  aCTree  with  that  feafon  of  the  ^  ear. 


i8o  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

fmiles  in  danger  !  he  that  Is  like  the  fun  of  heaven  rifing 
in  a  ftorm  !" 

FiNGAL  had  ftarted  from  a  dream,  and  leaned  on  Tren- 
mor'sfhield;  the  dark-brown  fhield  of  his  fathers ;  which 
they  had  lifted  of  old  in  war.  The  hero  had  feen,  in  his 
reft,  the  mournful  form  of  Agandecca.  She  came  from 
the  way  of  the  ocean.  She  flowly,  lonely,  moved  over 
Lena.  Her  face  was  pale  like  the  mift  of  Cromla ;  dark 
were  the  tears  of  her  cheek.  She  often  raifed  her  dim 
hand  from  her  robe  ;  her  robe,  which  was  of  the  clouds 
of  the  defart :  Hie  raifed  her  dim  hand  over  Fingal,  and 
turned  away  her  filent  eyes  !  "  Why  weeps  the  daughter 
of  Starno  ?"  faid  Fingal,  with  a  figh  ;  "  why  is  thy  face 
fo  pale,  fair  wanderer  of  the  clouds  ?"  She  departed  on 
the  wind  of  Lena.  She  left  him  in  the  midft  of  the  night. 
She  mourned  the  fons  of  her  people,  that  were  to  fall  by 
the  hand  of  Fingal. 

The  hero  ftarted  from  reft.  Still  he  beheld  her  in  his 
foul.  The  found  of  Ofcar's  fteps  approached.  The  king 
faw  the  grey  fliield  on  his  fide  ;  for  the  faint  beam  of  the 
morning  came  over  the  waters  of  Uilin.  "  What  do  the 
foes  in  their  fear  ?"  faid  the  rifmg  king  of  Morven  ;  "  or 
fly  they  through  ocean's  foam,  or  wait  they  the  battle  of 
fteel  ?  But  why  ftiould  Fingal  afk  ?  I  hear  their  voice  on 
the  early  wind  !  Fly  over  Lena's  heath,  O  Ofcar  :  awake 
our  friends  !" 

The  king  ftood  by  the  ftone  of  Lubar.  Thrice  he  rear- 
ed his  terrible  voice.  The  deer  ftarted  from  the  fountains 
of  Cromla.  The  rocks  fhook  on  all  their  hills.  Like  the 
noife  of  a  hundred  mountain-ftreams,  that  burft,  and  roar, 
and  foam  :  like  the  clouds,  that  gather  to  a  tempeft  on 
the  blue  face  of  the  llvy  ;  fo  met  the  fons  of  the  defart, 
round  the  tenible  voice  of  Fingal  !  Pleafant  was  the 
voice  of  the  king  of  Morven  to  the  warriors  of  his  land  t 
Often  had  he  led  them  to  battle  ;  often  returned  with  the 
fpoils  of  the  f( 


oe 


"  Cor.iE  to  battle,"  faid  the  king,  "  ye  children  of  echo- 
ing Selma  !  Come  to  the  death  of  thoufands  !  Comhal's 
fon  will  fee  the  light.  My  fword  fliall  wave  on  the  hill,  the 
defence  of  my  people  in  war.    But  never  may  you  need  it, 


Book  IV.        An  EPIC   POEM.  181 

warriors  ;  while  the  fon  of  Morni  fights,  the  chief  of  migh- 
ty men  !  He  fliall  lead  my  battle,  that  his  fame  may  rife  in 
fong  !  O  ye  ghofts  of  heroes  dead  !  ye  riders  of  the  ftorm 
of  Cromia !  receive  my  falling  people  with  joy,  and  bear 
them  to  your  hills.  And  may  the  blaft  of  Lena  carry  them 
over  m3^'feas,  that  they  may  come  to  my  filent  dreams,  and 
delight  my  foul  in  relt  ! — Fillan  and  Ofcar,  of  the  dark- 
brown  hair  !  fair  Ryno,  with  the  pointed  fteel !  advance 
with  valour  to  the  fight.  Behold  the  fon  of  Morni.  Let 
your  fwords  be  like  his  in  ftrife  :  behold  the  deeds  of  his 
hands.  Protect  the  friends  of  your  father.  Remember 
the  chiefs  of  old.  My  children,  I  will  fee  you  yet,  though 
here  ye  fhould  fall  in  Erin.  Soon  ftiall  our  cold,  pale 
ghofts  meet  in  a  cloud  on  Cona's  eddying  winds." 

Now  like  a  dark  and  ftormy  cloud,  edged  round  with 
the  red  lightning  of  heaven  ;  flying  weftward  from  the 
morning's  beam,  the  king  of  Selma  removed.  Terrible 
Is  the  light  of  his  armour  ;  two  fpears  are  in  his  hand. 
His  grey  hair  falls  on  the  wind.  He  often  looks  back  on 
the  war.  Three  bards  attend  the  fon  of  fame,  to  bear 
his  'words  to  the  chiefs.  High  on  Cromla's  fide  he  fat, 
waving  the  lightning  of  his  fword,  and  as  he  waved  we 
moved. 

Joy  rifes  in  Ofcar's  face.  His  cheek  is  red.  His  eye 
fiieds  tears.  The  fword  is  a  beam  of  fire  in  his  hand. 
He  came,  and,  fmiling,  fpoke  to  Offian.  "  O  ruler  of 
the  fight  of  fteel !  my  father,  hear  thy  fon  !  Retire  with 
Morven's  mighty  chief.  Give  me  the  fame  of  OfTian.  If 
here  I  fall,  O  chief!  remember  that  breaft  of  fnow,  the 
lonely  fun-beam  of  my  love,  the  white  handed  daughter 
of  Tofcar !  For,  with  red  cheek  from  the  rock,  bending 
over  the  ftream,  her  foft  hair  flies  about  her  bofom,  as 
flie  pours  the  figh  for  Ofcar.  Tell  her  I  am  on  my 
hills,  a  lightly-bounding  fon  of  the  wind ;  tell  her,  that, 
in  a  cloud,  I  may  meet  the  lovely  maid  of  Tofcar." 
"  Raife,  Ofcar,  rather  raife  my  tomb.  I  will  not  yield 
the  war  to  thee.  The  firft  and  bloodieft  in  the  ftrife,  my 
arm  ftiall  teach  thee  how  to  fight.  But,  remember,  my 
fon,  to  place  this  fword,  this  bow,  the  horn  of  my  deer, 
within  that  dark  and  narrow  houfe,  whofe  mark  is  one 

grey 


i82  F     I     N     G     A    i: 

grey  ftone!  Ofcar,  I  have  no  love  to  leave  to  the  care  of 
my  fon.  Everallin  is  no  more,  the  lovely  daughter  of 
Branno!" 

Such  were  our  v/ords,  Vv^hen  Gaul's  loud  voice  came 
growing  on  the  wind.  He  waved  on  high  the  fword  of 
his  father.  We  rufhed  to  death  and  wounds.  As  waves, 
white-bubbling  over  the  deep,  come  fwelling,  roaring  on: 
as  rocks  of  ooze  meet  roaring  waves  ;  fo  foes  attacked 
and  fought.  Man  met  with  man,  and  fteel  with  (leel. 
Shields  found,  and  warriors  fall.  As  a  hundred  hammers 
on  the  red  fon  of  the  furnace,  fo  rofe,  fo  rung  their 
fv/ords  ! 

Gaul  rulhed  on,  like  a  whirlwind  in  Ardven.  The 
deflrudion  of  heroes  is  on  his  fword.  Swaran  was  like 
the  fire  of  the  defart  in  the  echoing  heath  of  Gormal  ! 
How  can  I  give  to  the  fong  the  death  of  many  fpears?  My 
fword  rofe  high,  and  flamed  in  the  ftrife  of  blood.  Of- 
car,  terrible  wert  thou,  my  bed,  my  greatefh  fon  !  I  re- 
joiced in  my  fecret  foul,  when  his  fword  flamed  over  the 
flain.  They  fled  amain  through  Lena's  heath.  We  pur- 
fued  and  flev/.  As  flones  that  bound  from  rock  to  rock: 
as  axes  in  echoing  woods :  as  thunder  rolls  from  hill  to 
hill,  in  difmal  broken  peals  ;  fo  blow  fucceeded  to  blow, 
and  death  to  death,  from  the  hand  of  Ofcar  and  mine. 

But  Swaran  clofed  round  Mcrni's  fon,  as  tjie  ilrength 
of  the  tide  of  Iniftore.  The  king  half-rofe  from  his  hill 
at  the  nght.  He  half-aflumed  the  fpear.  "  Go,  UUin, 
go,  my  aged  bard,"  begun  the  king  of  Morven.  "  Re- 
mind the  mighty  Gaul  of  war.  Remind  him  of  his 
fathers.  Support  the  yielding  fight  with  fong  ;  for 
long  enlivens  war."  Tall  Ullin  went,  with  ftep  of  age, 
and  fpoke  to  the  king  of  fwords.  "  Son  *  of  the  chief  of 
generous  fteeds  !  high-bounding  king  of  fpears  !  Strong 
arm  in  every  perilous  toil  !  Hard  heart  that  never  yields  ! 
Chief  of  the  pointed  arms  of  death  !  Cut  down  the  foe : 
let  no  white  fail  bound  round  dark  Iniftore.  Be  thine 
arm  like  thunder  ;  thine  eyes  like  fire  ;  thy  heart  of  folid 

rock. 

*  Thje  cudom  of  encouraging  men  in  battle  with  extempore  rhymes,  has  been, 
i.ried  down  almoft  to  our  own  times.     Several  of  thefe  war  fongs  are  extant,  bu: 
(lie  moft  of  them  are  only  a  group  of  epithets,  without  either  beauty  or  barmons', 
utterly  deflitute  of  poetical  merit. 


Book  IV.        An   EPIC    POEM.  183 

rock.  Whirl  round  thy  fword  as  a  meteor  at  night ;  lift 
thy  Ihield  like  the  flame  of  death.  Son  of  the  chief  of 
generous  deeds,  cut  down  the  foe.  Deftroy  1"  The  he- 
ro's heart  beat  high.  But  Swaran  came  with  battle.  He 
cleft  the  fliield  of  Gaul  in  twain.    Thefons  of  Selma  fled. 

FiNGAL  at  once  arofe  in  arms.  Thrice  he  reared  his 
dreadful  voice.  Cromla  anfwered  around.  The  fons  of 
the  dcfart  flood  ftill.  They  bent  their  blufhing  faces  to 
earth,  afliamed  at  the  prefence  of  the  king.  He  came, 
like  a  cloud  of  rain  in  the  day  of  the  fun,  when  flow  it 
rolls  on  the  hill,  and  fields  expeft  the  fliower.  Silence 
attends  its  flow  progrefs  aloft ;  but  the  tempefl:  is  foon  to 
arife.  Swaran  beheld  the  terrible  king  of  Morven.  He 
(topped  in  the  midfl  of  his  courfe.  Dark  he  leaned  on 
his  fpear,  rolling  his  red  eyes  around.  Silent  and  tall,  he 
feemed  as  an  oak  on  the  banks  of  Lubar,  which  had  its 
branches  blaftied  of  old  by  the  lightning  of  heaven.  It 
bends  over  the  flream  :  the  grey  mofs  whifl:les  in  the 
wind  :  fo  flood  the  king.  Then  flovv^Iy  he  retired  to  the 
rifing  heath  of  Le;ia.  His  thoufands  pour  around  the 
hero.    Darknefs  gathers  on  the  hill ! 

FiNGAL,  like  a  beam  from  heaven,  Ihone  in  the  midfl 
of  his  people.  His  heroes  gather  around  him.  He  fends 
forth  the  voice  of  his  power.  "  Raife  my  ftandards  on 
high  ;  fpread  them  on  Lena's  wind,  like  the  flames  of  an 
hundred  hills!  Let  them  found  on  the  winds  of  Erin,  and 
remind  us  of  the  fight.  Ye  fons  of  the  roaring  flreams, 
that  pour  from  a  thoufand  hills,  be  near  the  king  of  Mor- 
ven !  attend  to  the  words  of  his  power  !  Gaul,  flronged 
arm  of  death !  O  Ofcar,  of  the  future  fights !  Connal, 
fon  of  the  blue  fliields  of  Sora !  Dermid,  of  the  dark- 
brown  hair  !  OfTian,  king  of  many  fongs,  be  near  your 
father's  arm !"  We  reared  the  fun-beam  *  of  battle  ;  the 
flandard  of  the  king !  Each  hero  exulted  v/ith  joy,  as, 
waving,  it  flew  on  the  wind.  It  was  fludded  with  gold 
above,  as  the  blue  wide  fliell  of  the  nightly  ficy.  Each 
hero  had  his  flandard  too  ;  and  each  his  gloomy  man ! 

"Behold," 

*  Fin^al's  Oandard  was  dnlinguinied  by  the  name  of  fun-beam  ;  probably  on  ac- 
count of  its  bright  colour,  and  its  being  lludded  with  gold.  To  begin  a  battle  is 
cxpreffud,  in  old  compofuioii,  \>)' lifting  of  the  fm-btam. 


1-84  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

"  Behold,"  faid  the  king  of  generous  fhells,  "  how 
Lochlin  divides  on  Lena  !  They  ftand  like  broken  clouds 
on  a  hill ;  or  an  half  confumed  grove  of  oaks  ;  when  we 
lee  the  fey  through  its  branches,  and  the  meteor  pafTing 
behind!  Let  every  chief  among  the  friends  of  Fingal  take 
a  dark  troop  of  thofe  that  frown  fo  high ;  nor  let  a  fon  of 
the  echoing  groves,  bound  on  the  waves  of  Iniftore ! 

"  Mine,'*  faid  Gaul,  "  be  the  feven  chiefs,  that  came 
from  Lano's  lake."  "  Let  Iniftore^s  dark  king,"  faid 
Ofcar,  "  come  to  the  fword  of  OfTian's  fon."  "  To  mine 
thekingof  Inifcon,"  faid  Connal,  "  heart  of  fleel!"  "  Or 
Mudan's  chief  or  I,"  faid  brown-haired  Dermid,  "  fhall 
fleep  on  clay-cold  earth."  My  choice,  though  now  fo 
weak  and  dark,  was  Terman's  battling  king :  I  promifed 
with  my  hand  to  win  the  hero's  dark-brown  fhield. 
"  Bled  and  vidorlous  be  my  chiefs,"  faid  Fingal  of  the 
mlldeft  look.  "  Swaran,  king  of  roaring  waves,  thou 
art  the  choice  of  Fingal !" 

Now,  like  an  hundred  different  winds,  that  pour  thro* 
many  vales  j  divided,  dark  the  fons  of  Selma  advanced. 
Cromla  echoed  around  !  How  can  I  relate  the  deaths, 
when  we  clofed  in  the  ftrife  of  arms!  O  daughter  of  Tof- 
car  !  bloody  were  our  hands  I  The  gloomy  ranks  of 
Lochlin  fell,  like  the  banks  of  the  roaring  Cona !  Our 
arms  were  victorious  on  Lena  :  each  chief  fulfilled  his 
promife  !  Befide  the  murmur  of  Branno  thou  didft  often 
fit,  O  maid !  thy  white  bofom  rofe  frequent,  like  the 
down  of  the  fwan  when  flow  Ihe  fwims  on  the  lake,  and 
fidelong  winds  blow  on  her  ruffled  wing.  Thou  haft  feen 
the  fun  retire,  red  and  flow  behind  his  cloud :  night  ga- 
thering round  on  the  mountain,  while  the  unfrequent 
blaft  roared  in  the  narrow  vales.  At  length  the  rain  beats 
hard  :  thunder  rolls  in  peals.  Lightning  glances  on  the 
rocks!  Spirits  ride  on  beams  of  fire!  The  llrength  of  the 
raountain-ftreams  comes  roaring  down  the  hills.  Such 
was  the  noife  of  battle,  maid  of  the  arms  of  fnow !  Why, 
daughter  of  Tofcar,  why  that  tear?  The  maids  of  Lochlin 
have  caufe  to  weep  !  The  people  of  their  country  fell. 
Bloody  were  the  blue  fwords  of  the  race  of  my  heroes! — 
Bur  I  am  fad,  forlorn,  and  blind :  no  more  the  compa- 
nion. 


Book  IV.        An  EPIC   POEM.  185 

nion  of  heroes.  Give,  lovely  maid,  to  me  thy  tears.  I 
have  feen  the  tombs  of  all  my  friends ! 

It  was  then,  by  Fiugal's  hand,  a  hero  fell,  to  his  grief! 
Grey-haired  he  rolled  in  the  dufl.  He  lifted  his  faint  eyes 
to  the  king :  "  And  is  it  by  me  thou  haft  fallen,"  faid 
the  fon  of  Comhal,  "  thou  friend  of  Agandecca !  I  have 
feen  thy  tears  for  the  maid  of  my  love,  in  the  halls  of 
the  bloody  Starno  !  Thou  haft  been  the  foe  of  the  foes  of 
my  love,  and  haft  thou  fallen  by  my  hand  ?  Raife,  Ullin, 
raife  the  grave  of  Mathon ;  and  give  his  name  to  Agan- 
decca's  fong.  Dear  to  my  foul  haft  thou  been,  thou 
darkly-dwelling  maid  of  Ardven  !" 

CuTHULLiN,  from  the  cave  of  Cromla,  heard  the  noife 
of  the  troubled  war.  He  called  to  Connal  chief  of  fwords ; 
to  Carril  of  other  times.  The  grey-haired  heroes  heard 
his  voice.  They  took  their  pointed  fpears.  They  came, 
and  faw  the  tide  of  battle,  like  ocean's  crowded  waves  ; 
when  the  dark  wind  blows  from  the  deep,  and  rolls  the 
billows  through  the  fandy  vale  !  Cuthullin  kindled  at  the 
fight.  Darknefs  gathered  on  his  brow.  His  hand  is  on 
the  fword  of  his  fathers  :  his  red-rolling  eyes  on  the  foe. 
He  thrice  attempted  to  rufti  to  battle.  He  thrice  was  ftopt 
by  Connal.  "  Chief  of  the  ifle  of  mift,"  he  faid,  «  Fin- 
gal  fubdues  the  foe.  Seek  not  a  part  of  the  fame  of  the 
king  ;  himfelf  is  like  the  ftorm  !" 

"  Then,  Carril,  go,"  replied  the  chief,  "  go,  greet 
the  king  of  Morven.  When  Lochlin  falls  av/ay  like  a. 
ftream  after  rain:  when  the  noife  of  the  battle  is  paft ; 
then  be  thy  voice  fweet  in  his  ear  to  pralfe  the  king  of 
Selma !  Give  him  the  fword  of  Caithbat.  Cuthullin  is 
not  worthy  to  lift  the  arms  of  his  fathers  ! — Come,  O  ye 
ghofts  of  the  lonely  Cromla !  ye  fouls  of  chiefs  that  are 
no  more  !  be  near  the  fteps  of  Cuthullin  ;  talk  to  him  in 
the  cave  of  his  grief.  Never  more  fliall  I  be  renowned, 
among  the  mighty  in  the  land.  I  am  a  beam  that  has 
Ihone  ;  a  mift  that  has  fled  away :  when  the  blaft  of  the 
morning  came,  and  brightened  the  ftiaggy  fide  of  the  hill! 
Connal !  talk  of  arms  no  more :  departed  is  my  fame. 
My  fighs  fliall  be  on  Cromla's  wind;  till  my  footfteps 
A  a  ceafe 


iS6  F    I    N    G     A    L  : 

ceafe  to  be  feen.  And  thou,  white-bofomed  Bragela, 
mourn  over  the  fall  of  my  fame.  Vanquiflied  I  will  never 
return  to  thee,  thou  fun-beam  of  my  foul  !'* 


i^^INGAL 


F       I       N       G       A       L 

AN    ANCIENT 

EPIC        POEM. 
B  O  O  K     V, 


ARGUR/IENT. 


CUTIIULLIN  and  Connal  ftill  remain  on  the  hill.  Fingal  and  Swaran  meet; 
the  combat  is  defcribed.  Swaran  is  overcome,  bound  and  delivered  over  as  a 
prifoner  to  the  care  of  Offian  and  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni;  Fingal,  his  younger 
fons,  and'Ofcar,  flill  purfue  the  enemy.  The  eplfode  of  Orla,  a  chief  of  Loch, 
iin,  who  was  mortally  wounded  in  the  battle,  is  introduced.  Fingal,  touched 
with  the  death  of  Orla,  orders  the  purfuit  to  be  difcontirAied  ;  and  calling  his 
Tons  together,  he  is  informed  that  Ryno,  the  youngeft  of  them,  was  flain.  He 
laments  his  death,  hears  the  flory  of  Lamderg  and  GelchofTa,  and  returns  to- 
wards the  place  where  he  had  left  Swaran.  Carril,  who  had  been  font  by  Cu- 
thullin  to  congratulate  Fingal  on  his  victory,  comes  in  the  mean  time  to  Offian. 
The  converfation  of  the  two  poets  clofes  the  a£lion  of  the  fourth  day. 

ON  Cromla's  refounding  fide,  Connal  fpoke  to  the 
chief  of  the  noble  car  :  "  Why  that  gloom,  fon  of 
Semo  ?  Our  friends  are  the  mighty  in  fight.  Renowned 
art  thou,  O  warrior  !  many  were  the  deaths  of  thy  fteel. 
Often  has  Bragela  met,  with  blue-rolling  eyes  of  joy  ; 
often  has  Ihe  met  her  hero,  returning;  in  the  midft  of  the 
valiant  ;  when  his  fword  was  red  with  llaughter  ;  when 
his  foes  were  filent  in  the  fields  of  the  tomb.  Pleafant  to 
her  ears  were  thy  bards,  when  thy  deeds  arofe  in  fong  ! 

"  But  behold  the  king  of  Morven  !  He  moves,  below, 
like  a  pillar  of  fire.  His  ftrength  is  like  the  ftream  of 
Lubar,  or  the  wind  of  the  echoing  Cromla  ;  vvhen  the 
branchy  foreils  of  night  are  torn  from  all  their  rocks. 
Happy  are  thy  people,  O  Fingal !  thine  arm  fhall  finifh 
their  wars.    Thou  art  the  firft  in  their  dangers  :  the  wifeft 


i88  F    I    N     G    A    L  : 

in  the  days  of  their  peace.  Thou  fpeakeft,  and  thy  thou- 
fands  obey  i  armies  tremble  at  the  found  of  thy  fteel. 
Happy  are  thy  people,  O  Fingal,  king  of  refounding  Sel- 
ma  ! — Who  is  that,  fo  d?Tk  and  terrible,  coming  in  the 
thunder  of  his  courfe  ?  Who  but  Starno's  fon,  to  meet  the 
king  of  Morven  ? — Behold  the  battle  of  the  chiefs  !  It  is 
the  ilorm  of  the  ocean,  \vhen  two  fpirits  meet  far  diflant, 
and  contend  for  the  rolling  of  waves  :  the  hunter  hears 
the  noife  on  his  hill  ;  he  fees  the  high  billows  advancing 
to  Ardven's  fliore  !" 

Such  were  the  words  of  Connal,  when  the  heroes  met 
in  fight.  There  was  the  clang  of  arms  !  there  every 
blow,  like  the  hundred  hammers  of  the  furnace  !  Terri- 
ble is  the  battle  of  the  kings  ;  dreadful  the  look  of  their 
eyes  !  Their  dark-brown  fhields  are  cleft  in  twain.  Their 
fleel  flies,  broken,  from  their  helms.  They  fling  their 
weapons  down.  Each  rufhes  to  his  hero's  grafp.  Their 
fmewy  arms  bend  round  each  other  :  they  turn  from  fide 
to  fide,  and  ftrain  and  flretch  their  large  fpreading  limbs 
below.  But,  when  the  pride  of  their  flrength  arofe,  they 
fhook  the  hill  with  their  heels.  Rocks  tumble  from  their 
places  on  high  ;  the  green-headed  bufhes  are  overturned. 
At  length  the  ftrength  of  Swaran  fell :  the  king  of  the 
groves  is  bound.  Thus  have  I  feen  on  Cona — but  Cona 
I  behold  no  more  ! — thus  have  I  feen  two  dark  hills  re- 
moved from  their  place,  by  the  ftrength  of  the  burfting, 
ftream.  They  turn  from  fide  to  fide  in  their  fall ;  their 
tall  oaks  meet  one  another  on  high.  Then  they  tumble 
together,  with  all  their  rocks  and  trees.  The  ftreams  are 
turned  by  their  fide  :  the  red  ruin  is  feen  afar. 

"  Sons  of  diftant  Morven,"  faid  Fingal,  "  guard  the 
king  of  Lochlin.  He  is  ftrong  as  his  thoufand  waves. 
His  hand  is  taught  to  war.  His  race  is  of  the  times  of 
old.  Gaul,  thou  firft  of  my  heroes;  Olfian,  king  of  fongs, 
attend.  He  is  the  friend  of  Agandecca ;  raife  to  joy  his 
grief.  But  Ofcar,  Fillan,  and  Ryno,  ye  children  of  the 
race  !  purine  Lochlin  over  Lena  ;  that  no  veflel  may  here- 
after bound  on  the  dark-rolling  waves  of  Iniftore  !" 

Th£y  flew  fudden  acrofs  the  heath.  He  flowly  moved, 
like  a  cloud  of  thunder,  when  the  fultry  plain  of  fummer 

is 


BookV.        An  EPIC   POEM.  189 

is  filent  and  dark !  His  fword  is  before  him  as  a  fun- 
beam  ;  terrible  as  the  llreaming  meteor  of  night.  He 
came  toward  a  chief  of  Lochlin.  He  fpoke  to  the  fon 
of  the  wave.  "  Who  is  that  fo  dark  and  fad,  at  the  rock 
of  the  roaring  dream  ?  He  cannot  bound  over  its  courfe : 
How  {lately  is  the  chief !  His  bofly  fhield  is  on  his  fide  ; 
his  fpear,  like  the  tree  of  the  defart !  Youth  of  the  dark- 
red  hair,  art  thou  of  the  foes  of  Fingal  ?'* 

"  I  AM  a  fon  of  Lochlin,"  he  cries ;  "  ftrong  is  my 
arm  in  war.  My  fpoufe  is  weeping  at  home.  Orla  fhall 
never  return  !"  "  Or  fights  or  yields  the  hero  ?"  faid 
Fingal  of  the  noble  deeds.  "  Foes  do  not  conquer  in  my 
prefence :  my  friends  are  renowned  in  the  hall.  Son  of 
the  wave,  follow  me  ;  partake  the  feaftof  my  fhells  :  pur- 
fue  the  deer  of  my  defart :  be  thou  the  friend  of  Fingal.'* 
"  No  :"  faid  the  hero,  "  I  affift  the  feeble.  My  flrength 
is  with  the  weak  in  arms.  My  fword  has  been  always  un- 
matched, O  warrior  :  let  the  king  of  Morven  yield  !" 
"  I  never  yielded,  Orla  ;  Fingal  never  yielded  to  man. 
Draw  thy  fword,  and  chufe  thy  foe.   Many  are  my  heroes  !" 

"  Does  then  the  king  refufe  the  fight  ?"  faid  Orla  of 
the  dark-brown  fhield.  "  Fingal  is  a  match  for  Orla;  and 
he  alone  of  all  his  race  ! — But,  king  of  Morven,  if  I  fhall 
fall  ;  as  one  time  the  warrior  mull  die  ;  raife  my  tomb 
in  the  midft  :  let  it  be  the  greateil  on  Lena.  Send,  over 
the  dark-blue  w^ave,  the  fword  of  Orla  to  the  fpoufe  of 
his  love  ;  that  flie  may  fhew  it  to  her  fon,  with  tears,  to 
kindle  his  foul  to  war."  "  Son  of  the  mournful  tale," 
faid  Fingal,  "  why  dofl  thou  awaken  my  tears  ?  One  day 
the  warriors  mud  die,  and  the  children  fee  their  ufelels 
arms  in  the  hall.  But,  Orla,  thy  tomb  fhall  rife  :  thy 
white-bofomed  fpoufe  fhall  weep  over  thy  fword." 

They  fought  on  the  heath  of  Lena.  Feeble  was  the 
arm  of  Orla.  The  fword  of  Fingal  defcended,  and  cleft 
his  fhield  in  twain.  It  fell  and  glittered  on  the  ground, 
as  the  moon  on  the  ruffled  dream.  "  King  of  Morven," 
faid  the  hero,  "  lift  thy  fword  and  pierce  my  bread. 
Wounded  and  faint  from  battle,  m.y  friends  have  left  me 
here.     The  mournful  tale  fhall  come  to  my  love,  on  the 

banks 


190  F    I    N    G    A    L: 

banks  of  the  flreamy  Lota;  when  (he  Is  alone  m  the  wood; 
and  the  ruflHng  blafl  in  the  leaves  !" 

"  No;"  faid  the  king  of  Morven,  "  I  will  never  wound 
thee,  Orla.  On  the  banks  of  Lota  let  her  fee  thee, 
efcaped  from  the  hands  of  war.  Let  thy  grey-haired  fa- 
ther, who,  perhaps,  is  blind  with  age ;  let  him  hear  the 
found  of  thy  voice,  and  brighten  within  his  hall.  With 
joy  let  the  hero  rife  and  fearch  for  his  Ton  with  his  hands  !** 
"  But  never  will  he  find  him^  Fingal;"  faid  the  youth  of 
the  flreamy  Lota.  "  On  Lena's  heath  I  muft  die:  foreign 
bards  fhall  talk  of  me.  My  broad  belt  covers  my  wound 
of  death.    I  give  it  to  the  wind  !'* 

The  dark  blood  poured  from  his  fide ;  he  fell  pale  on 
the  heath  of  Lena.  Fingal  bent  over  him  as  he  dies,  and 
called  his  younger  chiefs.  "  Ofcar  and  Fillan,  my  fons, 
raife  high  the  memory  of  Orla.  Here  let  the  dark-haired 
hero  reft,  far  from  the  fpoufe  of  his  love.  Here  let  him 
reft,  in  his  own  narrow  houfe,  far  from  the  found  of  Lota. 
The  feeble  will  find  his  bow  at  home;  but  will  not  be  able 
to  bend  it.  His  faithful  dogs  howl  on  his  hills ;  his 
boars,  which  he  ufed  to  purfue,  rejoice.    Fallen  is  the  arm 

of  battle!  the  mighty  among  the  valiant  is  low  ! Exalt 

the  voice,  and  blow  the  horn,  ye  fons  cf  the  king  of 
Morven  !  Let  us  go  back  to  Swaran,  to  lend  the  night 
away  in  fong.  Fillan,  Ofcar,  and  Ryno,  f.y  over  the 
heath  of  Lena.  Where,  Ryno,  art  thou,  young  fon  of 
fame  ?  Thou  art  not  wont  to  be  the  laft  to  anfwer  thy  fa- 
ther's voice  !" 

"  Ryno,"  faid  Ullin  firft  of  bards,  "  is  with  the  awful 
forms  of  his  fathers  :  with  Trathal  king  of  (hields  ;  with 
Trenmor  of  mighty  deeds.  The  youth  is  low,  the  youth 
is  pale  ;  he  lies  on  Lena's  heath  !"  "  Fell  the  fwiftefl  in 
the  race,"  faid  the  king,  "  the  firfl  to  bei^d  the  bow  ? 
Thou  fcarce  haft  been  known  to  me  :  why  did  young 
Ryno  fall?  But  fleep  thou  foftly  on  Lena,  Fingal  fhall 
foon  behold  thee.  Soon  fhall  my  voice  be  heard  no  more, 
and  my  footfteps  ceafe  to  be  feen.  The  bards  will  tell  of 
Fingal's  name.  The  ftones  will  talk  of  me.  But,  Ryno, 
thou  art  low  indeed !  thou  haft  not  received  thy  fame. 
Uliin,  ftrike  the  harp  for  Ryno;  tell  what  the  chief  would 

have 


BookV.        An  epic   POEM.  191 

have  been.  Farewel,  thou  firft  in  every  field !  No  more 
fhall  I  direft  thy  dart !  Thou  that  haft  been  fo  fair !  I  be- 
hold thee  not.  Farewel  I"  The  tear  is  on  the  cheek  of 
the  king,  for  terrible  was  his  fon  in  war.  His  fon  !  that 
was  like  a  beam  of  fire  by  night  on  a  hill ;  when  the  fo- 
refts  fink  down  in  its  courfe,  and  the  traveller  trembles  at 
the  found  !  But  the  winds  drive  it  beyond  the  fteep :  it 
fmks  from  fight,  and  darknefs  prevails. 

"  Whose  fame  is  in  that  dark-green  tomb  ?"  begun 
the  king  of  generous  fhells:  "  four  ftones  with  their  heads 
of  mofs  (land  there  1  They  mark  the  narrow  houfe  of 
death.  Near  it  let  Ryno  reft.  A  neighbour  to  the  brave 
let  him  lie.  Some  chief  of  fame  is  here,  to  fly,  with  my 
fon,  on  clouds.  O  Ullin,  raife  the  fongs  of  old.  Awake 
their  memory  in  their  tomb.  If  in  the  field  they  never 
fled,  my  fon  ftiall  reft  by  their  fide.  He  fliall  reft,  far  dif- 
tant  from  Morven,  on  Lena's  refounding  plains  I" 

"  Here,"  faid  the  bard  of  fong,  "  here  reft  the  firfl 
of  heroes.  Silent  is  Lamderg  *  in  this  place  :  dumb  is 
Ullin  king  of  fwords  :  And  who,  foft  fmiling  from  her 
cloud,  fliews  me  her  face  of  love  ?  Why,  daughter,  why 
fo  pale  art  thou,  firft  of  the  maids  of  Cromla  ?  Doft  thou 
fleep  with  the  foes  in  battle,  white-bofomed  daughter  of 
Tuathal?  Thou  haft  been  the  love  of  thoufands,  but  Lam- 
derg was  thy  love.  He  came  to  Tura's  moify  towers,  and, 
ftriking  his  dark  buckler,  fpoke :  "  Where  is  GelchoiTa^ 
my  love,  the  daughter  of  the  noble  Tuathal?  I  left  her  in 
the  hall  of  Tura,  when  I  fought  with  great  Ulfadda.  Re- 
turn foon,  O  Lamderg,  flie  faid,  for  here  I  fit  in  grief. 
Her  white  breaft  rofe  with  fighs.  Her  cbeek  was  wet 
with  tears.  But  I  fee  her  not  coming  to  meet  me;  to 
footh  my  foul  after  war.  Silent  is  the  hall  of  my  joy !  I 
hear  not  the  voice  of  the  bard.  Bran  -f-  does  not  fnake 
his  chains  at  the  gate,  glad  at  the  coming  of  Lamderg. 

Where 

*  Lamh-dhearg  fignifies  l/oo^y  hand.  Gelchofla,  lukite  Ugged.  Tuathal,  furiy. 
Ulfadda,  long  beard.     Ferchios,  the  conqueror  of  men. 

+  .Bran  is  a  common  name  of  (i,rey-hounds  to  this  day.  It  is  a  cuilom  in  the 
north  of  Scotland,  to  give  the  names  of  the  heroes  mentioned  in  this  potm,  to 
their  dogs  J  a  proof  that  they  are  fdmiliar  to  the  car,  and  their  fame  generally 
known. 


192  F    I    N    G     A    L  : 

Where  Is  Gelchoffa  my  love,  the  mild  daughter  of  the 
generous  Tuathal  ?'* 

"  LamdergI"  fays  Ferchios  fon  of  Aidon,  "  Gelchofla 
moves  ftately  on  Cromla.  She  and  the  maids  of  the  bow 
purfue  the  flying  deer  !"  "  Ferchios  !'*  replied  the  chief 
of  Cromla,  "  no  noife  meets  the  ear  of  Lamderg!  No  found 
is  in  the  woods  of  Lena.  No  deer  fly  in  my  fight.  No 
panting  dog  purfues.  I  fee  not  Gelchofla  my  love,  fair  as 
the  full  moon  fetting  on  the  hills.  Go,  Ferchios,  go  to 
Allad  *,  the  grey-haired  fon  of  the  rock.  His  dwelling  is  in 
the  circle  of  {tones.  He  may  know  of  the  bright  Gelchofla!" 

"  The  fon  of  Aidon  went.  He  fpoke  to  the  ear  of 
age.  "  Allad !  dweller  of  rocks :  thou  that  tremblefl; 
alone  !  what  faw  thine  eyes  of  age  ?"  "  I  faw,"  anfwered 
Allad  the  old,  "  Ullin,  the  fon  of  Cairbar.  He  came,  in 
darknefs,  from  Cromla.  He  hummed  a  furly  fong,  like 
a  blafl:  in  a  leaflefs  wood.  He  entered  the  hall  of  Tura. 
"  Lamderg,"  he  faid,  "  moll  dreadful  of  men,  fight  or 
yield  to  Ullin."  "  Lamderg,"  replied  GelchoflTa,  "  the 
fon  of  battle,  is  not  here.  He  fights  Ulfadda  mighty  chief. 
He  is  not  here,  thou  firfl  of  men  !  But  Lamderg  never 
yields.  He  will  fight  the  fon  of  Cairbar  !"  "  Lovely  art 
thou,"  faid  terrible  Ullin,  "  daughter  of  the  generous 
Tuathal.  I  carry  thee  to  Cairbar's  halls.  The  valiant 
Hiall  have  Gelchofla.  Three  days  I  remain  on  Cromla, 
to  wait  that  fon  of  battle,  Lamderg.  On  the  fourth  Gel- 
chofla is  mine ;  if  the  mighty  Lamderg  flies." 

"  Allad  1"  faid  the  chief  of  Cromla,  "  peace  to  thy 
dreams  in  the  cave.  Ferchios,  found  the  horn  of  Lam- 
derg, that  Ullin  may  hear  in  his  halls."  Lamderg,  like 
a  roaring  fliorm,  afcended  the  hill  from  Tura.  He  hum- 
med a  furly  fong  as  he  went,  like  the  noife  of  a  falling 
llream.  He  darkly  ft:ood  upon  the  hill,  like  a  cloud  va- 
rying its  form  to  the  wind.  He  roiled  a  fl:one,  the  fign  of 
war.  Ullin  heard  in  Cairbar's  hall.  The  hero  heard, 
with  joy,  his  foe.     He  took  his  father's  fpear.     A  fmile 

brightens 

*  AUnd  is  a  druid  :  he  is  called  the  fon  of  the  rock,  from  his  dwelling  in  a  cave; 
wnd  the  circle  of  fiones  here  mentioned  is  the  pale  of  the  druidical  temple.  Ha 
IS  here  confulted  as  one  who  had  a  fupernatural  knowledge  of  things.  From  the 
druids,  no  doubt,  came  the  ridiculsus  notion  of  the  fecond  fight,  which  prevailed 
in  the  highlands  and  ifles. 


BookV.        An   epic   POEM.  193 

brightens  his  dark-brown  cheek,  as  he  places  his  fword 
by  his  fide.  The  dagger  glittered  in  his  hand.  He  whiil- 
led  as  he  went. 

"  Gelchossa  faw  the  filent  chief,  as  a  v/reath  of  mill 
afcending  the  hill.  She  ftriick  her  white  and  heaving 
breaft  ;  and,  filent,  tearful,  feared  for  Lamderg.  '•  Cair- 
bar,  hoary  chief  of  Ihells,"  faid  the  maid  of  the  tender 
hand.  "  I  muft  bend  the  bow  on  Cromla.  I  fee  the 
dark-brown  hinds  !'*  She  halted  up  the  hill.  In  vain ! 
the  gloomy  heroes  fought.  Why  fhouid  i  tell  to  Selnia's 
king,  how  wrathful  heroes  fight?  Fierce  Ullin  fell  Young 
Lamderg  came,  all  pale,  to  the  daughter  cf  generous 
Tuathal!  "  What  blood,  my  love?"  fl;e  trembling  faid: 
"  wdiat  blood  runs  down  my  warrior's  fide  ?'*  "  It  is  Ul- 
lin's  blood,"  the  chief  replied,  "  thou  fairer  than  Inow ! 
Gelchofla,  let  me  reft  here  a  I'.ttle  while."  The  mighty 
Lamderg  died !  "  And  fleepeft  thou  fo  foon  on  earth,  O 
chief  of  fliady  Tura?"  Three  days  fhe  mourned  belide  her 
love.  The  hunters  found  her  cold.  They  1-aifed  this 
tomb  above  the  three.  Thy  fon,  O  king  of  Morven,  may- 
reft  here  with  heroes  !" 

"  And  here  my  fon  fhall  reft,"  faid  Fingal.  "  The 
voice  of  their  fame  is  in  mine  ears.  Fillan  and  Fergus  I 
bring  hither  Orla;  the  pale  youth  of  the  ftream  of  Lota  1 
Not  unequalled  fhall  Ryno  lie  in  earth,  when  Orla  is  by 
his  fide.  Weep,  ye  daughters  of  Morven !  ye  maids  of 
the  ftreamy  Lota,  weep !  Like  a  tree  they  grew  on  the 
hills.  They  have  fallen  like  the  oak  of  the  defart;  when 
it  lies  acrofs  a  ftream,  and  withers  in  the  wind.  Ofcar  f 
chief  of  every  youth !  thou  feeft  how  they  have  fallen.  Be 
thou,  like  them,  on  earth  renov/ned  :  Like  them,  the 
fong  of  bards.  Terrible  was  their  forms  in  battle  ;  but 
calm  w^as  Ryno  in  the  days  of  peace.  He  was  like  the 
bow  of  the  Ihower  feen  far  diftant  on  the  ftream ;  when, 
the  fun  is  fetting  on  Mora  ;  when  filence  dw^ells  on  the 
hill  of  deer.  Reft,  youngeft  of  my  fons  !  reft,  O  Ryno, 
on  Lena.  We,  too,  Ihall  be  no  more.  Warriors  one  day 
muft  fall !" 

Such  was  thy  grief,  thou  king  of  fwords,  when  Ryno 

lay  on  earth.    What  muft  the  grief  of  Oifian  be,  for  thou 

B  b  thyfelf 


194  F    I    N     G    A    L  : 

thyfelf  art  gone !  I  hear  not  thy  diftant  voice  on  Cona. 
My  eyes  perceive  thee  not.  Often  forlorn  and  dark  I  fit 
at  thy  tomb  ;  and  feel  it  with  my  hands.  When  I  think 
I  hear  thy  voice,  it  is  bur  the  paffing  blaft.  Fingal  has 
long  fince  fallen  aileep,  the  ruler  of  the  war  ! 

Then  Gaul  and  Offian  fat  with  Swaran,  on  the  foft 
green  banks  of  Lubar.  I  touched  the  harp  to  pleafe  the 
king.  But  gloomy  was  his  brew.  He  rolled  his  red  eyeg 
towards  Lena.  The  hero  mourned  his  hoif,  I  raifed  mine 
eyes  to  Cromla's  brow.  I  faw  the  fon  of  generous  Semo. 
Sad  and  flow  he  retired,  from  his  hill,  towards  the  lone- 
ly cave  of  Tura.  He  faw  Fingal  victorious,  and  mixed 
his  joy  with  grief.  The  fun  is  bright  on  his  armour. 
Cannal  flowly  ftrode  behind.  They  funk  behind  the  hilly:, 
like  two  piliars  of  the  fire  of  night ;  when  winds  purfue 
them  over  the  mountain,  and  the  flaming  heath  refoun^.V^ ! 
Befide  a  fl:ream  of  roaring  foam,  his  cave  is  in  a  rock. 
One  tree  bends  above  it.  The  rulhing  winds  echo  againft 
its  fides.  Here  reils  the  chief  of  Erin,  the  fon  of  gene- 
rous Semo.  His  thoughts  are  on  the  battles  he  lofl::  the 
tear  is  on  his  cheek.  He  mourned  the  departure  of  his 
fame,  that  fled  like  the  mifl  of  Cona.  O  Bragela,  thou 
art  too  far  remote,  to  cheer  the  foul  of  the  hero.  But  let 
him  fee  thy  bright  form  in  his  mind ;  that  his  thoughts 
may  return  to  the  lonely  fun-beam  of  his  love ! 

Who  comes  with  the  locks  of  age  ?  It  is  the  fon  of 
fongs.  "  Hail,  Carril  of  other  times !  Thy  voice  is  like 
the  harp  in  the  halls  of  Tura.  Thy  words  are  pleafant  as 
the  ihower,  which  falls  on  the  funny  fic'd.  Carril  of  the 
times  of  old,  why  comeft  thou  from  the  fon  of  the  gene- 
rous Semo  ?" 

"  OoSiAN,  king  of  fwords,"  replied  the  bard,  "  thou 
beft  can  raife  the  fong.  Long  hail  thou  been  known  to 
Carril,  thou  ruler  of  war  !  Often  have  I  touched  the  harp 
to  lovely  Everallin.  Thou,  too,  haft  often  joined  my 
voice  in  Branno's  hall  of  generous  flieils.  And  olten, 
amidft  our  voices,  was  heard  the  mildeft  Everallin.  One 
day  flie  fung  of  Cormac's  fall;  the  youth  who  died  for  her 
love.  I  faw  the  tears  on  her  cheek,  and  on  thine,  thou 
chief  of  men !   Her  foul  was  touched  for  the  unhappy, 

though 


BookV.        An  epic   POEM.  195 

though  {he  loved  him  not.    How  fair,  among  a  thoufand 
maids,  was  the  daughter  of  generous  Branno  !" 

"  Bring  not,  Carril,"  I  replied,  "  bring  not  her  me- 
mory to  my  mind.  My  foul  mull  melt  at  the  remem- 
brance. My  eyes  muft  have  their  tears.  Pale  in  the  earth 
is  fhe,  the  foftly-bkilhing  fair  of  my  love  !  But  fit  thou 
on  the  heath,  O  bard,  and  let  us  hear  thy  voice.  It  is 
pleafant  as  the  gale  of  Ipring,,  that  fighs  on  the  hunter's 
ear;  when  he  awakens  from  dreams  of  joy,  and  has  heard 
the  mufic  of  the  fpirits  of  the  hill !" 


J'INGAL: 


F       I       N       G       A      L 

AN    ANCIENT 

EPIC         POEM. 
BOOK    VI. 


ARGUMENT. 

NIGHT  comes  on,  Fingal  gives  a  feaft  to  his  army,  at  which  Swaraii  is  prefent. 
The  king  commands  UlUn  his  bard  to  give  the  /on  g  of  peace:  a  cuftom  always 
obferved  at  the  end  of  a  war.  Ullin  relates  the  aftions  of  Trenmor,  great 
grandfather  to  Fingal,  in  Scandinavia,  and  his  marriage  with  Inibaca,  the  daugh- 
'  ter  of  a  king  of  Lochlin  who  was  anceftor  to  Swaran  ;  which  confideration,  toge- 
ther with  his  being  brother  to  Agandecca,  with  whom  Fingal  was  in  love  in  his 
youth,  induced  the  king  to  releale  him,  and  permit  him  to  return,  with  the  re- 
mains of  his  army,  into  Lochlin,  upon  his  promife  of  never  returning  to  Ireland, 
in  a  hoftile  manner.  The  night  is  fpent  in  fettling  Swaran's  departure,  in  fongs 
of  bards,  and  in  a  converfation  in  which  the  ftory  of  Grumal  is  introduced  by 
Fingal.  Morning  comes.  Swaian  depaits;  Fingal  goes  on  a  hunting  party,  and 
finding  Cuthullin  in  the  cave  of  Tura,  comforts  him,  and  fets  fail,  the  next  day, 
for  Scotland  ;  which  concludes  the  poem, 

THE  clouds  of  night  came  rolling  down.  Darknefs 
refts  on'  the  fteeps  of  Cromla.  The  ftars  of  the 
north  arife  over  the  rolling  of  Erin's  waves  :  they  fliew 
their  heads  of  fire,  through  th-^  flying  mill  of  heaven. 
A  diftanl  wind  roars  in  the  wood.  Silent  and  dark  is  the 
plain  of  death  !  Still  on  the  dufky  Lena  arofe  in  my  ears 
the  voice  of  Carril.  He  fung  of  the  friends  of  our  youth  ; 
the  days  of  former  years  !  when  we  met  on  the  banks  of 
Lego  ;  when  we  fent  round  the  joy  of  the  lliell.  Cromla 
anfwered  to  his  voice.  The  ghofls  of  thofe  he  fung  came 
in  their  ruftling  winds.  They  were  feen  to  bend  with  joy, 
towards  the  found  of  their  praife  ! 

Be  thy  foul  bleft,  O  Carril,  in  the  midft  of  thy  eddying 
winds.     O  that  thou  wouldit   come  to  my  half,  when  I 

am 


198  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

am  alone  by  night  !  And  thou  dofl:  come,  my  friend^  I 
hear  often  thy  Hght  hand  on  my  harp  ;  when  it  hangs  on 
the  dillant  wall,  and  the  feeble  found  touches  my  ear. 
Why  doil  thou  not  fpeak  to  me  in  my  grief,  and  tell 
when  I  ihall  behold  my  friends  ?  But  thou  pafleft  away 
in  thy  murmuring  blaft  :  the  wind  whidles  through  the 
grey  hair  of  Oflian  ! 

Now,  on  the  fide  of  Mora,  the  heroes  gathered  to  the 
feafl.  A  thoufand  aged  oaks  are  burning  to  the  wind. 
The  ftrength  *  of  the  fliells  goes  round.  The  fouls  of  war- 
riors brighten  with  joy.  But  the  king  of  Lochlin  is  fdent. 
Sorrow  reddens  in  the  eyes  of  his  pride.  He  often  turned 
toward  Lena.  He  remembered  that  he  fell.  Fingal  lean- 
ed on  the  fliield  of  his  fathers.  His  grey  locks  flowly 
waved  on  the  wind,  and  glittered  to  the  beam  of  night. 
He  faw  the  grief  of  Swaran,  and  fpoke  to  the  firft  of  bards. 

"  Raise,  Ullin,  raife  the  fong  of  peace.  O  footh  my 
foul  from  war.  Let  mine  car  forget,  in  the  found,  the 
difmal  noife  of  arms.  Let  a  hundred  harps  be  near  to 
gladden  the  king  of  Lochlin.  He  mufl  depart  from  us 
with  joy.  None  ever  went  fad  from  Fingal.  Ofcar  !  the 
lightning  of  my  fword  is  againil  the  flrong  in  fight : 
peaceful  it  lies  by  my  fide,  when  warriors  yield  in  war.'* 

"  TRENMORf,"  faid  the  mouth  of  fongs,  "  lived  In 
the  days  of  other  years.  He  bounded  over  the  waves  of 
the  north  ;  companion  of  the  ftorm  !  The  high  rocks  of 
the  land  of  Lochlin ;  its  groves  of  murmuring  founds, 
appeared  to  the  hero  through  mill :  he  bound  his  white- 
bofomed  fails.  Trenmor  purfued  the  boar,  that  roared 
through  the  woods  of  Gormal.  Many  had  fled  from  its 
prefence  :  but  it  rolled  in  death  on  the  fpear  of  Trenmor. 
Three  chiefs,  who  beheld  the  deed,  told  of  the  mighty 
flranger.  They  told  that  he  flood,  like  a  pillar  of  fire,  in 
the  bright  arms  of  his  valour.  The  king  of  Lochlin  pre- 
pared 

*  The  ancient  Ccltae  brewed  beer  and  they  were  no  flrangcrs  to  mead.  Several 
ancient  poems  mention  wax-lights  and  wine  as  common  in  the  halls  of  Fingal.  The 
Caledonians  in  their  frequent  incurfions  to  the  province  might  become  acquainted 
with  thofe  conveniences  of  life,  and  introduce  them  into  their  own  country,  among 
the  booty  which  they  carried  from  South  Britain. 

i  Trenmor  was  great  grandfather  to  Fingal.  The  flory  is  introduced  to  facili-  • 
tate  the  uifmiffion  of  Swaran. 


Book  VI.        An   EPIC    POEM.  199 

pared  the  feaft.  He  called  the  blooming  Trenmor.  Three 
days  he  feafled  at  Gormal's  windy  towers  ;  and  received 
his  choice  in  the  combat.  The  land  of  Lochli^  had  no 
hero,  that  yielded  not  to  Trenmor.  The  fhell  of  joy  went 
round  with  fongs,  in  praife  of  the  king  of  Morven  :  he 
that  came  over  the  waves,  the  firft  of  mighty  men  ! 

"  Now  when  the  fourth  grey  morn  arofe,  the  hero 
launched  his  Ihip.  He  walked  along  the  filent  fliore, 
and  called  for  the  rulhing  wind :  For  loud  and  diftant  he 
heard  the  blall  murmuring  behind  the  groves.  Covered 
over  with  arms  of  fteel,  a  fon  of  the  woody  Gormal  ap- 
peared. Red  was  his  cheek,  and  fair  his  hair ;  his  fkin 
like  the  fnow  of  Morven.  Mild  rolled  his  blue  and  fmil- 
in<;  eye,  when  he  fpoke  to  the  king  of  fwords. 

"  Stay,  Trenmor  ;  flay,  thou  firft  of  men  !  thou  hafl 
not  conquered  Lonval's  Ion.  My  fword  has  often  met 
the  brave.  The  wife  fliun  the  ftrength  of  my  bow." 
"  Thou  fair-haired  youth,"  Trenmor  replied,  "  I  will  not 
fight  with  Lonval's  fon.  Thine  arm  is  feeble,  fun-beam 
of  youth.  Retire  to  Gormal's  dark-brown  hinds."  "  But 
I  will  retire,''  replied  the  youth,  "  with  the  fword  of 
Trenmor ;  and  exult  in  the  found  of  my  fame.  The  virgins 
Ihall  gather  with  fmiles  around  him  who  conquered  migh- 
ty Trenmor.  They  ihall  figh  with  the  fighs  of  love,  and 
admire  the  length  of  thy  fpear;  when  I  (hall  carry  it  among 
thoufands  4  when  I  lift  the  glittering  point  to  the  fun." 

"  Thou  (halt  never  carry  my  fpear,"  faid  the  angry 
king  of  Morven.  "  Thy  mother  fhall  find  thee  pale  on  tlie 
fhore;  and  looking  over  the  dark-blue  deep,  fee  the  fails  of 
him  that  flew  her  fon  !"  "  I  will  not  lift  the  fpear,"  replied 
the  youth,  "  my  arm  is  not  flrong  with  years.  But,  with 
the  feathered  dart,  I  have  learned  to  pierce  a  diftant  foe. 
Throw  down  that  heavy  mail  of  fteel.  Trenmor  is  cover- 
ed from  death.  I,  firft,  will  lay  my  mail  on  earth.  Throw- 
now  thy  dart,  thou  king  of  Morven!"  He  faw  the  heaving 
of  her  breaft.  It  was  the  fifter  of  the  king.  She  had  feen 
him  in  the  hall ;  and  loved  his  face  of  youth.  The  fpear 
dropt  from  the  hand  of  Trenmor :  he  bent  his  red  cheek 
to  the  ground.    She  was  to  him  a  beam  of  light  that 

meets 


200  F    I    N    G    A    L  : 

meets  the  fons  of  the  cave;  when  they  revlfit  the  fields  of 
the  fun,  and  bend  their  aching  eyes  ! 

"  Chief  of  the  windy  Morven,"  begun  the  maid  of 
the  arms  of  fnow.  "  Let  me  reft  in  thy  boundinc^  fhip, 
far  from  the  love  of  Corlo.  For  he,  like  the  thunder  of 
the  defart,  is  terrible  to  Inibaca.  He  loves  me  in  the 
gloom  of  pride.  He  fnakes  ten  thoufand  fpears  !"  "  Reft 
thou  in  peace,"  faid  the  mighty  Trenmor,  "  reft  behind 
the  lliield  of  my  fathers.  I  will  not  fly  from  the  chief, 
though  he  fhakes  ten  thoufand  fpears  \"  Three  days  he 
waited  on  the  fhore.  He  fent  his  horn  abroad.  He  called 
Corlo  to  battle,  from  all  his  echoing  hills.  But  Corlo 
came  not  to  battle.  The  king  of  Lochlin  defcends  from 
his  hall.  He  feafted  on  the  roaring  fhore.  He  gave  the 
maid  to  Trenmor  !" 

"  King  of  Lochlin,"  faid  Fingal,  "  thy  blood  flows  in 
the  veins  of  thy  foe.  Our  fathers  met  in  battle,  becaufe 
they  loved  the  ftrife  of  fpears.  But  often  did  they  feaft 
in  the  hall,  and  fend  round  the  joy  of  the  fhell.  Let  thy 
face  brighten  with  gladnefs,  and  thine  ear  delight  in  the 
harp.  Dreadful  as  the  ftorm  of  thine  ocean,  thou  haft 
poured  thy  valour  forth  ;  thy  voice  has  been  like  the 
voice  of  thoufands  when  they  engage  in  war.  Raife, 
to-morrow,  raife  thy  white  fails  to  the  v/ind,  thou  brother 
of  Agandecca  !  Bright  as  the  beam  of  noon,  flie  comes 
on  my  mournful  foul.  I  have  feen  thy  tear^  for  the  fair 
one.  I  fpared  thee  in  the  halls  of  Starno ;  when  my 
fword  was  red  with  flaughter ;  when  my  eye  was  full  of 
tears  for  the  maid.  Or  doft  thou  choofe  the  fight  ?  The 
combat  which  thy  fathers  gave  to  Trenmor  is  thine  !  that' 
thou  mayeft  depart  renowned,  like  the  fun  fetting  in  the 
w^eft !" 

"  King  of  the  race  of  Morven,"  faid  the  chief  of  re- 
founding  Lochlin  !  "  never  will  Swaran  fight  with  thee, 
firft  of  a  thoufand  heroes !  I  have  feen  thee  in  the  halls  of 
Starno  :  few  were  thy  years  beyond  my  own.  When 
fhall  Ij  I  faid  to  my  foul,  lift  the  fpear  like  the  noble  Fin- 
gal ?  We  have  fought  heretofore,  O  warrior,  on  the  fide 
of  the  fliaggy  Maimer;  after  my  waves  had  carried  me  to 
thy  halls,  and  the  feall  of  a  thoufaud  iliells  wa^  fpread. 

Let 


Book  VI.        An  EPIC   POEM.  201 

Let  the  bards  fend  his  name  who  overcame  to  future 
years,  for  noble  was  the  ftrife  of  Malmor  !  But  many  of 
the  fliips  of  Lochlin  have  loll  their  youths  on  Lena.  Take 
thefe,  thou  king  of  Morven,  and  be  the  friend  of  Swaran! 
When  thy  fons  Hiall  come  to  Gormal,  the  feafl:  of  lliells 
ihall  be  fpread,  and  the  combat  offered  on  the  vale." 

"  Nor  fliip,"  replied  the  king,  "  fhall  Fingal  take,  nor 
land  of  many  hills.  The  defart  is  enough  to  me,  with 
all  its  deer  and  woods.  Rife  on  thy  wives  agnin,  thou 
noble  friend  of  Agandecca.  Spread  thy  white  fails  to  die 
beam  of  the  morning;  return  to  the  echoing  hills  of  Gor- 
mal." "  Bleft  be  dry  foul,  thou  king  of  fliells,"  faid 
Swaran  of  the  dark  brown-fliield.  In  peace  thou  art  the 
gale  of  fpring  ;  in  war,  the  mountain  ftorm.  Take  now 
my  hand  in  friendlhip,  king  of  echoing  Selma  !  Let  thy 
bards  mourn  thofe  who  fell.  Let  Erin  give  the  fons  of 
Lochlin  to  earth.  Raife  high  the  moffy  ftones  of  their 
fame;  that  the  children  of  the  north  hereafter  may  behold 
the  place  where  their  fathers  fought :  the  hunter  may 
fay,  when  he  leans  on  a  moffy  tomb.  Here  Fingal  and 
Swaran  fought,  the  heroes  of  other  years.  Thus  hereafter 
Ihall  he  fay,  and  our  fame  fhall  laft  for  ever !" 

"  Swaran,"  faid  the  king  of  hills,  "  to-day  our  fame 
is  greateft.  We  fhall  pafs  away  like  a  dream.  No  found 
will  remain  in  our  fields  of  war.  Our  tombs  will  be  loft 
in  the  heath.  The  hunter  fhall  not  know  the  place  of 
our  reft.  Our  names  may  be  heard  in  fong  :  what 
avails  it,  when  our  flrength  hath  ceafed  ?  O  Offian,  Car- 
,  ril,  and  UUin,  you  know  of  heroes  that  are  no  more. 
Give  us  the  fong  of  other  years.  Let  the  night  pafs  away 
on  the  found,  and  morning  return  with  joy." 

We  gave  the  fong  to  the  kings.  An  hundred  harps 
mixed  their  found  with  our  voice.  The  face  of  Swaran 
brightened,  like  the  full  moon  of  heaven;  when  the  clouds 
vanifh  away,  and  leave  her  calm  and  broad  in  the  midft 
of  the  iky ! 

"  Where,  Carril,"  faid  the  great  Fingal,  "  Carril  of 

other  times  !  where  is  the  fon  of  Semo  ?  the  king  of  the 

ifle  of  mift?  Has  he  retired,  hke  the  meteor  of  death,  to  the 

dreary  cave  of  Tura  ?"  "  Cuthuilin,"  faid  Carril  of  other 

C  c  times. 


202  I:'     I     N     G     A.    L  : 

times,  "  lies  in  the  dreary  cave  of  Tura.  His  hand  is  on 
the  fvvord  of  his  llrength  ;  his  thoughts,  on  the  battles  he 
loft.  Mournful  is  the  king  of  fpears  ;  till  now  uncon- 
qnered  in  war.  He  lends  his  fword  to  reft  on  the  fide  of 
Fingal :  For,  like  the  ftorm  of  the  defart,  thou  haft  fcat- 
tered  all  liis  foes.  Take,  O  Fingal,  the  fword  of  the  hero. 
His  fame  is  departed  like  mift,  when  it  flies,  before  the 
ruftling  wind,  along  the  brightening  vale." 

"  No  :"  replied  the  king,  "  Fingal  ftiall  never  take  his 
fword.  His  arm  is  mighty  in  war  :  his  fame  ftiall  never 
fail.  Many  have  been  overcome  in  battle;  whofe  renown 
arofe  from  their  fall.  O  Swaran,  king  of  refounding 
woods,  give  all  thy  grief  away.  The  vanquiftied,  if  brave, 
are  renowned.  They  are  like  the  fun  in  a  cloud,  when 
he  hides  his  face  in  the  fouth,  but  looks  again  on  the 
hills  of  grafs  ! 

"  Grumal  was  a  chief  of  Cona.  He  fought  the  battle 
on  evei-y  coaft.  His  foul  rejoiced  in  blood;  his  ear,  in  the 
din  of  arms.  He  poured  his  warriors  on  Craca:  Craca's 
king  ir.et  him  from  his  grove  ;  for  then  within  the  circle 
of  Brumo  *,  he  fpoke  to  the  ftone  of  power.  Fierce  wlis 
the  battle  of  the  heroes,  for  the  maid  of  the  breaft  of  fnow. 
The  fame  of  the  daughter  of  Craca  had  reached  Grumal  at 
the  ftreams  of  Cona:  he  vowed  to  have  the  white-bofom- 
ed  m.aid,  or  die  on  echoing  Craca.  Three  days  they  ilrove 
together,  and  Grumal  on  the  fourth  was  bound.  Far 
from  his  friends  they  placed  him,  in  the  horrid  circle  of 
Brumo;  where  often,  they  faid,  the  ghofts  of  the  dead 
hov.'ied  round  the  ftone  of  their  fear.  But  he  afterwards 
flione,  like  a  pillar  of  the  light  of  heaven.  They  fell  by 
his  mighty  hand.     Grumal  had  all  his  fame ! 

"  Raise,  ye  bards  of  other  times,"  continued  the  great 
Fingal,  "  raile  high  the  praife  of  heroes :  that  my  foul 
may  fettle  on  their  fame ;  that  the  mind  of  Swaran  may 
ceafe  to  be  fad."  They  lay  in  the  heath  of  Mora.  The 
dark  winds  ruftled  over  the  chiefs.  A  hundred  voices, 
at  once,  arofe:  a  hundred  harps  were  ftrung.  They  fung 
of  other  times;  the  mighty  chiefs  of  former  years!  When 
nov/  iliall  I  hear  the  bard  ?    When  rejoice  at  the  fame  ot 

mv 

■  *  This  pafTagc  alludes  to  the  religion  of  the  king  of  Craca. 


Book  VI.        An  EPIC    POEM.  203 

my  fathers  ?  The  harp  is  nvot  ftrimg  on  Morven.  The 
voice  of  mufic  afcends  not  on  Cona.  Dead,  with  the 
mighty,  is  the  bard.     Fame  is  in  the  defart  no  more. 

Morning  trembles  with  the  beam  of  the  eaft;  it  glim- 
mers on  Cromda's  fide.  Over  Lena  is  heard  the  horn  of 
Swaran.  The  fons  of  the  ocean  gather  around.  Silent 
and  fad  they  rife  on  the  wave.  The  blaft  of  Erin  is  be- 
hind their  fails.  White,  as  the  mill  of  Morven.  they 
float  along  the  fea.  "  Call,"  faid  Fingal,  "  call  ray  dogs, 
the  long-bounding  fons  of  the  chace.  Call  white-breafted 
Bran  and  the  furly  ftrength  of  Luath  !  Fillan,  and  Ryno 
— but  he  is  not  here!  My  fon  reds  on  the  bed  of  death— 
Fillan  and  Fergus !  blow  the  horn,  that  the  joy  of  the 
chace  may  arife ;  that  the  deer  of  Cromla  may  hear  and 
ftart  at  the  lake  of  roes." 

The  fhrill  found  fpreads  along  the  wood.  The  fons  of 
heathy  Cromla  arife.  A  thouiand  dogs  fly  off  at  once, 
grey-bounding  through  the  heath.  A  deer  fell  by  every 
dog;  three  by  the  white-breafted  Bran.  He  brought  them, 
in  their  flight,  to  Fingal,  that  the  joy  of  the  king  might 
be  great!  One  deer  fell  at  the  tomb  of  Ryno.  The  grief 
of  Fingal  returned.  Fie  faw  how  peaceful  lay  the  itone 
of  him,  who  was  the  firft  at  the  chace  !  "  No  more  flialt 
thou  rife,  O  my  fon,  to  partake  of  the  feaft  of  Cromla. 
Soon  will  thy  tomb  be  hid,  and  the  grafs  grow  rank  on 
thy  grave.  The  fons  of  the  feeble  fliall  pafs  along.  They 
(hall  not  know  where  tfee  mighty  lie. 

"  OssiAN  and  Fillan,  fons  of  my  ftrength!  Gaul,  chief 
of  the  blue  fteel  of  war!  let  us  afcend  the  hill  to  the  cave* 
of  Tura.  Let  us  find  the  chief  of  the  battles  of  Erin. 
Are  thefe  the  walls  of  Tura  ?  Grey  and  lonely  they  rile 
on  the  heath.  The  chief  of  fhells  is  fad,  and  the  halls  are 
filent  and  lonely.  Come,  let  us  find  CuthuUin,  and  give 
him  all  our  joy.  But  is  that  Cuthullin,  O  Fillan,  or  a 
pillar  of  fmoke  on  the  heath  ?  The  wind  of  Cromla  is  on 
my  eyes.     I  diftinguilli  not  my  friend." 

'•  Fingal  !"  replied  the  youth,  "  it  is  the  fon  of  Se- 
mo  !  Gloomy  and  fad  is  the  hero  !  his  hand  is  on  his 
fword.  Flail  to  the  fon  of  battle,  breaker  of  the  flnclds?" 
"  Hail. to  thee,"  replied  Cuthullin,  "  hail  to  all  the  fons 

of 


204  F    I    N    G    A    L: 

of  Morven  !  Delightful  is  thy  prefence,  O  Fingal :  it  is 
the  fun  on  Cromla  when  the  hunter  mourns  his  abfence 
for  a  feafon,  and  fees  him  between  the  clouds.  Thy  fons 
aie  like  ilars  that  attend  thy  courfe.  They  give  light  in 
the  night.  It  is  not  thus  thou  haft  feen  me,  O  Fingal, 
returning  from  the  wars  of  thy  land  ;  v/hen  the  kings  of 
the  world*  had  fled,  and  joy  returned  to  the  hill  of 
hinds  1"  "  Many  are  thy  words,  Cuthullin,"  faid  Con- 
nan  f  of  fmaW  renown.  "  Thy  words  are  many,  fon  of 
Semo,  but  where  are  thy  deeds  in  arms  ?  Why  did  we 
come,  over  ocean,  to  aid  thy  feeble  fword  ?  Thou  flieft 
to  thy  cave  of  grief,  and  Connan  fights  thy  battles.  Re- 
fign  to  me  thefe  arms  of  light.  Yield  them,  thou  chief  of 
Erin!'*  "  No  hero,"  replied  the  chief,  "  ever  fought  the 
arms  of  Cuthullin  ;  and  had  a  thoufand  heroes  fought 
them,  it  were  in  vain,  thou  gloomy  youth !  I  fled  not  to 
the  cave  of  grief,  till  Erin  failed  at  her  ftreams." 

"  Youth  of  the  feeble  arm,"  faid  Fingal,  "  Connan, 
ceafe  thy  words  !  Cuthullin  is  renowned  in  battle ;  terri. 
ble  over  the  world.  Often  have  I  heard  thy  fame,  thou 
ftormy  chief  of  Inis-fail.  Spread  now  thy  white  fails  for 
the  ifle  of  mift.  .See  Brage'ia  leaning  on  her  rock.  Her 
tender  eye  is  in  tears ;  the  winds  lift  her  long  hair  from 
her  heaving  br^aft.  She  iiftens  to  the  breeze  of  night, - 
to  hear  the  voice  of  thy  rowers  || ;  to  hear  the  fong  of  the- 
fea  !  the  found  of  thy  diftant  harp  !"  '' 

*'  Long  fliall  die  liften  in  vain.     Cuthullin  fhall  never 
return !    How  can  I  behold  Bragela,  to  raife  the  figh  of  . 
her  breaft  ?  Fingal,  I  was  always  victorious,  in  battles  of  p 
other  fpears!"   "  And  hereafter  thou  flialt  be  vidorious,'*   ' 
faid  Fingal  of  generous  fliells.     "  The  fame  of  Cuthullin 
fhall  grow,  like  the  branchy  tree  of  Cromla.     Many  bat- 
tles await  thee,  O  chief !    Many  Hiall  be  the  wounds  of 

thy  I 

*  This  is  the  only  p^ffprje  in  the  poem,  wherein  the  wars  of  Fingal  againft  the  } 
Romans  are  alluded  to:  the  Roman  emperor  is  diflinguifted  inoldcompofitions  by  i 
the  title  of  kivg  of  the  wor/d.  I 

+  Connan  was  of  the  f.imily  of  Morni.     He  is  mentioned  in  feveral  other    ; 
poems,  and  always  appears  in  the  fame  charafter.     The  poet  pafTed  him  over  m 
filence  till  now,  and  his  beha.iour  here  deferves  no  better  ufage. 

11  The  prattrce  of  finging  when  t'ley  tow  is  univerfal  among  the  inhabitants  of 
the  no.thwefl  coaft  of  Scotland  and  the  iflcs.  It  Receives  time,  and  infpirits  the 
lowers ,  « 


BookVI.        An   epic   POEM.  205 

thy  hand  !  Bring  hither,  Ofcar,  the  deer  !  Prepare  the 
1  feaft  of  fliells.  Let  our  fouls  rejoice  after  danger,  and  our 
I   friends  dehght  in  our  prefence  !'* 

i  W^  fat.  We  feadcd.  We  fung.  The  foul  of  Cuthul- 
j  lin  rofe.  The  ftrength  of  his  arm  returned.  Gladnefs 
i  brightened  along  his  face.  Ullin  gave  the  fong  ;  Carril 
i  railed  the  voice.  I  joined  the  bards,  and  fung  of  battles 
I  of  the  fpear.  Battles !  where  I  often  fought.  Now  I  fight 
I  no  more !  The  fame  of  my  former  deeds  is  ceafed.  I  fit 
I   forlorn  at  the  tombs  of  my  friends ! 

Thus  the  night  paiTed  away  in  fong.     We  brought 

back  the  morning  with  joy.  Fingal  arofe  on  the  heath, 
I  and  fhook  his  glittering  fpear.  He  moved  firft  toward 
'    the  plains  of  Lena.     We  followed  in  all  our  arms. 

"  Spread  the  fail,"  faid  the  king,  "  feize  the  winds  as 

they  pour  from  Lena."  We  rofe  on  the  wave  with  fongs. 
p  We  rufhed,  with  joy,  through  the  foam  of  the  deep. 


LATHMON: 


L     A     T     H     M     O     N 


POEM. 


r 


ARGUMENT. 

LATHMON,  a  Eritifh  prince,  taking  advantage  of  Fingal's  abfence  on  an  expe 
ilition  in  Ireland,  made  a  defcent  on  Morven,  and  advanced  within  fight  of  St'i- 
ma,  the  royal  refidence.  Fingal  arrived  in  the  mean  time,  and  Lathmon  re- 
treated to  a  hill,  where  his  army  was  furprized  by  night,  and  himfelf  taken  pri- 
foner  by  Oflian  and  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni.  7"he  poem  opens  with  the  fiift 
appearance  of  Fingal  on  the  coaft  of  Morven,  and  ends,  it  may  be  fuppofcdj 
dbout  noon  the  next  day. 


L     A     T     H     M     O     N 


P  O  E  xM. 

SELMA,  thy  halls  are  filent.  There  Is  no  found  in 
ihe  woods  of  Morven.  The  wave  tumbles  alone  on 
the  coaft.  The  filent  beam  of  the  fun  is  on  the  field. 
The  daughters  of  Morven  come  forth,  like  the  bow  of 
the  fhower ;  they  look  towards  green  Erin  for  the  white 
fails  of  the  king.  He  had  promiled  to  return,  but  the 
winds  of  the  north  arofe. 

Who  pours  from  the  eaftern  hill,  like  a  ftream  of  dark- 
nefs  ?  It  is  the  hofl  of  Lathmon.  He  has  heard  of  tli« 
abfence  of  Fingal.  He  trufis  in  the  wind  of  the  north  : 
his  foul  brightens  with  joy.  Why  dcfl  thou  come,  O 
Lathmon  ?  The  mighty  are  not  in  Selma,  Why  comeft 
thou  with  thy  forward  fpear  ?  will  the  daughters  of  Mor- 
ven fight  ^  But  ftop,  O  mighty  flreara,  in  thy  courle  ! 
Does  not  Lathmon  behold  thefe  fails  ?  Why  doft  thou 
vaniih,  Lathm.on,  like  the  mill  of  the  lake  ?  But  the 
fqually  florm  is  behind  thee  :  Fingal  purfues  thy  iteps  ! 

The  king  of  Morven  had  darted  from  fleep,  as  we 
rolled  on  the  dark-blue  wave.  He  ftretched  his  hand  to 
his  fpear  ;  his  heroes  rofe  around.  We  knew  that  he  had 
feen  his  fathers ;  for  they  often  defcended  to  his  dreams, 
when  the  fword  of  the  foe  rofe  over  the  land,  and  the: 
battle  darkened  before  us.  "  Whither  haft  thou  fled,  O 
wind  ?"  faid  the  king  of  Morven.  "  Doft  thou  ruftle  in 
the  chambers  of  the  fouth  ?  Purfueft  thou  the  (liower  in 
other  lands  ?  Why  doft  thou  not  come  to  my  fails  ?  to 
the  blue  face  of  my  feas  ?  The  foe  is  in  the  land  of  Mor- 
ven, and  the  king  is  abfent  far.  But  let  each  bind  on 
his  mail,  and  each  affame  his  ftiield.  Stretch  every  fpear 
over  the  wave ;  let  every  fword  be  unfheathed.  Lathmon  * 
Dd  is 

*  It  is  faid  by  tradition,  that  it  w?s  the  intelligence  of  Lathmon's  invafion,  thaC 
occalioned  Fingal's  return  from  Ireland ;  though  Ofiian,  more  poetically,  afcribes 
the  caufe  of  Fingal's  knowledge  to  his  dream. 


210  L    A    T    H    M    O    N: 

is  before  us  with  his  hoft  ;  he  that  fled*  from  Fingal  on 
the  plains  of  Loiia.  But  he  returns,  like  a  colle6:ed 
ilream,-  and  his  roar  is  between  our  hills.'* 

Such  were  the  words  of  Fingal.  We  rulhed  into  Car- 
mona's  bay.  Offian  afcended  the  hill.  He  thrice  flruck 
his  boify  fhield.  The  rocks  of  Morven  replied  ;  the 
bounding  roes  came  forth.  The  foe  was  troubled  in  my 
prefence  :  he  colle'3:ed  his  darkened  hoft.  I  ftood,  like  a 
cloud,  on  the  hill,  rejoicing  in  the  arms  of  my  youth. 

MoRNif  fat  beneath  a  tree,  at  the  roaring  waters  of 
Stf union  [].-  His  locks  of  age  are  grey  :  he  leans  forward 
on  his  ilafF.  Young  Gaul  is  near  the  hero,  hearing  the 
battles  of  his  father.  Often  did  he  rife,  in  the  fire  of  his 
foul,  at  the  mighty  deeds  of  Monii,  The  aged  heard  the 
found  of  Oflian's  fhield  :  he  knew  the  fign  of  war.  He 
ftarted  at  once  from  his  place.  His  grey  hair  parted  on 
his  back.    He  remembered  the  deeds  of  other  years. 

"  My  fon,"  he  faid  to  the  fair-haired  Gaul,  "  I  hear 
the  found  of  war.  The  king  of  Morven  is  returned,  his 
fignals  are  fpread  on  the  wind.  Go  to  the  halls  of  Stru- 
mon  ;  bring  his  arms' to  Morni.  Bring  the  fhield  of  my 
father's  latter  years,  for  my  arm  begins  to  fail.  Take 
thou  thy  armour,  O  Gaul ;  and  rufii  to  the  firft  of  thy 
battles.  Let  thine  arm  reach  to  the  renown  of  thy  fathers. 
Be  thy  courfe,  in  the  field,  like  the  eagle's  wing.  Why 
fhouldf!  thou  fear  death,  my  fon  ?  The  valiant  fall  with 
fame  ;  their  fhields  turn  the  dark  ftrcam  of  danger  away; 
renown  dwells  on  their  aged  hairs.  Doft  thou  not  fee, 
()  Gaul,  how  the  fleps  of  my  age  are  honoured  ?  Morni 
moves  forth,  and  the  young  meet  him  with  awe,  and 
turn  their  eyes,  with  filent  joy,  on  his  courfe.  But  I  never 
fled  from  danger,  my  fon  I  my  fword  lightened  through 
the  darknefs  of  war.  The  ftranger  melted  before  me;  the' 
mighty  were  blafted  in  my  prefence." 

Gaui. 

*  He  alkidcs  to  a  battle  wherein  Fineal  had  defeated  Lathmoii. 

+  Morni  was  chief  of  a  numerous  tribe,  in  the  days  of  Fingal,  and  his  father 
Coinhal.  The  laft  mentioned  hero  was  killed  in  battle  againil  Morni's  tribe ;  but. 
the  valour  and  condutl  of  Fingal  reduced  them,  at  laft,  to  obedience.  We  find 
the  two  heroes  perfectly  reconciled  in  this  poem. 

Ij  Stru'-mone.  J! ream  of  the  hiil,  fleje  the  proper  name  of  a  rivulet  -a  tha 
neighbourhood  of  Seima. 


A     P  O  E  M.  211 

Gaul  brought  the  arms  to  Morni :  the  aged  warrior 
is  covered  with  Heel.  He  took  the  fpcar  in  his  hand, 
•which  was  itained  with  the  blood  of  the  valiant.  He  came 
towards  Fingal ;  his  fon  attended  his  fteps.  The  fon  of 
Comhal  arole  before  him  with  joy,  when  he  came  in  his 
locks  of  age. 

*'  Chief  of  roaring  Strumon!"  faid  the  rifing  foul  of 
Fingal,  • "  do  I  behold  thee  in  arms,  after  thy  ftrongih  has 
failed  ?  Often  has  lyLorni  fhone  in  fight,  like  the  beam  of 
the  afcending  fun ;  when  he  difperfes  the  florms  of  the 
'hill,  and  brings  peace  to  the  glittering  fields.  But  why 
didlt  thou  not  reft  in  thine  age  ?  Thy  renown  is  in  the 
fong.  The  people  behold  thee,  and  blefs  the  departure 
of  mighty  Morni.  Why  didft  thou  not  refl  in  thine  age? 
The  foe  will  vanifli  before  Fingal  i" 

"  Son  of  Comhal,"  replied  the  chief,  "  the  firength 
of  Morni's  arm  has  failed.  I  attempt  to  draw  the  fword 
of  my  youth,  but  it  remains  in  its  place.  I  throw  the 
fpear,  but  it  falls  ihort  of  the  mark.  I  feel  the  weight  of 
my  fliield.  We  decay  like  the  grafs  of  the  hill :  our 
ftrength  returns  no  more.  I  have  a  fon,  O  Fingal :  his 
foul  has  delighted  in  Morni's  deeds ;  but  his  fword  has 
not  been  lifted  againft  a  foe,  neither  has  his  fame  begun, 
I  come  with  him  to  war  ;  to  direft  his  arm  in  fight.  His 
renown  will  be  a  light  to  my  foul,  in  the  dark  hour  of  my 
departure.  O  that  the  name  of  Morni  were  forgot  among 
the  people  !  that  the  heroes  would  only  fay,  Behold  the 
father' of  Gaul  1" 

"  King  of  Strumon,"  Fingal  replied,  "  Gaul  fliall  lift 
the  fword  in  fight.  But  he  fliall  lift  it  before  Fingal;  my 
arm  fhall  defend  his  youth.  But  reft  thou  in  the  halls  of 
Selma  ;  and  hear  of  our  renown.  Bid  the  harp  to  be 
ftrung,  and  the  voice  of  the  bard  to  arife ;  that  thofe 
who  fall  may  rejoice  in  their  fam£;  and  the  foul  of  Morni 
brighten  with  joy.  Offian !  thou  haft  fought  in  battles  : 
the  blood  of  ftrangers  is  on  thy  fpear:  thy  courfe  be  with 
Gaul,  in  the  ftrife ;  but  depart  not  from  the  fide  of  Fin- 
gal!  left  the  foe  fliould  find  you  alone,  and  your  faiiue 
fall  in  my  prefence." 

I  SAW 


212  L    A    T    H    M    O    N: 

I  SAW*  Gaul  in  his  arms:  my  foul  was  mixed  with  his. 
The  fire  of  the  batile  was  m  his  eyes!  he  looked  to  the  foe 
with  joy.  We  fpoke  the  words  of  friendlhip  in  fecret : 
the  lightning  of  cur  iwords  poured  together;  for  we  drew 
them  behind  the  wood,  and  tried  the  Ilrength  of  our  arms 
on  the  empty  air. 

Night  came  down  on  Morven.  Fingal  fat  at  the  beam 
of  the  oak.  Morni  fat  by  his  fide,  with  all  his  grey  wav- 
ing locks.  Their  words  were  of  other  times,  of  the  migh- 
ty deeds  of  their  fathers.  Three  bards,  at  tiipes,  touched 
the  harp  :  Ulliii  was  near  with  his  fong.  He  fung  of  the 
mig-ity  Comhal ;  but  darknefs  gathered  -|-  on  Morni's 
brow.  He  rolled  his  red  eye  on  Ullin :  at  once  ceafed 
the  long  of  the  bard.  Fingal  obferved  the  aged  hero,  and 
he  mildly  fpoke.  "  Chief  of  Strumon,  why  that  dark- 
nefs? Let  the  days  of  other  years  be  forgot.  Our  fathers 
contended  in  war ;  but  we  meet  together  at  the  feaft. 
Our  fwords  are  turned  on  the  foe  of  our  land :  he  melts 
before  us  on  the  field.  Let  the  days  of  our  fathers  be 
forgot,  hero  of  molTy  Strumon  !" 

"  King  of  Morven,"  replied  the  chief,  "  I  remember 
thy  father  with  joy.  He  was  terrible  in  battle:  the  rage 
of  the  chief  was  deadly.  ,  My  eyes  were  full  of  tears,  when 
the  king  of  heroes  fell.  The  valiant  fall,  O  Fingal !  the 
feeble  remain  on  the  hills!  How  many  heroes  have  palfed 
away,  in  the  days  of  Morni !  Yet  I  did  not  fhun  the 
battle;  neither  did  I  fiy  from  the  ftrife  of  the  valiant.  Now 
let  the  fi lends  of  Fingal  reft;  for  the  night  is  around; 
that  thei»/  may  rife,  with  Ilrength,  to  battle  againft  car- 
boxne  Lathmon.  I  hear  the  found  of  his  hoft,  like  thun- 
der moving  on  the  hills.  Oflian  !  and  fair-haired  Gaul! 
ye  are  young  and  fwift  in  the  race ;  obferve  the  foes  of 
Fingal  from  that  woody  hill.     But  approach  them  not ; 

your 

*  Offian  fpeaks.  The  contrpft  between  the  old  and  young  heroes  is  ftrongly 
maiked.  T!  e  circurnflance  oi  the  latter's  drawing  their  fwords  is  well  imaginecl, 
and  agrees  wuh  \he  impatience  cf  young  foldiers,  juft  entered  upon  aftion. 

+  Ulhu  Irid  chofen  ill  the  luLjecl  oi  his  long.  The  darknefs  winch  gathered  on 
Morni's  li .  v  did  not  proceed  irom  any  diflike  he  had  to  Comhal's  name,  though 
they  v.vre  Foes,  but  from  his  fear  that  the  fong  would  awaken  Fingal  to  a  remem- 
brance of  the  feuds  which  had  iubfifted  of  old  between  the  families.  FingaP? 
fpeech  on  this  occafion  abounds  with  generofity  and  good  fcnfe. 


A    POEM. 


213 


your  fathers  are  not  near  to  fhleld  you.     Let  not  your 

:  fame  fall  at  once.     The  valour  of  youth  may  fail  1" 

I       Wj£  heard  the  words  of  the  chief  with  joy.    We  moved 

i  in  the  clang  of  our  arms.     Our  fleps  are  on  the  woody 

1  hill.     Heaven  burns  with  all  its  liars.     The  meteors  of 

death  fly  over   the  field.     The  diflant  noife  of  the  foe 

reached  our  ears.    It  v.^as  then  Gaul  fpoke,  in  his  valour: 

his  hand  half-unflieathed  the  fword. 

f       *'  Son  of  Fingal,"  he  faid,  "  why  burns  the  foul  of 

i  Gaul  ?    My  heart  beats  high  ;    my  fleps  are  difordered ; 

my  hand  trembles  on  my  fword.     When  I  look  towards 

the  foe,  my  foul  lightens  before  me.     I  fee  their  fleeping 

hoft.     Tremble  thus  the  fouls  of  the  valiant  in  battles  of 

the  fpear?  How  would  the  foul  of  Morni  rife  if  we  fhould 

I  ruili  on  the  foe !    Our  renown  would  grow  in  fong :  our 

fteps  would  be  (lately  in  the  eyes  of  the  brave." 

**■  Son  of  Morni,"  I  replied,  "  my  foul  delights  in  war, 
I  delight  to  iliine  in  battle  alone,  to  give  my  name  to  the 
bards.  But  what  if  the  foe  ftiould  prevail  ?  can  I  behold 
the  eyes  of  the  king?  They  are  terrible  in  his  difpleafure, 
and  like  the  flames  of  death.  But  I  will  not  behold  them 
in  his  wrath  !  Ofllan  ftiall  prevail  or  fall.  But  ihall  the 
fame  of  the  vanquilhed  rife?  They  pafs  like  a  fliade  away. 
But  the  fame  of  Oflran  {hall  rife !  His  deeds  fiiall  be  like 
his  fathers.  Let  us  rufli  in  our  arms,  fon  of  Morni ;  let 
us  rufli  to  fight.  Gaul !  if  thou  fliouldfl:  return,  go  to 
Selma's  lofty  hall.  Tell  to  Everallin  that  I  fell  with  fame; 
carry  this  fword  to  Branno's  daughter.  Let  her  give  it  to 
Ofcar,  when  the  years  of  his  youth  Ihall  arife." 

"  Son  of  Fingal,"  Gaul  replied  with  a  figh  ;  "  fliall  I 
return  after  Ofiian  is  low  ?  What  would  my  father  fay  ? 
what  Fingal,  the  king  of  men  ?  The  feeble  would  turn 
their  eyes  and  fay,  "  Behold  Gaul,  who  left  his  friend  in 
his  blood!"  Ye  {hall  not  behold  me,  ye  feeble,  but  in  the 
midfl  of  my  renov/n.  0{rian  !  I  have  heard  from  my  fa- 
ther the  mighty  deeds  of  heroes;  their  mighty  deeds  when 
alone ;  for  the  foul  increafes  in  danger." 

"  Son  of  Morni,"  I  replied,  and  llrode  before  him  on 
the  heath,  "  our  fathers  {liall  praife  our  valour  when  they 
mourn  our  fall.     A  beam  of  gladnefs  ihd.l\  rife  on  their 

fouls. 


214  L    A    T    H    M    0    N: 

fouls,  when  their  eyes  are  full  of  tears.  They  will  far, 
"  Our  fons  have  not  fallen  unknown :  they  fpread  der.th 
around  them."  But  why  fliould  we  think  of  the  narrow 
houfe  ?  The  fword  defends  the  brave :  but  death  purfues 
the  flight  of  the  feeble  ;  their  renown  is  never  heard." 

We  ruflied  forward  through  night;  we  came  to  the  roar 
of  a  ftream,  which  bent  its  blue  courfe  round  the  foe, 
through  trees  that  echoed  to  its  found.  We  came  to  the 
bank  of  the  flream,  and  faw  the  fleeping  hoft.  Their  fires 
were  decayed  on  the  plain;  the  lonely  fleps  of  their  fcouts 
were  diftant  far.  I  flretched  my  fpear  before  me  to  fup- 
porc  my  fteps  over  the  ftream.  But  Gaul  took  my  hand, 
and  fpoke  the  words  of  the  brave  :  "  Shall  the  fon  of 
Fingal  rufli  on  the  keeping  foe?  Shall  he  come  like  a  blaft 
by  night,  when  it  overtures  the  young  trees  in  fecret  ? 
Fingal  did  not  thus  receive  his  fame,  nor  dwells  renown 
on  .the"  grey  hairs  of  Morni,  for  actions  like  thefe.  Strike. 
Offian,  ftrike  the  fhield,  and  let  their  thoufands  rife.  I.ct 
them  meet  Gaul  in  his  firfl  battle,  that  he  may  try  the 
ftrength  of  his  arm." 

My  foul  rejoiced  over  the  warrior :  my  burfting  tears 
came  dov/n.  "  And  the  foe  fliall  meet  thee,  Gaul !"  I 
faid :  "  the  fame  of  Morni's  fon  fliall  arife.  But  rufli  not 
too  far,  my  hero:  let  the  gleam  of  thy  fteel  be  near  to  Of- 
fian. Let  our  hands  join  in  flaughtcr.  Gaul !  doft  thris 
not  behold  that  rock?  Its  grey  fide  dimly  gleams  to  tlie 
ftars.  Should  the  foe  prevail,  let  our  backs  be  towards 
the  rock.  Then  fliall  they  fear  to  approach  our  fpears  ; 
for  death  is  in  our  hands !" 

I  STRUCK  thrice  my  echoing  fliield.  The  ftarting  foe 
arofe.  We  rufhed  on  in  the  found  of  our  arms.  Their 
crouded  fteps  fly  over  the  heath.  They  thought  that  the 
mighty  Fingal  was  come.  The  ftrength  of  their  arms 
withered  away.  The  found  of  their  flight  was  like  that 
of  flame,  when  it  rufhes  thro'  the  blafted  groves.  It  was 
then  the  fpear  of  Gaul  flew  in  its  ftrength  ;  it  was  then 
his  fword  arofe.  Cremor  fell ;  and  mighty  Leth.  Dun- 
thormo  ftruggled  in  his  blood.  The  fteel  ruflied  through 
Crotho's  fide,  as  bent,  he  rofe  on  his  fpear ;  the  black 
ftream  poured  from  the  wound,  and  hifl'ed  on  the  half- 

extinguiflied 


A     P  O  E  M.  215 

extinguiflied  oak.  Cathmin  faw  the  fleps  of  the  hero  be- 
hind him,  he  afcended  a  blafted  tree;  but  the  fpear  pierced 
him  from  behind.  Shriekinsi^,  panting,  he  fell.  Mofs 
and  withered  branches  purfue  his  fall,  and  ftrew  the  blue 
arms  of  Gaul. 

Such  were  thy  deeds,  fon  of  Morni,  in  the  firfl  of  thy 
battles. — Nor  flept  thy  fword  by  thy  fide,  thou  lalt  of  Fin- 
gal's  race !  OfTian  rufhed  forward  in  his  ftrength ;  the 
people  fell  before  him ;  as  the  grafs  by  the  flaff  of  the  boy, 
when  he  whilUes  along  the  field,  and  the  grey  beard  of 
the  thiitle  fails.  But  carelefs  the  youth  moves  on  5  his 
fteps  are  towards  the  defart. 

Grey  morning  rofe  around  us,  the  winding  llreams 
are  bright  along  the  heath.  The  foe  gathered  on  a  hiil; 
and  the  rage  of  Lathmon  rofe.  He  bent  the  red  eye  of 
his  wrath :  he  is  filent  in  his  rifing  grief.  He  often  llruck 
his  bofiy  fhield  ;  and  his  lleps  are  unequal  on  the  heath. 
I  faw  the  diilant  darknefs  of  the  hero,  and  I  fpoke  to  Mor- 
ni's  fon. 

"  Car-borne  chief  of  Strumo,  dofl  thou  behold  the 
foe  ?  They  gather  on  the  hill  in  their  wrath.  Let  our 
fteps  be  towards  the  king  *.  He  Ihall  rife  in  his  ftrength, 
and  the  hoft  of  Lathmon  vanilli.  Our  fame  is  around  us, 
warrior  ;  the  eyes  of  the  agedj  will  rejoice.  But  let  us 
fly,  fon  of  Morni  ;  Lathmon  defcends  the  hill."  "  Then 
let  our  fteps  be  flow,"  replied  the  fair-haired  Gaul,  "  left 
the  foe  fay,  with  a  fmile,  "  Behold  the  warriors  of  night  1 
They  are,  like  ghofts,  terrible  in  darknefs  ;  they  melt 
away  before  the  beam  of  the  eaft."  Oflian,  take  the  fliield 
of  Gormar,  who  fell  beneath  thy  fpear.  The  aged  heroes 
will  rejoice,  beholding  the  deeds  of  their  fons." 

Such  were  our  words  on  the  plain,  when  Sulmath  jj 
came  to  car -borne  Lathmon  :  Sulmath  chief  of  Dutha,  at 
the  dark-rolling  ftream  of  Duvranna§.  "  Why  doft  thou 
not  rufli,  fon  of  Nulith,  with  a  thoufand  of  thy  heroes  ? 

Why 

*  Fingal 

+  Finf^al  and  Morui. 

II  Sull-mhath,  a  man  of  good  cve-f^lu. 

kj  Dubh-bhianna,  dark  wounkdh-Jiream.  A  river  in  Scotland,  wl-vch  falls  int« 
the  fea  at  Banff,  (liU  retains  iLc  ncur.e  of  Duvran.  If  that  is  meant  in  this  palTage, 
Lathmon  ipuft  have  been  a  prince  of  the  Piaifli  fiation,  or  ihofe  Caledonians  wh& 
uihabitcd  of  old  tkc  eaftern  coafl:  of  Scot-land. 


2i6  L    A    T    H    M    O    N: 

Why  dofl  thou  not  defcend  with  thy  hoft,  before  the  war- 
riors fly  ?  Their  blue  arms  are  beaming  to  the  rifing  light, 
and  their  ileps  are  before  us  on  the  heath  !" 

"  Son  of  the  feeble  hand,"  faid  Lathmon,  "  fhall  my 
hoft  defcend  !  They  are  but  two,  fon  of  Dutha  ;  (hall  a 
thoufand  lift  their  fteel !  Nuath  would  mourn,  in  his  hall, 
for  the  departure  of  his  fame ;  his  eyes  would  turn  from 
Lathmon,  when  the  tread  of  his  feet  approached.  Go 
thou  to  the  heroes,  chief  of  Dutha.  I  behold  the  ftately 
fteps  of  Oilian.  His  fame  is  worthy  of  my  fteel  ! — let  us 
contend  in  light." 

The  noble  Sulmath  came.  I  rejoiced  in  the  words  of 
the  king.  I  raifed  the  ftiield  on  my  arm  :  Gaul  placed  in 
my  hand  the  fword  of  Morni.  We  returned  to  the  mur- 
muring ftream  :  Lathmon  came  down  in  his  ftrength. 
His  dark  hoft  rolled,  like  clouds,  behind  him  j  but  the 
fon  of  Nuath  was  bright  in  his  fteel ! 

"  Son  of  Fingal,"  faid  the  hero,  "  thy  fame  has  grown 
on  our  fall.  How  many  lie  there  of  my  people  by  thy 
hand,  thou  king  of  men  !  Lift  now  thy  fpear  againft 
Lathmon.  Lay  the  fon  of  Nuath  low!  lay  him  low  among 
his  warriors,  or  thou  thyfelf  muft  fall  !  It  ftiall  never  be 
told  in  my  halls,  that  my  people  fell  in  my  prefence  ;  that 
they  fell  in  the  prefence  of  Lathmon,  when  his  fwcrd 
refted  by  his  fide  !  The  blue  eyes  of  Cutha  would  roll  in 
tears  ;   her  fteps  be  lonely  in  the  vales  of  Dunlathmon  !'* 

"  Neither  ftiall  it  be  told,"  I  replied,  "  that  the  fon 
of  Fingal  fled.  Were  his  fteps  covered  with  darknefs,, 
yet  would  not  Oflian  fly  !  His  foul  would  meet  him  and 
fay,  "  Does  the  bard  of  Selma  fear  the  foe  ?"  No  :  he 
does  not  fear  the  foe  :  his  joy  is  in  the  midft  of  battle  !** 

Lathmon  came  on  with  his  fpear.  He  pierced  the 
ftiield  of  Oflian.  I  felt  the  cold  fteel  by  my  fide.  I  drew 
the  fword  of  Morni.  I  cut  the  fpear  in  twain  :  the  bright 
point  fell  ghttering  on  earth.  The  fon  of  Nuath  burnt 
in  his  wrath.  He  lifted  high  his  founding  ftiield.  His 
dark  eyes  rolled  above  it,  as,  bending  forward,  it  ftione 
like  a  gate  of  bfafs !  But  Oflian's  fpear  pierced  the  bright- 
nefs  of  its  boflfes,  and  funk  in  a  tree  that  rofe  behind. 
The  flileld  hung  on  the  quivering  lance !  but  Lathmon 

ft  ill 


A     P  O  E  M.  217 

ftill  advanced !  Gaul  forefaw  the  fall  of  the  chief.  He 
ftretched  his  buckler  before  my  fword  ;  v/hen  it  defcend- 
ed,  in  a  ftream  of  light,  over  the  king  of  Dunlathmon  ! 

Lathmon  beheld  the  fon  of  Morni.  The  tear  darted 
from  his  eye.  He  threw  the  fword  of  his  fathers  on  earth, 
and  fpoke  the  words  of  the  brave.  "  Why  Ihould  Lath- 
man  fight  againfl  the  firft  of  men  ?  Your  fouls  are  beams 
from  heaven  ;  your  fwords,  the  flames  of  death  !  Who 
can  equal  the  renown  of  the  heroes,  whofe  deeds  are  fo 
great  in  youth  ?  O  that  ye  were  in  the  halls  of  Nuath, 
in  the  green  dwelling  of  Lathmon  !  then  would  my  father 
fay,  that  his  fon  did  not  yield  to  the  weak  !  But  who 
comes,  a  mighty  flream,  along  the  echoing  heath  ?  The 
little  hills  are  troubled  before  him  ;  a  thoufand  ghofts  are 
on  the  beams  of  his  (leel ;  the  ghofts  of  thofe  who  are  to 
fall*  by  the  arm  of  the  king  of  refounding  Morven.  Hap- 
py art  thou,  O  Fingal ;  thy  fons  (hall  fight  thy  wars.  They 
go  forth  before  thee  j  they  return  with  the  fteps  of  their 
renown  !" 

Fingal  came,  in  his  mildnefs,  rejoicing  infecret  over 
the  deeds  of  his  fon.  Morni's  face  brightened  with 
gladnefs  ;  his  aged  eyes  look  faintly  through  tears  of  joy. 
We  came  to  the  halls  of  Selma.  We  fat  around  the  feafl 
of  fhells.  The  maids  of  fong  came  into  our  prefence,  and 
the  mildly- blufhing  Everallin  !  Her  hair  fpreads  on  her 
neck  of  fnow  ;  her  eye  rolls  in  fecret  on  Offian,  She 
touched  the  harp  of  mufic ;  we  bleifed  the  daughter  of 
Branno  1 

Fingal  rofe  in  his  place,  and  fpoke  to  Lathmon  king 
of  fpears.  The  fword  of  Trenmor  (hook  by  his  fide,  as 
high  he  raifed  his  mighty  arm.  "  Son  of  Nuath,"  he 
faid,  "  why  doft  thou  fearch  for  fame  in  Morven  ?  We 
are  not  of  the  race  of  the  feeble  ;  our  fwords  gleam  not 
over  the  weak.  When  did  we  roufe  thee,  O  Lathmon, 
with  the  found  of  war  ?  Fingal  does  not  delight  in  battle, 
though  his  arm  is  ftrong  !  My  renown  grows  on  the  fall 
of  the  haughty.  The  light  of  my  fteel  pours  on  the  proud 
in  arms.  The  battle  comes;  and  the  tombs  of  the  valiant 
E  e  rife  j 

*  It  u'as  thought,  in  OflTian's  time,  that  each  perfon  had  his  attending  fpirit.  The 
fradiiions  concerning  this  opinion  are  daik  and  unfatisfaftoiy. 


2i8  L    A    T    H    M    O    N. 

rife:  the  tombs  of  my  people  rife,  O  my  fathers!  I  at  laft 
muft  remain  alone  !  But  I  will  remain  renowned  ;  the  de- 
parture of  my  foul  fhall  be  a  ftream  of  light.  Lathmon! 
retire  to  thy  place!  Turn  thy  battles  to  other  lands!  The 
race  of  Morven  are  renowned  j  their  foes  are  the  fons  of 
the  unhappy  1" 


DAR-THULA 


DAR-THULA 


P  O  E  M, 


ARGUMENT. 

IT  may  not  be  improper  here,  to  give  the  ftory  which  is  the  foundation  of  this 
poem,  as  it  is  handed  down  by  tradition.  Ufnoth  loid  of  Etha,  which  is  proba- 
bly that  part  of  Argylf  (hire  which  is  near  Loch  E  a,  an  arm  of  the  fea  in  Lorn, 
had  three  fons,  Nathos,  Althos,  and  Ardan,  by  Sliffama,  the  daughter  of  Semo 
and  fifter  to  the  celebrated  Cuthullin.  The  three  brothers,  when  very  young, 
were  fent  over  to  Ireland,  by  their  father,  to  learn  the  ufe  of  arms,  under  their 
uncle,  Cuthullin,  who  made  a  great  figure  in  that  kingdom.  They  were  juft 
landed  in  Ulfler  when  the  news  of  Cuthullin's  death  arrived.  Nathos,  though 
very  young,  took  the  command  of  Cuthullin's  army,  made  head  againft  Cairbar 
the  ufurper,  and  defeated  him  in  feveral  battles.  Cairbar  at  laft  having  found 
means  to  murder  Cormac  the  lawful  king,  the  army  of  Nathos  fhifted  fides,  and 
he  himfelf  was  obhged  to  return  into  Ulfter,  in  order  to  pafs  over  into  Scotland. 
Dar-thula,  the  daughter  of  CoUa,  with  whom  Cairbar  was  in  love,  refidcd, 

.  at  that  time,  in  Selama,  a  caftle  in  Ulfter :  fhe  faw,  fell  in  love,  and  fled  with 
Nathos ;  but  a  ftorm  rifing  at  fea,  they  were  unfortunately  driven  back  on  that 
part  of  the  coaft  of  Ulfter,  where  Cairbar  was  encamped  with  his  army.  The 
three  brothers,  after  having  defended  themfelves,  for  fome  time,  with  great 
bravery,  were  ovei  powered  and  flain,  and  the  unfortunate  Dar-thula  killed  her- 
felf  UDon  the  body  of  her  beloved  Nathos. 

The  poem  opens,  on  the  night  preceding  the  death  of  the  fons  of  Ufnoth» 
and  brings  in,  by  way  of  epifode,  what  pafled  before.     It  relates  the  death  of  ■ 
Dar-thala  differently  from  the  common  tradition ;  this  account  is  the  moft  pro- 
bable, as  fuicide  feems  to  have  been  unknown  in  thofe  early  times;  for  op 
traces  of  it  are  found  in  the  old  poetry. 


DAR-THULA 


POEM. 

DAUGHTER  of  heaven,  fair  art  thou!  the  filence 
of  thy  face  is  pleafant !  Thou  comefl  forth  in  love- 
iinefs.  The  ftars  attend  thy  blue  courfe  in  the  eaft.  The 
clouds  rejoice  in  thy  prefence,  O  moon :  they  brighten 
their  dark-brown  fides.  Who  is  like  thee  in  heaven,  light 
of  the  filent  night?  The  ftars  are  afhamed  in  thy  prefence. 
They  turn  away  their  fparkling  eyes.  Whither  doft  thou 
retire  from  thy  courfe,  when  the  darknefs  of  thy  counte- 
nance grows  ?  Haft  thou  thy  hall,  like  Oflian  ?  Dwelleft 
thou  in  the  ftiadow  of  grief?  Have  thy  fifters  fallen  from 
heaven  ?  Are  they  who  rejoiced  with  thee,  at  night,  no 
more  ?  Yes  !  they  have  fallen,  fair  light !  and  thou  doft 
often  retire  to  mourn.  But  thou  thyfelf  ftialt  fail,  one 
night;  and  leave  thy  blue  path  in  heaven.  The  ftars  will 
then  lift  up  their  heads :  they,  who  were  aftiamed  in  thy 
prefence,  will  rejoice.  Thou  art  now  clothed  with  thy 
brightnefs.  Look  from  thy  gates  in  the  {ky.  Burft  the 
cloud,  O  wind,  that  the  daughter  of  night  may  look  forth; 
that  the  ftiaggy  mountains  may  brighten,  and  the  ocean 
roll  its  white  waves,  in  light ! 

Nathos  *  is  on  the  deep,  and  Althos,  that  beam  of 
youth.  Ardan  is  near  his  brothers.  They  move  in  the 
gloom  of  their  courfe  ;  the  fons  of  Ufnoth  move,  in  dark- 
nefs, from  the  wrath  of  Cairbar  f  of  Erin.  Who  is  that, 
dim,  by  their  fide  ?  The  night  has  covered  her  beauty ! 
Her  hair  fighs  in  ocean's  wind.  Her  robe  ftreams  in 
dufky  wreaths.     She  is  like  the  fair  fpirit  of  heaven,  in 

the 

*  Nathos  fignifies  jot^^k/,   Althos,  exqu'fite  beauty,  Ardan,  pride. 

+  Cairbar,  who  murdered  Cormac  king  ot  Ireland,  and  ufurped  the  throne.  He 
vas  afterwards  killed  by  Ofcar  the  fon  of  Oflian  in  a  (ingle  combat.  The  poet, 
upon  other  occafions,  gives  him  the  epithet  of  red-haired. 


222  D   A   R-T   H   U   L   A: 

the  midfl  of  his  fiiadowy  mifl.  Who  is  it  but  Dar-thula*, 
the  firft  of  Erin's  maids  ?  She  has  fled  from  the  love  of 
Cairbar,  with  blue-fhielded  Nathos.  But  the  winds  de- 
ceive thee,  O  Dar-thula.  They  deny  the  woody  Etha 
to  thy  fails.  Thefe  are  not  the  mountains  of  Nathos;  nor 
is  that  the  roar  of  his  climbing  waves.  The  halls  of  Cair- 
bar are  near:  the  towers  of  the  foe  lift  their  heads !  Erin 
ftretches  its  green  head  into  the  fea.  Tura's  bay  receives 
the  fhip.  Where  have  ye  been,  ye  fouthern  winds!  when 
the  fons  of  my  love  were  deceived  ?  But  ye  have  been 
fporting  on  plains,  purfuing  the  thiflle's  beard.  O  that 
ye  had  been  ruftling  in  the  fails  of  Nathos,  till  the  hills 
of  Etha  arofe !  till  they  arofe  in  their  clouds,  and  faw 
their  returning  chief!  Long  haft  thou  been  abfent,  Na- 
thos !    The  day  of  thy  return  is  paft ! 

But  the  land  of  ftrangers  faw  thee,  lovely :  thou  wall 
lovely  in  the  eyes  of  Dar-thula.  Thy  face  was  like  the 
light  of  the  morning  ;  thy  hair,  like  the  raven's  wing. 
Thy  foul  was  generous  and  mild,  like  the  hour  of  the  fet- 
ting  fun.  Thy  words  were  the  gale  of  the  reeds ;  the 
gliding  flream  of  Lora  I  But  when  the  rage  of  battle  rofe, 
thou  waft  a  fea  in  a  ftorm.  The  clang  of  thy  arms  was 
terrible:  the  hoft  vanifned  at  the  found  of  thy  courfe.  It 
was  then  Dar-thula  beheld  thee,  from  the  top  of  her  mof- 
fy  tower ;  from  the  tower  of  Selama  f,  where  her  fathers 
dwelt. 

"  Lovely  art  thou,  O  ftranger  !"  fhe  faid,  "  for  her 
trembling  foul  arofe.  Fair  art  thou  in  thy  battles,  friend  of 
the  fallen  Cormac  || !  Why  doft  thou  rufh  on,  in  thy  valour, 
youth  of  the  ruddy  look  ?  Few  are  thy  hands,  in  fight, 
againft  the  dark-browed  Cairbar  !  O  that  I  might  be 
freed  from  his  love  §  1  that  I  might  rejoice  in  the  prefence 

of 

*  Dar-thula,  or  Dart-'buJle,  e  woman  zvith  Jiiie  eyes.  She  was  the  moft  famou* 
beauty  of  antiquity.  To  this  day,  when  a  woman  is  praifed  for  her  beauty,  the 
common  phrafc  is,  thzij}ie  is  as  lovely  as  Dar-thula. 

+  The  word  fignifies  either  beautiful  to  behold,  or  a  place  with  a  pie af ant  cr  mdt 
froJpeEl.  In  early  times,  they  built  their  houfes  upon  eminences,  to  command  a 
view  of  the  country,  and  to  prevent  their  being  furprized:  many  of  them,  on  that 
account,  were  called  Selama.  The  famous  Sielma  of  Flngal  is  derived  from  the 
fame  root. 

11  Cormac  the  young  king  of  Ireland,  who  was  privately  murdered  by  Cairbar, 

^  That  L;,  of  the  love  of  Cairbtr. 


A     POEM.  223 

of  Nathos!  Blefl  are  the  rocks  of  Etha!  they  will  behold 
his  fleps  at  the  chace  !  they  will  fee  his  white  bofom, 
when  the  winds  lift  his  flowing  hair  !'*  Such  were  thy 
words,  Dar-thula,  in  Selama*s  mofly  towers.  But,  now, 
the  night  is  around  thee.  The  winds  have  deceived 
thy  fails :  the  winds  have  deceived  thy  fails,  Dar-thula ! 
Their  bluftering  found  is  high.  Ceafe  a  little  while,  O 
north  wind.  Let  me  hear  the  voice  of  the  lovely.  Thy 
voice  is  lovely,  Dar-thula,  between  the  ruftling  blafts ! 

"  Are  thefe  the  rocks  of  Nathos  ?'*  Ihe  faid  :  "  This 
the  roar  of  his  mountain-ftreams  ?  Comes  that  beam  of 
light  from  Ufnoth's  nightly  hall?  The  mill  fpreads  a- 
round  ;  the  beam  is  feeble  and  diftant  far.  But  the  light 
of  Dar-thula's  foul  dwells  in  the  chief  of  Etha !  Son  of 
the  generous  Ufnoth,  why  that  broken  figh  !  Are  we  in 
the  land  of  ftrangers,  chief  of  echoing  Etha!" 

"  These  are  not  the  rocks  of  Nathos,"  he  replied, 
"•*  nor  this  the  roar  of  his  flreams.  No  light  comes  from 
Etha's  halls,  for  they  are  diftant  far.  We  are  in  the  land 
of  ftrangers,  in  the  land  of  cruel  Cairbar.  The  winds 
have  deceived  us,  Dar-thula.  Erin  lifts  here  her  hills. 
Go  towards  the  north,  Althos:  be  thy  fteps,  Ardan,  along 
the  coaft;  that  the  foe  may  not  come  in  darknefs,  and  our 
hopes  of  Etha  fail.  I  will  go  towards  that  mofly  tower, 
to  fee  who  dwells  about  the  beam.  Reft,  Dar-thula,  on 
the  fliore  !  reft  in  peace,  thou  lovely  light !  the  fword  of 
Nathos  is  around  thee,  like  the  lightning  of  heaven !" 

He  went.  She  fat  alone  ;  flie  heard  the  rolling  of  the 
wave.  The  big  tear  is  in  her  eye.  She  looks  for  return- 
ing Nathos.  Her  foul  trembles  at  the  blaft.  She  turns 
her  ear  towards  the  tread  of  his  feet.  The  tread  of  his 
feet  is  not  heard.  "  Where  art  thou,  fon  of  my  love!  The 
roar  of  the  blaft  is  around  me.  Dark  is  the  cloudy  night. 
But  Nathos  does  not  return.  What  d.^rains  thee,  chief 
of  Etha  ?  Have  the  foes  met  the  hero  in  the  ftrife  of  the 
night  ?" 

He  returned,  but  his  face  was  dark.  He  had  feen  his 
departed  friend  I  It  was  the  wall  of  Tura.  The  ghoft  of 
Cuthullin  ftalked  there  alone  :  The  fighing  of  his  breaft 
was  frequent.    The  decayed  flame  of  his  eyes  v/as  terri- 


224  DAR-THULA: 

ble !  His  fpear  was  a  column  of  mift.  The  ftars  looked 
dim  through  his  form.  His  voice  was  like  hollow  wind 
in  a  cave ;  his  eye,  a  light  feen  afar.  He  told  the  tale  of 
grief.  The  foul  of  Nathos  was  fad,  like  the  fun  in  the 
day  of  mift,  when  his  face  is  watry  and  dim. 

"  Why  art  thou  fad,  O  Nathos  ?"  faid  the  lovely 
daughter  of  Colla.  "  Thou  art  a  pillar  of  light  to  Dar- 
thula.  The  joy  of  her  eyes  is  in  Etha's  chief.  Where  is 
my  friend,  but  Nathos  ?  My  father,  my  brother  is  fallen! 
Silence  dwells  on  Selama.  Sadnefs  fpreads  on  the  blue 
ftreams  of  my  land.  My  friends  have  fallen,  with  Cor- 
mac.  The  mighty  were  flain  in  the  battles  of  Erin.  Hear, 
fon  of  Ufnoth  !    hear,  O  Nathos,  my  tale  of  grief. 

"  Evening  darkened  on  the  plain.  The  blue  ftreams 
failed  before  mine  eyes.  The  unfrequent  blaft  came  ruft- 
ling,  in  the  tops  of  Selama's  groves.  My  feat  was  beneath 
a  tree,  on  the  walls  of  my  fathers.  Truthil  pail  before 
my  foul ;  the  brother  of  my  love :  he  that  was  abfent  in 
battle,  againft  the  haughty  Cairbar!  Bending  on  his  fpear, 
the  grey-haired  Colla  came.  His  downcaft  face  is  dark, 
and  forrow  dwells  in  his  foul.  His  fword  is  on  the  fide 
of  the  hero  ;  the  helmet  of  his  fathers  on  his  head.  The 
battle  grows  in  his  breaft.    He  ftrives  to  hide  the  tear. 

"  Dar-thula,  my  daughter,"  he  faid,  "  thou  art  the 
laft  of  Collars  race  !  Truthil  is  fallen  in  battle.  The  chief 
of  Selama  is  no  more  !  Cairbar  comes,  with  his  thou- 
fands,  towards  Selama's  walls.  Colla  will  meet  his  pride, 
and  revenge  his  fon.  But  where  ftiall  I  find  thy  fafety, 
Dar-thula  with  the  dark-brown  hair !  thou  art  lovely  as 
the  fun-beam  of  heaven,  and  thy  friends  are  low !  "  Is 
the  fon  of  battle  fallen  ?"  I  faid,  with  a  burfting  figh  i 
'^'  Ceafed  the  generous  foul  of  Truthil  to  lighten  through 
the  field  ?  My  fafety,  Colla,  is  in  that  bow.  I  have  learned 
to  pierce  the  deer.  Is  not  Cairbar  like  the  hart  of  the 
defart,  father  of  fallen  Truthil  ?" 

"  The  face  of  age  brightened  with  joy.  The  crouded 
tears  of  his  eyes  poured  down.  The  lips  of  Colla  trem- 
bled. His  grey  beard  whiftled  in  the  blaft.  "  Thou  art 
the  lifter  of  Truthil,"  he  faid  ;  "  thou  burneft  in  the  fire 
of  his  fouL    Take,  Dar-thula,  take  that  fpear,  that  brazen 

fhield. 


A     POEM.  225 

flileld,  that  burniflied  helm  :  they  are  the  fpolls  of  a  war- 
rior, a  fon  of  early  youth  !  When  the  light  rifes  on  Sehima, 
we  go  to  meet  the  car-borne  Cairbar.  But  keep  thou  near 
the  arm  of  Colla,  beneath  the  fliadow  of  my  fliield.  Thy 
father,  Dar-thula,  could  once  defend  thee;  but  age  is  trem- 
bling on  his  hand.  The  llrength  of  his  arm  has  failed. 
His  foul  is  darkened  with  grief." 

"  We  paiTed  the  night  in  forrow.  The  light  of  morning 
rofe.  I  Ihone  in  the  arms  of  battle.  The  grey-haired  hero 
moved  before.  The  fons  of  SeUima  convened,  around  the 
founding  fliield  of  Colla.  But  few  were  they  in  the  plain, 
and  their  locks  were  grey.  The  youths  had  fallen  with 
Truthil,  in  the  battle  of  car-borne  Cormac.  "  Friends  of 
my  youth!'*  faid  Colla,  "  it  was  not  thus  you  have  fcen 
me  in  arms.  It  was  not  thus  I  ftrode  to  battle,  when  the 
great  Confadan  fell.  But  ye  are  laden  with  grief.  The 
darknefs  of  age  comes,  like  the  mifl.  of  the  defart.  My 
fhield  is  worn  with  years  !  my  fword  is  fixed  *  in  its  place  ! 
I  faid  to  my  foul,  thy  evening  fhall  be  calm :  thy  depar- 
ture, like  a  fading  light.  But  the  florm  has  returned.  I 
bend  like  an  aged  oak.  My  boughs  are  fallen  on  Sehima. 
I  tremble  in  my  place.  Where  art  thou,  with  thy  fallen 
heroes,  O  my  beloved  Truthil !  Thou  anfwerefl  not  from 
thy  rufhing  blafl.  The  foul  of  thy  father  is  fad.  But  I 
will  be  fad  no  more :  Cairbar  or  Colla  mufl  fall !  I  feel 
the  returning  ftrength  of  my  arm.  My  heart  leaps  at  the 
found  of  war." 

"  The  hero  drew  his  fword.  The  gleaming  blades  of  his 
people  rofe.  They  moved  along  the  plain.  Their  grey 
hair  ftreamed  in  the  wind.  Cairbar  fat  at  the  feafl,  in 
the  fdent  plain  of  Lonaf.  He  faw  the  coming  of  the 
heroes.  He  called  his  chiefs  to  war.  Why  ||  fhould  I 
tell  to  Nathos,  how  the  llrife  of  battle  grew  ?  I  have 
F  f  feen 

*  It  was  the  cunom  of  ancient  times,  that  every  warrior,  at  a  certain  age,  or  when 
he  became  unfit  for  the  field,  fixed  his  arms  in  the  great  hall,  where  the  tribe  feaft- 
ed,  upon  joyful  occafions.  He  was  afterwards  never  to  appear  in  battle  ;  and  this 
ftage  of  life  was  called  the  lime  of  fixing  of  the  arms. 

+  Lona,  a  marfhy  plain.  Cairbar  had  juil  provided  an  entertainment  for  his 
army,  upon  the  defeat  of  Truthil  the  fon  of  Colla,  and  the  reft  of  the  party  of 
Cormac,  when  Colla  and  his  aged  warriors  ariivcd  to  sive  him  battle. 

*|1  The  poet,  by  an  artifice,  avoids  the  delcription  of  the  battle  of  Lona,  as  it 
would  be  improper  in  the  mouth  of  a  woman,  and  could  have  nothing  new,  after 

the 


226  D  A  R  -  T  H  U  L  A : 

feen  thee,  in  the  midft  of  thoufands,  like  the  beam  of 
heaven's  fire:  it  is  beautiful,  but  terrible;  the  people 
fall  in  its  dreadful  courfe.  The  fpear  of  Colla  flew. 
He  remembered  the  battles  of  his  youth.  An  arrow 
came  with  its  found :  it  pierced  the  hero's  fide.  He 
fell  on  his  echoing  fhield.  My  foul  ftarted  with  fear.  I 
ftretched  my  buckler  over  him ;  but  my  heaving  breaft 
was  feen  !  Cairbar  came,  with  his  fpear.  He  beheld  Se- 
lama's  maid.  Joy  rofe  on  his  dark-brown  face.  He  flayed 
the  lifted  fleel.  He  raifed  the  tomb  of  Colla.  He  brought 
me  weeping  to  Selama.  He  fpoke  the  words  of  love,  but 
my  foul  was  fad.  I  faw  the  fhlelds  of  my  fathers ;  the  fword 
of  car-borne  Truthil.  I  faw  the  arms  of  the  dead  ;  the  tear 
was  on  my  cheek!  Then  thou  didfl:  come,  O  Nathos!  and 
gloomy  Cairbar  fled.  He  fled,  like  the  ghofl  of  the  defart 
before  the  morning's  beam.  His  hoft  was  not  near :  and 
feeble  was  his  arm  againft  thy  fteel !  Why  art  thou  fad, 
O  Nathos  ?"    faid  the  lovely  daughter  of  Colla. 

"  I  HAVE  met,"  replied  the  hero,  "  the  battle  in  my 
youth.  My  arm  could  not  lift  the  fpear,  when  danger 
firfl;  arofe.  My  foul  brightened  in  the  prefence  of  war, 
as  the  green  narrow  vale,  when  the  fun  pours  his  flreamy 
beams,  before  he  hides  his  head  in  a  fl:orm.  The  lonely 
traveller  feels  a  mournful  joy.  He  fees  the  darknefs,  that 
{lowly  comes.  My  foul  brightened  in  danger  before  I  faw 
Selama's  fair ;  before  I  faw  thee,  like  a  ilar,  that  fhines 
on  the  hill,  at  night :  the  cloud  advances,  and  threatens 
the  lovely  light !  We  are  in  the  land  of  foes.  The  winds 
have  deceived  us,  Dar-thula  !  the  ftrength  of  our  friends 
is  not  near,  nor  the  mountains  of  Etha.  Where  Ihall  I 
find  thy  peace,  daughter  of  mighty  Colla  !  The  brothers 
of  Nathos  are  brave;  and  his  own  fword  has  fhone  in 
fight.  But  what  are  the  fons  of  Ufnoth  to  the  hofl  of 
dark-browed  Cairbar  !  O  that  the  winds  had  brought  thy 
fails,  Ofcar  *  king  of  men  !  Thou  didfl:  promife  to  come 
to  the  battles  of  fallen  Cormac!  Then  would  my  hand 

be 

the  numerous  defciiptions,  of  that  kind,  in  the  refl  of  the  poems.  He,  at  the  fame 
time,  gives  an  opportunity  to  Dar-thula  to  pafs  a  fine  compliment  on  her  lover. 
*  Ofcar,  the  fonofOffian,  had  long  tefolved  en  an  expedition,  into  Ireland, 
againfl  Cairbar,  who  had  affaffinated  his  friend  Caihol,  the  fon  of  Moran,  an  Irifli- 
man  of  noble  extraftion,  and  in  the  intereft  of  the  family  of  Cormac. 


A    POEM.  227 

be  flrong,  as  the  flaming  arm  of  death.  Cairbar  would 
tremble  in  his  halls,  and  peace  dwell  round  the  lovely 
Dar-thula.  But  why  doft  thou  fall,  my  foul  ?  The  fons 
of  Ufnoth  may  prevail !" 

"  And  they  will  prevail,  O  Nathos !"  faid  the  rifmg 
foul  of  the  maid.  "  Never  fliall  Dar-thula  behold  the 
halls  of  gloomy  Cairbar.  Give  me  thofe  arms  of  brafs, 
that  glitter  to  the  paffing  meteor.  I  fee  them  dimly  in 
the  dark-bofomed  fhip.  Dar-thula  will  enter  the  battle 
of  fteel.  Ghoi'l  of  the  noble  Colla  !  do  I  behold  thee  on 
that  cloud  ?  Who  is  that,  dim,  befide  thee?  Is  it  the  car- 
borne  Truthil  ?  Shall  I  behold  the  halls  of  him  that  flew 
Selama's  chief  ?  No  :  I  will  not  behold  them,  fpirits  of 
my  love  I" 

Joy  rofe  in  the  face  of  Nathos,  when  he  heard  the 
white-bofomed  maid.  "  Daughter  of  Selama!  thou  Ihineft 
along  my  foul.  Come,  v/ith  thy  thoufands,  Cairbar  !  the 
ftrength  of  Nathos  is  returned !  Thou,  O  aged  Ufnoth, 
fhalt  not  hear  that  thy  fon  has  fled.  I  remember  thy  words 
on  Etha,  when  my  fails  began  to  rife ;  when  I  fpread 
them  towards  Erin,  towards  the  moflTy  walls  of  Tura ! 
"  Tkou  goeil,"  he  faid,  "  O  Nathos,  to  the  king  of 
fliields  !  Thou  goeil  to  Cuthullin,  chief  of  men,  who  ne- 
ver fled  from  danger.  Let  not  thy  arm  be  feeble:  neither 
be  thy  thoughts  of  flight ;  lefl:  the  fon  of  Semo  fliould 
fay,  that  Etha's  race  are  weak.  His  words  may  come  to 
Ufnoth,  and  fadden  his  foul  in  the  hall."  The  tear  was 
on  my  father's  cheek.    He  gave  this  fliining  fword ! 

"  I  CAME  to  Tura's  bay  :  but  the  halls  of  Tura  were 
filent.  I  looked  around,  and  there  was  none  to  tell  of 
the  fon  of  generous  Semo.  I  went  to  the  hall  of  fliells, 
where  the  arms  of  his  fathers  hung.  But  the  arms  were 
gone,  and  aged  Lamhor  *  fat  in  tears.  "  Whence  are  the 
arms  of  fl:eel,"  faid  the  rifmg  Lamhor  ?  "  The  light  of 
the  fpear  has  long  been  abfent  from  Tura's  dufl^y  walls. 
Come  ye  from  the  rolling  fea  ?  or  from  Temcra's  | 
mournful  halls  ?" 

«  Ws 

*  Lamh-mhor,  mighty  hand. 

t  Temora  was  the  refidence  of  the  fuprcme  kings  of  Ireland.  It  is  here  called 
mournful,  on  account  of  the  death  of  Cormac,  who  was  murdered  there  by  Cair- 
kar,  who  ufurped  his  throne. 


228  D  A  R  -  T  H  U  L  A  : 

"  We  come  from  the  fea,"  I  faid,  "  from  Ufnoth's 
rlfing  towers.  We  are  the  fons  of  Slis-sama||,  the  daugh- 
ter of  car-borne  Semo.  Where  is  Tura's  chief,  fon  of  the 
filent  hali  ?  But  why  ihould  Nathos  aik  ?  for  I  behold 
thy  tears.  How  did  the  mighty  fall,  fon  of  the  lonely 
Turar"  "  He  fell  not,"  Lamhor  replied,  "  like  the  filent 
ftar  of  night,  when  it  flies  through  darknefs,  and  is  no 
more.  But  he  was  like  a  meteor  that  flioots  into  a  diflant 
land.  Death  attends  its  dreary  courfe.  Itfelf  is  the  fign 
of  wars.  Mournful  are  the  banks  of  Lego;  and  the  roar 
of  ftreamy  Lara !  There  the  hero  fell,  fon  of  the  noble 
Ufnoth."  "  The  hero  fell  in  the  midft  of  flaughter,"  I 
faid,  with  a  burfting  figh.  "  His  hand  was  flrong  in  war. 
Death  dimly  fat  behind  his  fword." 

"  We  came  to  Lego's  founding  banks.  We  found  his 
rifmg  tomb.  His  friends  in  battle  are  there:  his  bards  of 
many  fongs.  Three  days  we  mourned  over  the  hero:  on 
the  fourth,  I  fcruck  the  fliield  of  Caithbat.  The  heroes 
gathered  around  with  joy,  and  fhook  their  beamy  fpears. 
Corlath  was  near  with  his  hod,  the  friend  of  car-borne 
Cairbar.  We  came  like  a  ftream  by  night.  His  heroes 
fell  before  us.  When  the  people  of  the  valley  rofe,  they 
faw  their  blood  with  morning's  light.  But  we  rolled  away, 
like  wreathes  of  mill:,  to  Cormac's  echoing  hall.  Our 
fwords  rofe  to  defend  the  king.  But  Temora's  halls  were 
empty.  Cormac  had  fallen  in  his  youth.  The  king  of 
Erin  was  no  more  ! 

"  Sadness  feized  the  fons  of  Erin.  They  flowly,  gloo- 
mily, retired  :  like  clouds  that,  long  having  threatened 
rain,  vanifli  behind  the  hills.  The  fons  of  Ufnoth  moved, 
in  their  grief,  towards  Tura's  founding  bay.  We  pafled 
by  Sehima.  Cairbar  retired,  like  Lano's  mift,  when  dri- 
ven before  the  winds.  It  was  then  I  beheld  thee,  O  Dar- 
thula,  like  the  light  of  Etha's  fun.  "  Lovely  is  that 
beam!"  I  faid.  The  crowded  figh  of  my  bofom  rofe. 
Thou  cameft  in  t-hy  beauty,  Dar-thula,  to  i\|ha's  mourn- 
ful chief.  But  the  winds  have  deceived  us,  daughter  of 
Colla,  and  the  foe  is  near  !" 

"  Yes  ! 

IJ  Slis-fearaha,  foft  bofom.     She  was  the  wife  of  Ufnoth,  and  daughter  of  Semo, 
the  chief  of  the  ijk  cfmijl.  \ 


A    POEM, 


227 


''  Yes!  the  foe  is  near,'*  laid  the  rufliing  ftrength  of  Al- 
thos  *.  "  I  heard  their  clanging  arms  on  the  coaft.  I 
law  the  dark  wreathes  of  Erin's  ftandard.  Diflind  is  the 
\oice  of  Cairbar  f  ;  loud  as  Cromla's  falling  dream.  He 
had  feen  the  dark  fliip  on  the  lea,  before  the  dufky  night 
came  down.  His  people  watch  on  Lena's  plain.  They 
lift  ten  thoufand  fwords."  "  And  let  them  lift  ten  thou- 
fand  fwords,"  laid  Nathos,  with  a  fmile.  "  The  fons  of 
car-borne  Ufnoth  will  never  tremble  in  danger!  Why 
doft  thou  roll  with  all  thy  foam,  thou  roaring  fea  of  Erin? 
Why  do  ye  rullle,  on  your  dark  wings,  ye  whiflling 
forms  of  the  fky  ?  Do  ye  think,  ye  ftorms,  that  ye  keep 
Nathos  on  the  coafl  ?  No :  his  foul  detains  him,  children 
of  the  night !  Althos!  bring  my  father's  arms :  thou  feefl 
them  beaming  to  the  ftars.  Bring  the  fpear  of  Semo  |j. 
It  Hands  in  the  dark-bofomed  (hip  !" 

He  brought  the  arms.  Nathos  covered  his  Hmbs,  in 
all  their  Ihining  fteel.  The  flride  of  the  chief  is  lovely. 
The  joy  of  his  eyes  was  terrible.  He  looks  towards  the 
coming  of  Cairbar.  The  wind  is  rufliing  in  his  hair. 
Dar-thula  is  filent  at  his  fide.  Her  look  is  fixed  on  the 
chief.  She  ftrives  to  hide  the  rifing  figh.  Two  tears 
fwell  in  her  radiant  eyes  ! 

"  Althos  !"  faid  the  chief  of  Etha,  "  I  fee  a  cave  in 
that  rock.  Place  Dar-thula  there.  Let  thy  arm,  my  bro- 
ther, be  ftrong.  Ardan  !  we  meet  the  foe;  call  to  battle 
gloomy  Cairbar.  O  that  he  came  in  his  founding  fteel, 
to  meet  the  fon  of  Ufnoth  !  Dar-thula !  if  thou  fhalt 
efcape,  look  not  on  the  fallen  Nathos  !  Lift  thy  fails,  O 
Althos,  towards  the  echoing  groves  of  my  land. 

"  Tell  the  chief  §,  that  his  fon  fell  with  fame;  that 

my 

*  Althos  had  juft  returned  from  viewing  the  coaft  of  Lena,  whither  he  had  been 
fent  by  Nathos,  the  beginning  of  the  night, 

t  Cairbar  had  gathered  an  army,  to  the  coafl  of  Ulfter,  in  order  to  oppofe  Fin- 
gal  who  prepared  for  an  expedition  into  Ireland  to  re-elkblifh  the  houCe  of  Cormac 
on  the  throne,  which  Cairbar  had  ufurped.     Between  the  wings  of  Caiibar's  aimy  , 
was  the  bay  of  Tura,  into  which  the  fliip  of  the  fons  of  Ufnoth  was  driven:  fo  that 
there  was  no  pofTibility  of  their  efcaping. 

II  Semo  was  grandfather  to  Naihos  by  the  mother's  fide.  The  fpear  mentioned 
here  was  given  to  Ufnoth  on  his  marriage,  it  being  the  cuflom  then  for  thi  father 
of  the  lady  to  give  his  arms  to  his  fon-in-law, 

S  Ufnoth. 


230 


DAR.THULA: 


my  fword  did  not  fhun  the  fight.  Tell  him  I  fell  in  the 
midil  of  thoufands.  Let  the  joy  of  his  grief  be  great ! 
Daughter  of  Colla!  call  the  maids  to  Etha's  echoing  hall. 
Let  their  fongs  arife  for  Nathos,  when  fhadowy  autumn 
returns.  O  that  the  voice  of  Cona,  that  Oflian,  might 
be  heard  in  my  praife !  then  would  my  fpirit  rejoice  in  the 
midft  of  the  rufhing  winds."  And  my  voice  (hall  praife 
thee,  Nathos,  chief  of  the  woody  Etha !  The  voice  of 
Ofiian  (hall  rife  in  thy  praife,  fon  of  the  generous  Ufnoth! 
Why  was  I  not  on  Lena,  when  the  battle  rofe  ?  Then 
would  the  fword  of  Offian  defend  thee  j  or  himfelf  fall 
low ! 

We  fat,  that  night,  in  Selma,  round  the  ftrength  of 
the  (hell.  The  wind  was  abroad,  in  the  oaks.  The  fpirit 
of  the  mountain  *  roared.  The  blaft  came  ruftling  through 
the  hall,  and  gently  touched  my  harp.  The  found  was 
mournful  and  low,  like  the  fong  of  the  tomb.  Fingal 
heard  it  the  firft.  The  crouded  fighs  of  his  bofom  role. 
"  Some  of  my  heroes  are  low,"  faid  the  grey-haired  king 
of  Morven.  "  I  hear  the  found  of  death  on  the  harp. 
Offian,  touch  the  trembling  (Iring.  Bid  the  forrow  rife  j 
that  their  fpirits  may  fly,  with  joy,  to  Morven's  woody 
hills  !"  I  touched  the  harp  before  the  king ;  the  found 
was  mournful  and  low.  "  Bend  forward  from  your 
clouds,"  I  faid,  "  ghofts  of  my  fathers !  bend  !  Lay  by 
the  red  terror  of  your  courfe.  Receive  the  falling  chief; 
whether  he  comes  from  a  diftant  land,  or  rifes  from  the 
rolling  fea.  Let  his  robe  of  mift  be  near;  his  fpear,  that 
is  formed  of  a  cloud.  Place  an  half-extinguiihed  meteor 
by  his  fide,  in  the  form  of  the  hero's  fword.  And,  oh  I 
let  his  countenance  be  lovely,  that  his  friends  may  delight 
in  his  prefence.  Bend  from  your  cloud,"  I  faid,  "  ghofls 
of  my  fathers  !  bend  !" 

Such  was  my  fong  in  Selma,  to  the  lightly-trembling 
harp.  But  Nathos  was  on  Erin's  Ihore,  furrounded  by 
the  night.  He  heard  the  voice  of  the  foe,  amidfl  the  roar 
of  tumbling  waves.  Silent  he  heard  their  voice,  and  left- 
cd  on  his  fpear!  Morning  rofe,  with  its  beams.    The  fons 

of 

*  By  the  fpirit  of  the  mountain  is  meant  that  deep  and  melancholy  found  which 
precedes  a  Ooim  ;  well  known  to  thofe  who  live  in  a  high  country. 


A    POEM. 


231 


of  Erin  appear  ;  like  grey  rocks,  with  all  their  trees,  they 
fpread  along  the  coaft.  Cairbar  ftood,  in  the  midft.  He 
grimly  fmiled  when  he  faw  the  foe.  Nathos  ruftied  for- 
ward, in  his  ftrength  :  nor  could  Dar-thula  flay  behind. 
She  came  with  the  hero,  lifting  her  fhining  fpear.  And 
who  are  thefe,  in  their  armour,  in  the  pride  of  youth  ? 
Who  but  the  fons  of  Ufnoth,  AUhos  and  dark-haired 
Ardan  ? 

"  Come,"  faid  Nathos,  "  come  !  chief  of  high  Temo- 
ra !  Let  our  battle  be  on  the  coaft,  for  the  white-bofomed 
maid.  His  people  are  not  with  Nathos  ;  they  are  behind 
thefe  rolling  feas.  Why  doft  thou  bring  thy  thoufands 
againft  the  chief  of  Etha  ?  Thou  didft  fly  *  from  him,  in 
battle,  when  his  friends  were  around  his  fpear."  "  Youth 
of  the  heart  of  pride,  fhall  Erin's  king  fight  with  thee  ? 
Thy  fathers  were  not  among  the  renowned,  nor  of  the 
kings  of  men.  Are  the  arms  of  foes  in  their  halls  ?  or 
the  fhields  of  other  times  ?  Cairbar  is  renowned  in  Te- 
mora,  nor  does  he  fight  with  feeble  men !" 

The  tear  flarted  from  car-borne  Nathos.  He  turned 
his  eyes  to  his  brothers.  Their  fpears  flew,  at  once.  Three 
heroes  lay  on  earth.  Then  the  light  of  their  fwords  gleam- 
ed on  high.  The  ranks  of  Erin  yield;  as  a  ridge  of  dark 
clouds  before  a  blaft  of  wind  !  Then  Cairbar  ordered  his 
people,  and  they  drew  a  thoufand  bows.  A  thoufand  ar- 
rows flew.  The  fons  of  Ufnoth  fell  in  blood.  They  fell 
like  three  young  oaks,  which  ftood  alone  on  the  hill:  The 
traveller  faw  the  lovely  trees,  and  wondered  how  they  grew 
fo  lonely:  the  blaft  of  the  defart  came,  by  night,  and  laid 
their  green  heads  low ;  next  day  he  returned,  but  they 
were  withered,  and  the  heath  was  bare  ! 

Dar-thula  ftood  in  filent  grief,  and  beheld  their  fall! 
Ko  tear  is  in  her  eye  ;  but  her  look  is  wildly  fad.  Pale 
was  her  cheek.  Her  trembling  lips  broke  fhort  an  half- 
formed  word.  Her  dark  hair  flew  on  wind.  The  gloomy 
Cairbar  came.  "  Where  is  thy  lover  now  ?  the  car-borne 
chief  of  Etha  ?  Haft  thou  beheld  the  halls  of  Ufnoth  ? 
or  the  dark-brown  hills  of  Fingal  ?  My  battle  would  have 
roared  on  Morven,  had  not  the  winds  met  Dar-thula. 

Firigal 

*  He  alludes  to  the  flight  of  Cairbar  from  Sclama, 


232 


D  A  R  -  T  H  U  L  A. 


Fingal  himfelf  would  have  been  low,  and  forrow  dwelling 
inSelma!"  Her  fhield  fell  from  Dar-thula's  arm.  Her 
breaft  of  fnow  appeared.  It  appeared  ;  but  it  was  flained 
with  blood.  An  arrow  was  fixed  in  her  fide.  She  fell  on 
the  fallen  Nathos,  like  a  wreath  of  fnow !  Her  hair  fpreads 
wide  on  his  face.    Their  blood  is  mixing  round  ! 

"  Daughter  of  Colla  !  thou  art  low  !"  faid  Cairbar's 
hundred  bards.    "  Silence  is  at  the  blue  llreams  of  Se- 
lama.    Truthil's*  race  have  failed.    When  wilt  thou  rife 
in  thy  beauty,  firfl  of  Erin's  maids  ?  Thy  fleep  is  long  in  ■ 
the  tomb  :   the  morning,  diftant  far.    The  fun   fliall  not 
come  to  thy  bed  and  fay,  "  Awake,  Darthula!  awake,  thou 
firfl  of  women  !  The  wind  of  fpring  is  abroad  !  the  flowers 
{hake  their  heads  on  the  green  hills !  the  woods  wave  their 
growing  leaves  !"    Retire,  O  fun  !  the  daughter  of  Colla  ■ 
is  afleep.    She  will  not  come  forth  in  her  beauty  !    She ' 
will  not  move,  in  the  Heps  of  her  lovelinefs  !'* 

Such  was  the  fong  of  the  bards,  when  they  raifed  the 
tomb.  1  fung  over  the  grave,  when  the  king  of  Morven 
came  ;  when  he  came  to  green  Erin,  to  fight  with  car- 
borne  Cairbar  ! 

*  Tmihil  was  the  founder  of  Dar-thula's  family. 


THE 


THE 


DEATH  OF  CUTHULLIN 


P  O  E 


Og 


ARGUMENT, 

CUTHULLIN,  after  the  arms  of  Fingal  had  expelled  Swaran  from  Ireland,  con- 
tinued to  manage  the  affairs  of  that  kingdom  as  the  guardian  of  Cormac,  the 
young  king.  In  the  third  year  of  Cuthullin's  adminiftration,  Torlath,  the  fon 
of  Cantela,  rebelled  in  Connaught;  and  advanced  to  Temora  to  dethrone  Cor- 
mac. Cuthullin  marched  againft  Kim,  came  up  with  him  at  the  lake  of  Lego, 
and  totally  defeated  his  forces.  Torlath  fell  in  battle  by  Cuthullin's  hand;  but 
as  he  too-eagerly  prelTed  on  the  enemy,  he  was  mortally  wounded.  The  af- 
fairs of  Cormac,  though,  for  foroe  time,  fupported  by  Nathos,  as  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  poem,  fell  into  confufion  at  the  death  of  Cuthullin.  Cormac  him- 
felf  was  {lain  by  the  rebel  Cairbar ;  and  the  re-eftablifhment  of  the  royal  family 
of  Ireland  by  Fingal,  furniflies  the  fubjeft  of  the  epic  ppem  of  Temora. 


The  death  of  CUTHULLIN: 


POEM. 

IS  the  wind  on  the  fhleld  of  Fingal  ?  or  is  the  voice  of 
pafl  times  in  my  hall  ?  Sing  on,  fweet  voice,  for  thou 
art  pleafant.  Thou  carrieft  away  my  night  with  joy. 
Sing  on,  O  Bragela,  daughter  of  car-borne  Sorglan  ! 

"  It  is  the  white  wave  of  the  rock,  and  not  CuthuUin's 
fails.  Often  do  the  mills  deceive  me,  for  the  fhip  of  my 
iove  ;  when  they  rife  round  fome  ghoft,  and  fpread  their 
grey  Ikirts  on  the  wind.  Why  doll  thou  delay  thy  com- 
ing, fon  of  the  generous  Semo  ?  Four  times  has  autumit 
returned  with  its  winds,  and  raifed  the  feas  of  Togorma*, 
fmce  thou  haft  been  in  the  roar  of  battles,  and  Bragela 
diftant  far  !  Hills  of  the  ifle  of  mift  !  when  will  ye  anfwer 
to  his  hounds  ?  But  ye  are  dark  in  your  clouds.  Sad 
Bragela  calls  in  vain  !  Night  comes  rolling  down.  The 
face  of  ocean  fails.  The  heath-cock's  head  is  beneath  his 
wing.  The  hind  fleeps,  with  the  hart  of  the  defart.  They 
(hall  rife  with  morning's  light,  and  feed  by  the  mofly 
ftream.  But  my  tears  return  with  the  fun  ;  my  fighs 
come  on  with  the  night.  When  wilt  thou  come  in  thine 
arms,  O  chief  of  Erin's  wars  ?" 

Pleasant  is  thy  voice  in  Oflian's  ear,  daughter  of 
car-borne  Sorglan !  But,  retire  to  the  hall  of  fhells  ;  to 
the  beam  of  the  burning  oak.  Attend  to  the  murmur  o£ 
the  fea  :  it  rolls  at  Dunfcai's  walls.  Let  fleep  defcend  oa 
thy  blue  eyes  :  let  the  hero  arife  in  thy  dreams  ! 

CUTHULLIK 

*  Togorma,  i.  e.  the  ijland  of  blue  waves,  one  of  the  Hebrides,  was  fubjeft  to 
Connal,  the  fon  of  Caithbat,  Cuthulhn's  friend.  He  is  fometimcs  called  the  fon 
of  Colgar,  from  one  of  that  name  who  was  the  founder  of  the  family.  Connal,  a 
few  days  before  the  news  of  Torlath's  revolt  came  to  Temora,  had  failed  to  To- 
gorma, his  native  ifle  ;  where  he  was  deuined  by  coaUAry  winds  during  the  wax  iu 
'.vhich  Cuthullin  was  killed. 


236      The  DEATH  of  CUTHULLIN  : 

CuTHULLiN  fits  at  Lego's  lake,  at  the  dark-rolling  of 
waters.  Night  is  around  the  hero.  His  thoufands  fpread 
on  the  heath.  A  hundred  oaks  burn,  in  the  midft.  The 
feaft  of  fhells  is  fmoking  wide.  Carril  ftrikes  the  harp, 
beneath  a  tree.  His  grey  locks  glitter  in  the  beam.  The 
ruftling  bla'il:  of  night  is  near,  and  lifts  his  aged  hair. 
His  fong  is  of  the  blue  Togorma,  and  of  its  chief,  Cu- 
thuUin's  friend !  "  Why  art  thou  abfent,  Connal,  in  the 
day  of  the  gloomy  ftorm  ?  The  chiefs  of  the  fouth  have 
convened,  againlt  the  car-borne  Cormac.  The  winds  de- 
tain thy  fails  :  thy  blue  waters  roll  around  thee.  But 
Cormac  is  not  alone.  The  fon  of  Semo  fights  his  wars  ! 
Semo's  fon  his  battles  fights  !  the  terror  of  the  ftranger ! 
he  that  is  like  the  vapour  of  death,  flowly  borne  by  fultry 
winds  !  The  fun  reddens  in  its  prefence  :  the  people  fall 
around.'* 

Such  was  the  fong  of  Carril,  when  a  fon  of  the  foe 
appeared.  He  thjew  down  his  pointlefs  fpear.  He  fpoke 
the  words  of  Torlath  !  Torlath,  chief  of  heroes,  from 
Lego's  fable  furge  !  he  that  led  his  thoufands  to  battle, 
againfl  car-borne  Cormac.  Cormac,  who  was  difiant  far, 
in  Temora's  *  echoing  halls :  he  learned  to  bend  the  bow 
of  his  fathers  ;  and  to  lift  the  fpear.  Nor  long  didft  thou 
lift  the  fpear,  mildly-ihining  beam  of  youth !  death  ftands 
dim  behind  thee,  like  the  darkened  half  of  the  moon,  be- 
hind its  growing  light !  Cuthullin  rofe  before  the  bard  |, 
that  came  from  generous  Torlath.  He  offered  him  the 
ihell  of  joy.  He  honoured  the  fon  of  fongs.  "  Sweet ' 
voice  of  Lego  !"  he  faid,  "  what  are  the  words  of  Tor- 
lath ?  Comes  he  to  our  feaft  or  battle,  the  car-borne  fon 
of  Cantela  ||  ?" 

"  He  comes  to  thy  battle,"  replied  the  bard,  "  to  the 
founding  ftrife  of  fpears.    When  morning  is  grey  on  Lego, 

Torlath 

*  The  royal  palace  of  the  Irifh  kings ;  Teamhrath,  according  to  fome  of  th:" 
hards. 

t  The  bards  were  the  heralds  of  ancient  times;  and  their  perfons  were  facied  on 
account  of  their  office.    In  later  times  they  abufed  that  privilege ;  and  as  their  per- 
fons were  inviolable,   they  fatyrifed  and  lampooned  fo  freely  thofe  who  were  i  . 
liked  by  their  pafons,  that  they  became  a  public   nuifance.     Screened  under  ti 
charafter  of  heralds,  they  grofsly  abufed  the  enciriy  when  he  would  not  accept ;  ^ 
terms  they  offered. 

II  Ccan-teola',  had  of  a  family , 


A     P  O  E  M.  237 

Toiiath  will  fight  on  the  plain.  Wilt  thou  meet  him,  in 
thine  arms,  king  of  the  ifle  of  mill  ?  Terrible  is  the  fpear 
of  Torlath  !  it  is  a  meteor  of  night.  He  lifts  it,  and  the 
people  fall!  death  "fits  in  the  lightning  of  his  fword  !" 
"  Do  I  fear,"  replied  CuthuUin,  "  the  fpear  of  car-borne 
Torlath  ?  He  is  brave  as  a  thoufand  heroes :  but  my  foul 
delights  in  war !  The  fword  refls  not  by  the  fide  of  Cu- 
thuUin, bard  of  the  times  of  old  !  Morning  ihall  meet  me 
on  the  plain,  and  gleam  on  the  blue  arms  of  Semo's  fon. 
But  fit  thou,  on  the  heath,  O  bard  !  and  let  us  hear  thy 
voice.  Partake  of  the  joyful  fliell ;  and  hear  the  fongs  of 
Temora  !'* 

"  This  is  no  time,"  replied  the  bard,  "  to  hear  the 
fong  of  joy  ;  when  the  mighty  are  to  meet  in  battle,  like 
the  (Irength  of  the  waves  of  Lego.  Why  art  thou  fo  dark, 
Sliinora  *  !  with  all  thy  filent  woods  ?  No  ftar  trembles 
on  thy  top  :  no  moon-beam,  on  thy  fide.  But  the  meteors 
of  death  are  there  :  the  grey  watry  forms  of  ghofts.  Why 
art  thou  dark,  Slimora !  with  thy  filent  woods  ?"  He  re- 
tired, in  the  found  of  his  fong.  Carril  joined  his  voice. 
The  mufic  was  like  the  memory  of  joys  that  are  pad, 
pleafant  and  mournful  to  the  foul.  The  ghofts  of  departed 
bards  heard  on  Slimora's  fide.  Soft  founds  fpread  along 
the  wood.  The  filent  valleys  of  night  rejoice.  So,  when 
he  fits  in  the  filence  of  the  day,  in  the  valley  of  his  breeze, 
the  humming  of  the  mountain-bee  comes  to  Offian's  ear: 
the  gale  drowns  it  in  its  courfe  ;  but  the  pleafant  found 
returns  again  !  Slant  looks  the  fun  on  the  field ;  gradual 
grows  the  lliade  of  the  hill ! 

"  Raise,"  faid  CuthuUin,  to  his  hundred  bards,  "  the 
fong  of  the  noble  Fingal :  that  fong  which  he  hears  at 
night,  when  the  dreams  of  his  reft  defcend  ;  when  the 
bards  ftrike  the  diftant  harp,  and  the  faint  light  gleams  on 
Selma's  walls.  Or  let  the  grief  of  Lara  rife  :  the  fighs  of 
the  mother  of  Calmar  f ,  when  he  was  fought,  in  vain,  on 

his 

*  Slla'mor,  great  hill. 

\  Calmar,  the  fon  of  Matha.  His  death  is  related  at  large  in  ihe  third  book  o^ 
Fingal.  He  was  the  only  fon  of  Matha  ;  and  the  family  was  extintl  in  him.  The 
feat  of  the  family  was  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Lara,  in  the  neighbouihood  of  Lcj^^o, 
2nd  probably  near  the  place  where  CuthuUin  l.iy;  which  circumflance  fuggeRcd  to 
him  the  lamentation  of  Alcleiha  over  her  fon, ' 


238      The  DEATH  of  CUTHULLIN  : 

his  hills ;  when  flie  beheld  his  bow  in  the  hall.  Carril, 
place  the  Ihield  of  Caithbat  on  that  branch.  Let  the  fpear 
of  Cuthullin  be  near ;  that  the  found  of  my  battle  may 
rife,  with  the  grey  beam  of  the  eaft."  The  hero  leaned 
on  his  father's  fhield:  the  fong  of  Lara  rofe!  The  hundred 
bards  were  diflant  far:  Carril  alone  is  near  the  chief.  The 
words  of  the  fong  were  his :  the  found  of  his  harp  was 
mournful. 

"  Alcletha  *  with  the  aged  locks !  mother  of  car- 
borne  Calmar  !  why  doft  thou  look  towards  the  defart,  to 
behold  the  return  of  thy  fon  ?  Thefe  are  not  his  heroes, 
dark  on  the  heath  :  nor  is  that  the  voice  of  Calmar.  It 
is  but  the  diftant  grove,  Alcletha  !  but  the  roar  of  the 
mountain  wind  !  "  Who  j-  bounds  over  Lara's  ftream, 
filler  of  the  noble  Calmar  ?  Does  not  Alcletha  behold  his 
fpear  ?  But  her  eyes  are  dim !  Is  it  not  the  fon  of  Matha, 
daughter  of  my  love  ?" 

"  It  is  but  an  aged  oak,  Alcletha  !"  replied  the  lovely 
weeping  Alona  || .  "  It  is  but  an  oak,  Alcletha,  bent  over 
Lara's  ftream.  But  who  comes  along  the  plain  ?  Sorrow 
is  in  his  fpeed.  He  lifts  high  the  fpear  of  Calmar.  Alcle- 
tha, it  is  covered  with  blood !"  "  But  it  is  covered  with 
the  blood  of  foes§,  fifler  of  car-borne  Calmar  !  His  fpear 
}iever  returned  unftained  with  blood ;  nor  his  bow,  from 
the  ftrife  of  the  mighty.  The  battle  is  confumed  in  his  pre- 
fence:  he  is  a  flame  of  death,  Alona!  Youth^of  the  mourn- 
ful fpeed  !  where  is  the  fon  of  Alcletha  ?  Does  he  return 
vvath  his  fame,  in  the  midft  of  his  echoing  fhields  ?  Thou 
art  dark,  and  filent !  Calmar  is,  then,  no  more  !  Tell  me 
not,  vv  arrior,  hov/  he  fell.  I  muft  not  hear  of  his  wound !" 
Why  doft  thou  look  towards  the  defart,  mother  of  low- 
laid  Calmar?" 

Such  was  the  fong  of  Carril,  when  Cuthullin  lay  on 

his 

*  Alcj-cln'tha  decaying  beauty :  probably  a  poe'ical  name  given  the  inother  of 
Calmar,  by  the  bard'himfelf. 

i  Alcletha  ("peaks.  Calmar  had  promifed  to  return,  by  a  certain  day,  and  his 
imother  and  his  filter  Alona  are  reprefented  as  looking,  with  impatience,  towards 
that  quarter  where  they  expetled  Calmar  fliould  make  his  firfl  appearance. 

li  Aioine,  exqiilfite  beauty. 

%  Alcletha  fpeaks. 

*1  She  addrefies  herfelf  to  LsriMi.   r^lmar\  fiiend.   who  had  returned  with  tllr 


A    POEM. 


^39 


his  fhield.  The  bards  refted  on  their  harps.  Sleep  fell 
foftly  around.  The  Ion  of  Semo  was  awake  alone.  His 
foul  was  fixed  on  war.  The  burning  oaks  began  to  decay. 
Faint  red  li^ht  is  fpread  around.  A  feeble  voice  is  heard. 
The  ghoft  of  Calmar  came  !  He  ftalked  dimly  along  the 
beam.  Dark  is  the  wound  in  his  fide.  His  hair  is  difor- 
dered  and  loofe.  Joy  fits  pale  on  his  face.  He  feems  to 
invite  Cuthullin  to  his  cave. 

"  Son  of  the  cloudy  night !"  faid  the  rifmg  chief  of 
Erin,  "  why  doll  thou  bend  thy  dark  eyes  on  me,  ghoft 
of  the  noble  Calmar  ?  Wouldft  thou  frighten  me,  O 
Matha's  fon  !  from  the  battles  of  Cormac  ?  Thy  hand 
was  not  feeble  in  war  ;  neither  was  thy  voice  for  peace. 
How  art  thou  changed,  chief  of  Lara  !  if  thou  now  doft 
advife  to  fly  !  But,  Calmar,  I  never  fled.  I  never  feared 
the  ghofts  of  night.  Small  is  their  knowledge,  weak 
their  hands  ;  their  dwelling  is  in  the  wind.  But  my  foul 
grows  in  danger,  and  rejoices  in  the  noife  of  fteel.  Re- 
tire thou  to  thy  cave.  Thou  art  not  Calmar's  ghoft.  He 
delighted  in  battle  :  his  arm  was  like  the  thunder  of  hea- 
ven !"  He  retired  in  his  blaft  with  joy,  for  he  had  heard 
the  voice  of  his  praife. 

The  faint  beam  of  the  morning  rofe.  The  found  of 
Caithbat's  buckler  fpread.  Green  Erin's  warriors  con- 
vened, like  the  roar  of  many  ftreams.  The  horn  of  war 
is  heard  over  Lego.  The  mighty  Torlath  came,  "  V/hy 
doft  thou  come  with  thy  thoufands,  Cuthullin  ?"  faid  the 
chief  of  Lego.  "  I  know  the  ftrength  of  thy  arm.  Thy 
foul  is  an  unextinguiflied  fire.  Why  fight  we  not  on  the 
plain,  and  let  our  hofts  behold  our  deeds  ?  Let  them  be- 
hold us  like  roaring  waves,  that  tumble  round  a  rock  ; 
the  mariners  haften  away,  and  look  on  their  ftrife  with 
fear.'' 

"  T?iou  rifeft,  like  the  fun,  on  my  foul,"  replied  the 
fon  of  Semo.  "  Thine  arm  is  mighty,  O  Torlath  !  and 
worthy  of  my  wrath.  Retire,  ye  men  of  Ullin,  to  Sli- 
mora's  ftiady  fide.  Behold  the  chief  of  Erin,  in  the  day 
of  his  fame.  Carril !  tell  to  mighty  Connal,  if  Cuthullin 
muft  fall — tell  him  I  accufed  the  winds,  which  roar  on 
Togorma's  waves.    Never  was  he  abfcnt  in  battle,  when 

the 


240      The  DEATH  of  CUTHULLIN  : 

the  ftrife  of  my  fame  arofe.  Let  his  fv/ord  be  before 
Cormac,  like  the  beam  of  heaven.  Let  his  counfel  found 
in  Temora,  in  the  day  of  danger  !" 

He  rufhed,  in  the  found  of  his  arms,  Kke  the  terrible 
fpirit  of  Loda*  ;  when  he  comes,  in  the  roar  of  a  thou- 
fand  ftorms,  and  fcatters  battles  from  his  eyes.  He  fits 
on  a  cloud  over  Lochlin's  feas.  His  mighty  hand  is  on 
his  fword.  Winds  lift  his  flaming  locks  !  The"  wainiiic^ 
moon  half-lights  his  dreadful  face.  His  features,  blended 
in  darknefs,  arife  to  view.  So  terrible  was  CuthuUin,  in 
the  day  of  his  fame.  Torlath  fell  by  his  hand.  Lego's 
heroes  mourned.  They  gather,  around  the  chief,  like  the 
clouds  of  the  defart.  A  thoufand  fwords  rofe  at  once  ;  s 
thoufand  arrov/s  flew.  But  he  flood  like  a  rock,  in  ih-: 
midfl:  of  the  roaring  fea.  They  fell  around.  He  fl:rode  • 
blood.  Dark  Slimora  echoed  wide.  The  fons  of  Uii 
came.  The  battle  fpread  over  Lego.  The  chief  of  Eri  : 
overcame.  He  returned  over  the  field  with  his  fame.  Bul 
pale  he  returned  !  The  joy  of  his  face  was  dark.  He  roll- 
ed his  eyes  in  fdence.  The  fword  hung,  unflieathed,  in 
his  hand  :  his  fpear  bent  at  every  flep  ! 

"  Carril  1"  faid  the  chief  in  fecret,  *'  the  flrength  of 
CuthuUin  fails.  My  days  are  with  the  years  that  are  pa!i\. 
No  morning  of  mine  ihall  arife.  They  fhall  feek  me  ^\ 
Temora,  but  1  fnall  not  be  found.  Cormac  will  weep 
his  hall,  and  fay,  "  Where  is  Erin's  chief  ?"  But  i. 
name  is  renowned  !  my  fame,  in  the  fong  of  bards.  TI  t 
voath  will  fay  in  fecret,  "  O  let  me  die  as  CuthuUin  died. 
Renown  clothed  him  like  a  robe  :  the  light  of  his  fame  a 
great."  Draw  the  arrow  from  m.y  fide.  Lay  Cuthuilia 
beneath  that  oak.  Place  the  fiiield  of  Caithbat  near,  th  u 
they  may  behold  me  amidft  the  arms  of  my  fathers  !" 

"  And  is  the  fon  of  Semo  fallen  ?"  faid  Carril,  with  a 
figh.  "  Mournful  are  Tura's  walls.  Sorrow  dwells  at 
Dunfc'di.    Thv  fpoufe  is  left  alone  in  her  youth.    The  fcnf 

of 

*  Loda,  in  the  thjrd  book  of  Fingal,  h  mentroned  as  a  ptace  of  woifiiip  in  Scan- 
Jinavia  :  by  thc/phit  of  LcJa,  the  poet  probably  means  Odin,  the  great  deity  of 
t.he  northern  nations.     He  is  delcribed  hfre  with  all  his  terrors. 

t  Conloch,  who  was  afterr^ards  very  famous  for  liis  great  exploits  in  Irerand". 
5Ie  was  fo  remavkabk;  i'cH  his  dj-sterity  in  haadling  the  javclinj  thai  vilica  a  5:aod 

markfmaa 
,  ,\, 


A     P  O  E  M.  241 

of  thy  love  is  alone !  He  fliall  come  to  Bragela,  and  aflc 
her  why  fhe  weeps.  He  fhall  lift  his  eyes  to  the  wall,  and 
fee  his  father's  fword.  "  Whofe  fword  is  that  ?"  he  will 
fay.  The  foul  of  his  mother  is  fad.  Who  is  that,  like  the 
hart  of  the  defart,  in  the  murmur  of  his  courfe  ?  His  eyes 
look  wildly  round,  in  fearch  of  his  friend.  Connal,  fon 
of  Colgar,  where  haft  thou  been,  when  the  mighty  fell  ? 
Did  the  feas  of  Togorma  roll  around  thee  ?  Was  the 
wind  of  the  fouth  in  thy  fails  ?  iThe  mighty  have  fallen 
in  battle,  and  thou  waft  not  there.     Let  none  tell  it  in 

,  Selma,  nor  in  Morven's  woody  land.    Fingal  will  be  fad, 

,  and  the  fons  of  the  defart  mourn  !" 

By  the  dark-rolling  waves  of  Lego  they  raifed  the  hero's 
tomb.    Luath*,  at  a  diftance,  lies.     The  fong  of  bards 

,  rofe  over  the  dead. 

"  Blestj  be  thy  foul,  fon  of  Semo.    Thou  wert  migh- 

!  ty  in  battle.  Thy  ftrength  was  like  the  ftrength  of  a 
ftream  :  thy  fpeed,  like  the  eagle's  wing.    Thy  path  ia 

.  battle  was  terrible  :  the  fteps  of  death  were  behind  thy 

:  fword.    Bleft  be  thy  foul,  fon  of  Semo,  car-borne  chief 

!  of  Dunfcai.  Thou  haft  not  fallen  by  the  fword  of  the 
mighty,  neither  was  thy  blood  on  the  fpear  of  the  brave. 
The  arrow  came,  like  the  fting  of  death  in  a  blaft  :  nor 
did  the  feeble  hand,  which  drew  the  bow,  perceive  it^ 
Peace  to  thy  foul,  in  thy  cave,  chief  of  the  ifle  of  mift  1 

"  The  mighty  are  difperfed  at  Temora :  there  is  none 
in  Cormac's  hall.    The  king  mourns  in  his  youth.    He 

-does  not  behold  thy  return.  The  found  of  thy  lliield  is 
ceafed  :  his  foes  are  gathering  round.  Soft  be  thy  reft  in 
thy  cave,  chief  of  Erin's  wars  !  Bragela  will  not  hope  for 
thy  return,  or  fee  thy  fails  in  ocean's  foam.  Her  fteps  are 
not  on  the  ftiore  ;  nor  her  ear  open  to  the  voice  of  thy 
H  h  rowers. 

markfman  is  defcribcd,  it  has  paffed  into  a  proverb,  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  He  is 
unerring  as  the  arm  of  Conloc'i. 

*  It  was,  of  old,  the  cuftom  to  bury  the  favourite  dog  near  the  mafter.  This  was 
ilot  peculiar  to  the  ancient  Scots,  for  we  find  it  praftifed  by  many  other  nations  in 
their  ages  of  heroifni.  There  is  a  flone  fliewn  dill  at  Dunfriii  in  the  ifle  of  Sky, 
to  which  CuthuUin  commonly  bound  his  dog  Luath.  The  Hone  goes  by  his  name 
to  this  day. 

+  This  is  the  fong  of  the  bards  over  CuthuUin's  tomb.  Every  ftanza  clofes  with 
fome  remarkable  title  of  the  hero,  which  w.is  alwovs  the  cuftom  in  funeral  elegies. 


242       The  DEATH  of  CUTHULLIN. 

rowers.  She  fits  In  the  hall  of  flieils.  She  fees  the  arms 
of  him  that  is  no  more.  Thine  eyes  are  full  of  tears, 
daughter  of  car-borne  Sorglan !  Blell  be  thy  foul  in! 
death,  O  chief  of  fliady  Tura  !" 


" 


THE 


THE 


BATTLE   OF  LOR  A 


P  O  E  M, 


ARGUMENT. 

FINGAL,  on  his  return  from  Ireland,  after  he  had  expelled  Swaran-from  that 
kingdom,  made  a  feaft  to  all  his  heroes ;  he  forgot  to  invite  Ma-ronnan  and  Ai- 
de, two  chiefs,  who  had  not  been  along  with  him  in  his  expedition.  They  re- 
fented  his  negleft ;  and  went  over  to  Erragon  king  of  Sora,  a  country  of  Scandi- 
navia, the  declared  enemy  of  Fingal,  The  valour  of  Aldo  foon  gained  him  a 
great  reputation  in  Sora ;  and  Lorma  the  beautiful  wife  of  Erragon  fell  in  love 
with  him.  He  found  means  to  efcape  with  her,  and  to  come  to  Fingal,  who 
jefided  then  in  Selma  on  the  wedern  coaft.  Erragon  invaded  Scotland,  and  was 
ilain  in  battle  by  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni,  after  he  had  rejefted  terms  of  peace  of- 
fered him  by  Fingal.  In  this  war  Aldo  fell,  in  a  fingle  combat,  by  the  hands 
of  his  rival  Erragon  ;  and  the  unfortunate  Lorma  afterv/ards  died  of  grief. 


The  battle  of  LORA  : 


P  O  E  xM. 

SON  of  the  diftant  land,  who  dwelleft  In  the  fecret  cell ! 
do  I  hear  the  found  of  thy  grove  ?  or  is  it  thy  voice 
of  fongs  ?  The  torrent  was  loud  in  my  ear  ;  but  I  heard  a 
tuneful  voice.  Dofl  thou  praife  the  chiefs  of  thy  land;  or 
the  fpirits  *  of  the  wind  ?  But,  lonely  dweller  of  rocks  ! 
look  thou  on  that  heathy  plain.  Thou  feed  green  tombs, 
with  their  rank,  whiftling  grafs;  with  their  (tones  of  mofly 
heads.  Thou  feeft  them,  fon  of  the  rock ;  but  Offian's 
eyes  have  failed. 

A  MOUNTAIN-STREAM  comes  roaring  down,  and  fends 
its  waters  round  a  green  hill.  Four  moffy  ftones,  in  the 
midfl  of  withered  grafs,  rear  their  heads  on  the  top.  Two 
trees,  which  the  ftorms  liave  bent,  fpread  their  whiftling 
branches  around.  This  is  thy  dwelling,  Erragon  f  ;  this, 
thy  narrow  houfe.  The  found  of  thy  fhells  have  been  long 
forgot  in  Sora  :  thy  fhield  is  become  dark  in  thy  hall. 
Erragon,  king  of  fhips  !  chief  of  diftant  Sora  !  how  haft 
thou  fallen  on  our  mountains  ?  how  is  the  mighty  low  ? — 
Son  of  the  fecret  cell !  doft  thou  delight  in  fongs  ?  Hear 
the  battle  of  Lora.  The  found  of  its  fteel  is  long  fmce 
paft.  So  thunder,  on  the  darkened  hill,  roars,  and  is  no 
more.  The  fun  returns  with  his  filent  beams.  The  glit- 
tering rocks,  and  green  heads  of  the  mountains,  fmile ! 

The  bay  of  Cona  received  our  fliips  ||  from  Erin's  roll-* 
ing  waves.  Our  white  ftieets  hung  loofe  to  the  mafts. 
The  boifterous  winds  roared  behind  the  groves  of  Morven. 
The  horn  of  the  king  is  founded :  the  deer  ftart  from  their 
rocks.  Our  arrows  flew  in  the  woods.  The  feaft  of  the 
hill  is  fpread.    Our  joy  was  great,  on  our  rocks,  for  the 

fall 

*  Alluding  to  the  religious  hymns  of  the  Culdees.  , 

+  Erragon,  or  Ferg-thonn,  fignifies  the  rage  of  the  waves :  probably  a  poetical 
name  given  him  by  OlTian  himfelf ;  for  he  goes  by  the  name  of  Annir  in  tradition. 
H  This  was  at  Fingal's  return  from  his  war  againft  Swaran. 


246         The  battle  of  LOR.A: 

fall  of  the  terrible  Swaran.  Two  heroes  were  forgot  at 
our  feaft.  The  rage  of  their  bofoms  burned.  They  rolled 
their  red  eyes  in  fecret.  The  figh  burfls  from  their  breafts. 
They  were  feen  to  talk  together,  and  to  throw  their  fpears 
on  earth.  They  were  two  dark  clouds,  in  the  midfl:  of 
our  joy;  like  pillars  of  mifi:  on  the  fettled  fea.  They  glit- 
ter to  the  fun,  but  the  mariners  fear  a  ftorm. 

"  Raise  my  white  fails,"  faid  Ma-ronnan,  "  raife  them 
to  the  winds  of  the  wePc.  Let  us  rufh,  O  Aldo,  through 
the  foam  of  the  northern  wave.  We  are  forgot  at  the 
feaft:  but  our  arms  have  been  red  in  blood.  Let  us  leave 
the  hills  of  Fingal,  and  ferve  the  king  of  Sora.  His  coun- 
tenance is  fierce.  War  darkens  around  his  fpear.  Let  us 
be  renowned,  O  Aldo,  in  the  battles  of  other  lands  !'* 

They  took  their  fwords,  their  Ihields  of  thongs.  They 
rufhed  to  Lumar's  refounding  bay.  They  came  to  Sora's 
haughty  king,  the  chief  of  bounding  fteeds.  Erragon  had 
returned  from  the  chace.  His  fpear  was  red  in  blood.  He 
bent  his  dark  face  to  the  ground,  and  whiflled  as  he  went. 
He  took  the  flrangers  to  his  feafts:  they  fought,  and  con- 
quered, in  his  wars. 

Aldo  returned  with  his  fame  towards  Sora*s  lofty  wall' 
From  her  tower  looked  the  fpoufe  of  Erragon,  the  humii 
rolling  eyes  of  Lorma.  Her  yellow  hair  flies  on  the  wiiu 
of  ocean.  Her  white  breaft  heaves,  like  fnow  on  heath  ; 
w^hen  the .  gentle  winds  arife,  and  flowly  move  it  in  the 
light.  She  faw  young  Aldo,  like  the  beam  of  Sora's  fet- 
ting  fun.  Her  foft  heart  fighed.  Tears  filled  her  eyes. 
Her  white  arm  fupported  her  head.  Three  days  fhe  fat 
within  the  hall,  and  covered  her  grief  with  joy.  On  the 
fourth,  flie  fled  with  the  hero,  along  the  troubled  fea. 
They  came  to  Cona's  moify  towers,  to  Fingal  king  of 
1  pears. 

"  Aldo  of  the  heart  of  pride  !'*  faid  Fingal,  rlfing  in 
wrath :  "  fliall  I  defend  thee  from  the  rage  of  Sora's  in- 
jured king?  Who  will  now  receive  my  people  into  their 
halls?  who  will  give  the  feaft  of  flrangers;  fince  Aldo,  of 
the  little  foul,  has  difhonoured  my  name  in  Sora?  Go  to 
thy  hills,  thou  feeble  hand.  Go :  hide  thee  in  thy  caves. 
Mournful  is  the  battle  we  muft  fight,  wdth  Sora's  gloomy 

king. 


A     P  O  E  M.  247 

king.  Spirit  of  the  noble  Trenmor !  when  will  Fingal 
ceafe  to  fight?  I  was  born  in  the  midft  of  battles  *,  and 
my  fteps  mud  move  in  blood  to  the  tomb.  But  my  hand 
did  not  injure  the  weak,  my  (leel  did  not  touch  the  feeble 
in  arms.  I  behold  thy  tempefts,  O  Morven,  which  will 
overturn  my  halls ;  when  my  children  are  dead  in  battle, 
and  none  remains  to  dwell  in  Selma.  Then  will  the  feeble 
come,  but  they  will  not  know  my  tomb.  My  renown  is 
only  in  fong.  My  deeds  fhall  be  as  a  dream,  to  future 
times !" 

His  people  gathered  around  Erragon,  as  the  florms 
round  the  ghofl  of  night ;  when  he  calls  them,  from  the 
top  of  Morven,  and  prepares  to  pour  them  on  the  land  of 
the  llranger.  He  came  to  the  fliore  of  Cona.  He  fent  his 
bard  to  the  king,  to  demand  the  combat  of  thoufands,  or 
the  land  of  many  hills !  Fingal  fat  in  his  hall,  with  the 
friends  of  his  youth  around  him.  The  young  heroes  were 
at  the  chace,  far  diftant  in  the  defart.  The  grey-haired 
chiefs  talked  of  other  times ;  of  the  actions  of  their  youth  ; 
when  the  aged  Nartmorf  came,  the  chief  of  ftreamy  Lora. 

"  This  is  no  time,"  laid  Nartmor,  "  to  hear  the  fongs 
of  other  years  :  Erragon  frowns  on  the  coaft,  and  lifts  ten 
thoufand  fwords.  Gloomy  is  the  king  among  his  chiefs ! 
He  is  like  the  darkened  moon,  amidfl  the  meteors  of 
night  ;  when  they  fail  along  her  fklrts,  and  give  the  light 
that  has  failed  o'er  her  orb."  "  Come,"  faid  Fingal, 
"  from  thy  hall,  come,  daughter  of  my  love  ;  come  from 
thy  hall,  Bofminaj|,  maid  of  ftreamy  Morven  !  Nartmor, 
take  the  Heeds  of  the  ftrangers.  Attend  the  daughter  of 
Fingal !  Let  her  bid  the  king  of  Sora  to  our  feaft,  to  Sel- 
ma's  lliaded  wall.  Offer  him,  O  Bofmina,  the  peace  of 
heroes,  and  the  wealth  of  generous  Aldo.  Our  youths 
are  far  diftant :  age  is  on  our  trembling  hands  !" 

She  came  to  the  hoft  of  Erragon,  like  a  beam  of  light 
to  a  cloud.  In  her  right  hand  was  feen  a  fparkling  fliell : 
in  her  left,  an  arrow  of  gold.    The  firft,  the  joyful  mark 

of 

*  Comhal  the  father  of  Fingal  was  (lain  in  battle,  againft  the  tribe  of  Morni,  the 
veiy  day  that  Fingal  was  born ;  fo  that  he  may,  with  propriety,  be  faid  to  have  beea 
born  in  the  midjl  of  battles. 

t  Neart-ir.or,  great  ftrength.     Lora,  noify. 

U  Bof-mhina,  Jhft  and  tenkir  hand.     She  was  the  voungeR  of  Fingal's  children. 


248         The  BATTLE  of  LORA  : 

of  peace:  the  latter,  the  fign  of  war.  Erragon  brightened 
in  her  prefence,  as  a  rock  before  the  fudden  beams  of  the 
fun  ;  when  they  iifue  from  a  broken  cloud,  divided  by  the 
roaring  wind ! 

"  Son  of  the  diflant  Sora,"  began  the  mildly-blufhing 
maid,  "  come  to  the  feaft  of  Morven's  king,  to  Selma'* 
Hiaded  walls.  Take  the  peace  of  heroes,  O  warrior  !  Let 
the  dark  fword  reft  by  thy  fide.  Chufell  thou  the  wealth 
of  kings  ?  Then  hear  the  words  of  generous  Aldo.  He 
gives  to  Erragon  an  hundred  fteeds,  the  children  of  the 
rein  ;  an  hundred  maids,  from  dillant  lands  ;  an  hundred 
hawks,  with  fluttering  wing,  that  fly  acrofs  the  iky.  An 
hundred  girdles*  fliall  alfo  be  thine,  to  bind  high-bofom- 
ed  maids :  the  friends  of  the  births  of  heroes  :  the  cure  of 
the  fons  of  toil.  Ten  fliells,  fliudded  with  gems,  fliall  fliine 
in  Sora's  towers  :  the  bright  water  trembles  on  their  fi;ars, 
and  feems  to  be  fparkling  wine.  They  gladdened  once  the 
kings  of  the  world-]-,  in  the  midfl:  of  their  echoing  hall 
Thefe,  O  hero,  fliall  be  thine ;  or  thy  white-bofome.l 
fpoufe.  Lorma  fliall  roll  her  bright  eyes  in  thy  halls  ; 
though  Fingal  loves  the  generous  Aldo  :  Fingal !  who 
never  injured  a  hero,  though  his  arm  is  ft:rong  !" 

"  Soft  voice  of  Cona  !"  replied  the  king,  "  teli  him, 
he  fpreads  his  feafl:  in  vain.  Let  Fingal  pour  his  fpoils 
around  me.  Let  him  bend  beneath  my  power.  Let  him 
give  me  the  fwords  of  his  fathers  :  the  fliields  of  other 
times  ;  that  my  children  may  behold  them  in  my  halls, 
and  fay,  Thefe  are  the  arms  of  Fingal."  "  Never  fliall 
they  behold  them  in  thy  halls  !"  faid  the  rifmg  pride  of 
the  maid.  "  They  are  in  the  hands  of  heroes,  who  never 
yielded  in  war.  King  of  echoing  Sora !  the  florm  is  ga- 
thering on  our  hills.  Dofl:  thou  not  forefee  the  fall  of  thy 
people,  fon  of  the  difl:ant  land  ?" 

She  came  to  Selma's  filent  halls.    The  king  beheld  her 

do\\ii- 

*  Santlified  girdles,  till  very  lately,  were  kept  in  many  families  in  the  north  of 
Scotland;  they  M-ere  bound  about  vomen  in  labour,  and  were  fuppofed  to  alleviate 
their  pains,  and  to  accelerate  the  birth.  Thev  were  impieffed  with  feveral  myfli- 
cul  iijrures,  and  the  ceremony  of  binding  them  about  the  woman's  waifl,  was  ac- 
ro;i\pinied  with  words  and  geftures  which  fliewed  the  ciiltom  to  b.ive  come  origi- 
rjllv  from  the  druids. 

t  Thr;  Roman  emperors. 


A    POEM. 


249 


down-caft  eyes.  He  rofe  from  his  place,  In  his  ftrength. 
He  fhook  his  aged  locks.  He  took  the  founding  mail  of 
Trenmor,  the  dark-brown  Ihleld  of  his  fathers.  Darknefs 
filled  Selma's  hall,  when  he  ftretched  his  hand  to  his  fpear: 
the  ghofts  of  thoufands  were  near,  and  forefaw  the  death 
of  the  people.  Terrible  joy  rofe  in  the  face  of  the  aged 
heroes.  They  ruflied  to  meet  the  foe.  Their  thoughts  are 
on  the  deeds  of  other  years  ;  and  on  the  fame  that  rifes 
from  death  ! 

Now  at  Trathal's  ancient  tomb  the  dogs  of  the  chace 
appeared.  Fingal  knew  that  his  young;  heroes  followed. 
He  ftopt  in  the  midil  of  his  courfe.  Ofcar  appeared  the 
firll ;  then  Morni's  fon,  and  Nemi's  race.  Fercuth  *  Ihew- 
ed  his  gloomy  form.  Dermid  fpread  his  dark  hair  on 
wind.  Oflian  came  the  lail.  I  hummed  the  fong  of  other 
times.  My  fpear  fupported  my  fteps  over  the  little 
ftreams.  My  thoughts  were  of  mighty  men.  Finga! 
flruck  his  boffy  fl:iieid ;  and  gave  the  difmal  fign  of 
war.  A  thoufand  fwords,  at  once  unfheathed,  gleam  on 
the  waving  heath.  Three  grey-haired  fons  of  fong  raife 
the  tuneful,  mournful  voice.  Deep  and  dark,  with  found- 
ing fleps,  we  ruih,  a  gloomy  ridge,  along:  like  the  fliower 
of  a  Itorm,  when  it  pours  on  a  narrow  vale. 

The  king  of  Morven  fat  on  his  hill.  The  fun-beam  of 
battle  flew  on  the  wind.  The  friends  of  his  youth  are 
near,  with  all  their  waving  locks  of  age.  Joy  rofe  in  ^2e. 
hero's  eyes  when  he  beheld  his  fons  in  war;  when  he  law 
us,  amidft  the  lightning  of  fwords,  mindful  of  the  4i;eds 
of  our  fathers.  -Erragon  came  on,  in  his  ftrength,  Hke 
the  roar  of  a  winter  ftream.  The  battle  fails  around  liis 
fteps :  death  dimly  ftalks  along  by  his  fide ! 

"  Who  comes,"  faid  Fingal,  "  like  the  bounding  roe,' 
like  the  hart  of  echoing  Cona  ?  His  fnieid  glitters  on  his 
fide.  The  clang  of  his  armour  is  mournful.  He  meets 
with  Erragon  in  the  flrife!  Behold  the  battle  of  the  chiefs! 
It  is  like  the  contending  of  ghofls  in  a  gloomy  ftorm. 
But  fallelt  thou,  fon  of  the  hill,  and  is  thy  white  bofom 
ftained  with  blood  ?  Weep,  unhappy  Lorma,  Aldo  is  no 
li  morel" 

*  Fear-ciub,  the  fame  wit!i  Fergus,  tk  inan  of  tk  word,  or  commander  of  ?.r. 
army. 


250  The  BATTLE  of  LORA: 

more  !"  The  king  took  the  fpear  of  his  flrength.    He  was 
fad  for  the  fall  of  Aldo.    He  bent  his  dreadful  eyes  on  the  ' 
foe  :  but  Gaul  met  the  king  of  Sora.    Who  can  relate  the 
fight  of  the  chiefs  ?    The  mighty  (Iranger  fell ! 

"  Sons  of  Cona !"  Fingal  cried  aloud,  "  ftop  the  hand  of  j 
death.  Mighty  was  he  that  is  low.  Much  is  he  mourned  I 
in  Sora !  The  ftranger  will  come  towards  his  hall,  and 
Avonder  why  it  is  fo  filent.  The  king  is  fallen,  O  ftranger. 
The  joy  of  his  houfe  is  ceafed.  Liften  to  the  found  of  his 
woods.  Perhaps  his  ghoft  is  murmuring  there  !  But  he  is 
far  diftant,  on  Morveri,  beneath  the  fword  of  a  foreign 
foe."  Such  were  the  words  of  Fingal,  when  the  bard 
raifed  the  fong  of  peace.  We  ftopped  our  uplifted  fwords. 
We  fpared  the  feeble  foe.  We  laid  Erragon  in  a  tomb. 
I  raifed  the  voice  of  grief.  The  clouds  of  night  came  roll- 
ing down.  The  ghoft  of  Erragon  appeared  to  fome.  His 
face  was  cloudy  and  dark ;  an  half-formed  figh  is  in  his 
breaft.  "  Bleft  be  thy  foul,  O  king  of  Sora !  thine  arm 
was  terrible  in  war  !" 

LoRMA  fat,  in  Aldo's  hall.  She  fat  at  the  light  of  a 
flaming  oak.  The  night  came  down,  but  he  did  not  re- 
turn. The  foul  of  Lorma  is  fad  !  "  What  detains  th 
hunter  of  Cona  ?  Thou  didft  promife  to  return.  Has  : 
deer  been  diftant  far  ?  Do  the  dark  winds  figh,  rou;:  i 
Vhee,  on  the  heath  ?  I  am  in  the  land  of  ftrangers;  where 
is  kny  friend,  but  Aldo.?    Come  from  thy  founding  hills,; 

0  nay  beft  beloved  !"  1 
H'ER  eyes  are  turned  toward  the  gate.    She  liftens  to 

the  ^'•uftling  blaft.  She  thinks  it  is  Aldo's  tread.  Joy  riles 
in  -^ler  face  !  But  forrow  returns  again,  like  a  thin  cloud 
on  the  moon.  "  Wilt  thou  not  return,  my  love  r  Let  me 
behold  the  face  of  the  hill.  The  moon  is  in  the  eaft. 
Calm  and  bright  is  the  breaft  of  the  lake !  When  Ihall  I 
behold  his  dogs,  returning  from  the  chace .?    When  ftiall 

1  hear  his  voice,  loud  and  diftant,  on  the  wind  ?  Come 
from  thy  founding  hills,  hunter  of  the  woody  Cona!" 
His  thin  ghoft  appeared,  on  a  rock,  like  a  watry  beam  of 
feeble  light ;  when  the  moon  rufties  fudden  from  between 
two  clouds,  and  the  midnight  fhower  is  on  the  field  !  She 
followed  the  empty  form  over  the  heath.    She  knew  that 

her 


A     P  O  E  M.  251 

her  hero  fell.  I  heard  her  approaching  cries  on  the  wind, 
like  the  mournful  voice  of  the  breeze,  when  it  fighs  on 
the  grafs  of  tke  cave ! 

She  came.  She  found  her  hero  !  Her  voice  was  heard 
no  more.  Silent  flie  rolled  her  eyes.  She  was  pale,  and 
"wildly  fad  !  Few  were  her  days  on  Cona.  She  funk  into 
the  tomb.  Fingal  commanded  his  bards  ;  they  fung  over 
the  death  of  Lorma.  The  daughters  of  Morven  mourned 
her,  for  one  day  in  the  year,  when  the  dark  winds  of  au- 
tumn returned  ! 

Son  of  the  diftant  land  *  !  Thou  dwelled  in  the  field 
of  fame !  O  let  thy  fong  aiife,  at  times,  in  praife  of  thofe 
who  fell.  Let  their  thin  ghofts  rejoice  around  thee ;  and 
the  foul  of  Lorma  come  on  a  feeble  beam  f :  when  thou 
Heft  down  to  reft,  and  the  moon  looks  into  thy  cave. 
Then  flialt  thou  fee  her  lovely;  but  the  tear  is  ftiil  on  her 
cheek ! 

'  The  poet  addreffes  himfelf  to  the  Culdee. 
1)C  thou  on  a  moon-beam,  O  Morna,  near  the  window  of  my  reft;   when  my 
!,ts  are  of  peace  ;  and  the  din  of  arms  is  paR.  FINGAL,  B.  I. 


T  E  M  O  R  A .: 


T      E      M       O       R       A 


A  N 


EPIC       P     O    E    M. 


In    eight    books. 


ARGUMENT. 

CAIRBAR,  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul,  lord  of  Atha  in  Connaught,  the  mofi  po- 
tent chief  of  the  race  of  the  Fir-blog,  having  murdered,  at  Terr.ora  the  royal  pa- 
lace, Cormac  the  fon  of  Aitho,  the  young  king  of  Ireland,  ufurped  the  throne. 
Cormac  was  lineally  defcended  from  Conar  the  fon  of  Trenmor,  the  great  grand- 
father of  Fingal,  king  of  thofe  Caledonians  who  inhabited  the  weftern  coaft  of 
Scotland.  Fingal  refented  the  behaviour  of  Cairbar,  and  refolved  to  pafs  over 
into  Ireland  with  an  army,  to  re-eftaolilh  the  royal  family  on  the  Irifh  throne. 
Early  intelligence  of  his  defigns  coming  to  Cairbar,  he  affembled  lome  of  his 
tribes  in  Ulfter,  and  at  the  fame  time  ordered  his  brother  Cathmor  to  follow  him 
fpeedily  with  an  army,  from  Temora.  Such  was  the  fituation  of  affairs  whea 
the  Caledonian  invaders  appeared  on  the  coaft  of  Ulfler. 

The  poem  opens  in  the  morning.  Cairbar  is  reprefented  as  retired  from  the 
reft  of  the  army,  when  one  of  his  fcouts  brought  him  news  of  the  landing  of 
Fingal.  He  affembles  a  council  of  his  chiefs.  Foldath  the  chief  of  Moma 
haughtily  defpifcs  the  enemy  ;  and  is  reprimanded  warmly  by  Malthos.  Cairbar, 
after  hearing  their  debate,  orders  a  feaft  to  be  prepared,  to  which,  by  his  bard, 
i  Oila,  he  invites  Ofcar  the  fon  of  Offian  ;  refolving  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  that 
hero,  and  to  have  fome  pretext  for  killing  him.  Ofcar  came  to  the  feaft;  the 
quarrel  happened  ;  the  followers  of  both  fought,  and  Cairbar  and  Ofcar  fell  by 
mutual  wounds.  The  noife  of  the  battle  reached  Fingal's  army.  The  king  came 
on,  40l];e  relief  of  Ofcar,  and  the  Irilh  fell  back  to  the  army  of  Cathmor,  who 
was  advanced  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Lubar,  on  the  heath  of  Moilena.  Fingal, 
after  mourning  over  his  grandfon,  ordered  Ullin  the  chief  of  his  bards  to  carry 
his  body  to  Moiven,  to  be  there  interred.  Night  coming  on,  Althan,  the  fon  of 
Conachar,  relates  to  the  king  the  particulars  of  the  murder  of  Cormac.  Fillan, 
the  fon  of  Fingal,  is  fent  to  obferve  the  motions  of  Cathmor  by  night,  which 
concludes  the  aciion  of  the  firft  day.  The  fcene  of  this  book  is  a  plain,  near 
the  hill  of  Mora,  which  rofe  on  the  borders  of  the  heath  of  Moilena,  in  Ulfler. 


M       O      R      A  : 


EPIC        POEM, 
BOOK     I. 

THE  blue  waves  of  Erin  roll  In  light.  The  moun- 
tains are  covered  with  day.  Trees  fhake  their  dufky 
heads,  in  the  breeze.  Grey  torrents  pour  their  noify 
jfireams.  Two  green  hills,  with  aged  oaks,  furround  a 
narrow  plain.  The  blue  courfe  of  a  ftream  is  there.  On 
its  banks  flood  Cairbar*  of  Atha.  His  fpear  fupports  the 
king  :  the  red  eye  of  his  fear  is  fad.  Cormac  rifes  in  his 
loul,  with  all  his  ghaftly  wounds.  The  grey  form  of  the 
youth  appears  in  darknefs.  Blood  pours  from  his  airy  fide. 
Cairbar  thrice  threw  his  fpear  on  earth.  Thrice  he  flroak- 
ed  his  beard.  His  fteps  are  fhort.  He  often  flops.  He 
toffes  his  fmewy  arms.  He  is  like  a  cloud  in  the  defart, 
varying  its  form  to  every  blafl :  the  valleys  are  fad  around, 
and  fear,  by  turns,  the  ihower.  The  king,  at  length,  re- 
fumed  his  foul.  He  took  his  pointed  fpear.  He  turned  his 
eye  to  Moi-lena.  The  fcouts  of  blue  ocean  came.  They 
came,  with  Heps  of  fear,  and  often  looked  behind.  Cair- 
bar knew  that  the  mighty  were  near  !  He  called  his 
gloomy  chiefs. 

The  founding  fleps  of  his  warriors  came.     They  drew, 
at  once,  their  fwords.    There  Morlathf  flood,  with  dark- 
ened 

*  Cairbar,  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul,  vas  delcended  lineally  from  Lathon  the 
chief  of  the  Fir-blog,  the  firft  colony  who  fettled  in  the  fouth  of  Ireland.  The  Cael 
were  in  poffeffion  of  the  northern  coaft  of  that  kingdom,  and  the  firft  monarchs  of 
Ireland  were  of  their  race  Hence  arofe  thofe  differences  between  the  two  nations, 
which  terminated,  at  laft,  in  the  murder  of  Cormat  and  the  ufurpalion  of  Cairbar, 
lord  of  Atha,  who  is  mentioned  in  this  place. 

t  Mor-lath,  great  in  the  day  of  battle.  Hidalla',  mildiy 'looking  hero.  Cor-mar, 
expert  at  fea.     hlAi\\-o%,  Jlozv  to /peak.     Yo\a?i.\.h,  generous. 

Foldath,  who  is  here  ftron^ly  marked,  makes  a  great  figure  in  the  fequel  of  the 
poem.  His  fierce,  uncomplying  charafter  is  fuftained  throughout.  He  feems, 
iTom  a  paffage  in  the  fecond  book,  to  have  been  Caii bar's  greateft  confidant,  and 
to  have  had  a  principal  hand  in  the  confpiracy  againft  Cormac  king  of  Ireland.  His 
tribe  was  one  of  the  moft  confiderable  of  the  race  of  the  Fir-bloj, 


256  T    E    M    O    R   A: 

ened  face.  HIdalla's  long  hair  fighs  In  wind.  Red-haired 
Cormar  bends  on  his  fpear,  and  rolls  his  fide-long-looking 
eyes.  Wild  is  the  look  of  Malthos,  from  beneath  two 
fhaggy  brows.  Foldath  Hands,  like  an  oozy  rock,  that 
covers  its  dark  fides  with  foam.  His  fpear  is  like  Slimo- 
ra's  fir,  that  meets  the  wind  of  heaven  :  his  fhield  is 
marked  with  the  ftrokes  of  battle  :  his  red  eye  defpifes 
danger.  Thefe,  and  a  thoufand  other  chiefs,  furroundad 
the  king  of  Erin,  when  the  fcout  of  ocean  came,  Mor- 
annal*,  from  flreamy  Moi-lena.  His  eyes  hang  forward 
from  his  face  :  his  lips  are  trembling,  pale  ! 

"  Do  the  chiefs  of  Erin  fland,"  he  fald,  "  filent  as 
the  grove  of  evening  ?  Stand  they,  like  a  filent  wood,  and 
Fingal  on  the  coaft  ?  Fingal,  who  is  terrible  in  battle, 
the  king  of  flreamy  Morven  !'*  "  Haft  thou  feen  the 
warrior  ?'*  faid  Cairbar,  with  a  figh.  "  Are  his  heroes 
many  on  the  coaft  ?  Lifts  he  the  fpear  of  battle  ?  Or 
comes  the  king  in  peace  ?'*  "  In  peace  he  comes  not, 
king  of  Erin.  I  have  feen  his  forward  fpear |.  It  is  a 
meteor  of  death.  The  blood  of  thoufands  is  on  its  fteel. 
He  came  firft  to  the  fhore,  ftrong  in  the  grey  hair  of  age. 
Full  rofe  his  finewy  limbs,  as  he  ftrode  in  his  might. 
That  fword  is  by  his  fide,  which  gives  no  fecond  ||  wound. 
His  ftiield  is  terrible,  like  the  bloody  moon,  afcending 
through  a  ftorm.  Then  came  Offian  king  of  fongs.  Then 
Morni's  fon,  the  firft  of  men.  Connal  leaps  forward  on 
his  fpear.  Dermid  fpreads  his  dark-brown  locks.  Fillan 
bends  his  bow,  the  young  hunter  of  ftreamy  Moruth.  But 
who  is  that  before  them,  like  the  terrible  courfe  of  a 
ftream  !  It  is  the  fon  of  OfTian,  bright  between  his  locks  ! 
His  long  hair  falls  on  his  back.  His  dark  brows  are  half- 
inclofed  in  fteel.    His  fword  hangs  loofe  on  his  fide.    His 

fpear 

*  M6r-annal,  prong-breath;  a  very  proper  name  for  a  fcout. 

\  Mor-annal  here  alludes  to  the  particular  appearance  of  Fingal's  fpear.  If  a 
man,  upon  his  firft  landing  in  a  ftrange  country,  kept  the  point  of  his  fpear  for- 
ward, it  denoted  in  ihofe  days  that  he  came  in  a  hoftile  manner,  and  accordingly 
he  was  treated  as  an  enemy;  if  he  kept  the  point  behind  him,  it  was  a  token  of 
friendfliip,  and  he  was  immediately  invited  to  the  feaft,  according  to  the  hofpitality 
of  the  times, 

II  This  was  the  famous  fword  of  Fingal,  made  by  Luno,  a  fmith  of  Lochlin,  and 
after  him  poetically  called  tht  Jhi  of  Luno:  it  is  faid  of  this  fword,  that  it  killed  a 
man  at  every  ftroke ;  and  that  Fingal  never  ufed  it  but  in  times  of  the  gr*aceft 
danfjcr. 


Book  I.         An  EPIC   POEM.  2^7 

fpear  glitters  as  he  moves.  I  fled  from  his  terrible  eyes, 
king  of  high  Temora  !" 

"  Then  fly,  thou  feeble  man,'*  faid  Foklath's  gloomy 
wrath.  "  Fly  to  the  grey  fl:reams  of  thy  land,  fon  of  the 
little  foul !  Have  not  I  feen  ihat  Ofcar  ?  I  beheld  the  chief 
in  war.  He  is  of  the  mighty  in  danger :  but  there  are 
otljers  who  lift  the  fpear.  Erin  has  many  fons  as  brave^ 
king  of  Teraora  of  groves  !  Let  Foldath  meet  him  in  his 
llrength.  Let  me  flop  this  mighty  ftream.  My  fpear  is 
covered  with  blood.    My  fhield  is  like  the  wall  of  Tura  \" 

"  Shall  Foldath  *  alone  meet  the  foe  ?"  replied  the 
dark-browed  Malthos.  "  Are  they  not,  on  our  coaft,  like 
the  waters  of  many  ftreams  ?  Are  not  thefe  the  chiefs, 
who  vanquiflied  Swaran,  when  the  fons  of  green  Erin  fled? 
Shall  Foldath  meet  their  braveft  hero  ?  Foldath  of  the 
heart  of  pride !  Take  the  flrength  of  the  people !  and  let 
Malthos  come.  My  fword  is  red  with  fiaughter,  but  who 
has  heard  my  words  |  ?" 

"  Sons  of  green  Erin,"  faid  Hidalla  |!,  "  let  not  Fingal 
hear  your  words.  The  foe  miglit  rejoice,  and  his  arm  be 
.flrong  in  the  land.  Ye  are  brave,  O  warriors !  Ye  are 
tempefts  in  war.  Ye  are  like  ftorms,  which  meet  the 
rocks  without  fear,  and  overturn  the  woods.  But  let  us 
move  in  our  ftrength,  flow  as  a  gathered  cloud !  Then 
fliall  the  mighty  tremble;  the  fpear  fliall  fall  from  the  hand 
of  the  valiant.  We  fee  the  cloud  of  death,  they  will  fay, 
while  fliadows  fly  over  their  face.  Fingal  will  mourn  in 
his  age.  He  fliall  behold  hrs  flying  fame.  The  fl:eps  of 
his  chiefs  will  ceafc  in  Morven.  The  mofs  of  years  fliali 
grow  in  Selma." 

Cairbar  heard  their  words,  in  filence,  like  the  cloud 

of  a  fliower :  it  ftands  dark  on  Cromla,  till  the  liglitning 

burfl:s  its  fide.    The  valley  gleams  with  heaven's  flame  ; 

K  k  ^        the 

*  The  cppofite  cbaraften  of  Foldath  and  Malthos  are  ftrongly  mSrleu  in  fubfe- 
quent  parts  of  the  poem.  They  appear  alvv'ays  in  oppcrfition.  The  feuds  between 
their  families,  which  were  the  fource  of  chcii  hatred  to  one  anotlier,  are  mentioned 
in  other  poems. 

+  That  is,  who  has  heard  my  vaunting?  He  intended  the  expreflicn  as  a  rcbuka 
to  the  felf-praife  of  Foldath. 

II  Hidalla  was  the  chief  of  Clonra,  a  fmall  diflria  on  the  barjcs  of  the  lake  o£ 
Lego.  The  beauty  of  his  perj'on,  his  ^loqucnes  and  genius  for  poetry,  are  after- 
v<ards  mentioned. 


258  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

the  fplrits  of  the  ftorm  rejoice.  So  ftood  the  filent  king 
of  Temcra  :  at  length  his  words  brake  forth.  "  Spread 
the  feail  on  Moi-leiia.  Let  my  hundred  bards  attend. 
Thou,  red-hair'd  Olia,  take  the  harp  of  the  king.  Go  to 
Oicar  chief  of  fwords.  Bid  Ofcar  to  our  joy.  To-day  we 
feafland  hear  the  fong:  to-morrow,  break  the  fpears !  Tell 
him  that  I  have  raifed  the  tomb  of  Cathol  *  ;  that  bards 
gave  his  friend  to  the  winds.  Tell  him  that  Cairbar  haa 
heard  of  his  fame,  at  the  ilream  of  refoundlng  Carun  j , 
Cathmor  ||  my  brother  is  not  here.  He  is  not  here  witli 
his  thoufand3,^-aad  our  arms  are  weak.  Cathmor  is  a  foe 
to  ft  rife  at  the  feaft !  His  foul  is  bright  as  that  fun  !  But 
Cairbar  muft  fight  with  Ofcar,  chiefs  of  the  woody  Te- 
mora !  His  words  for  Cathol  were  many :  the  wrath  of 
Cairbar  burns.  He  fliall  fall  on  Moi-lena.  My  fame  fhall 
rife  in  blood.'* 

Their  faces  brightened  round  with  joy.  They  fpread 
over  Moi-lena.  '  The  feaft  of  fliells  is  prepared.  The  fongs 
of  bards  arife.    The  chiefs  of  Selma  heard  their  joy  §.    We 

thought 

*  Cathol  the  fon  of  Maronnan,  or  Moran,  was  murdered  by  Cairbar,  for  his  at* 
tacbmcnt  to  the  family  of  Cormac.  He  had  attended  Ofcar  to  the  war  of  Inis' 
tkona,  where  they  contraBed  a  great  friendfliip  for  one  another.  Ofcar,  immedf"- 
ately  after  the  deaih  of  Cathol,  had  fent  a  formal  challange  to  Cairbar,  which 
he  prudently  declined,  but  conceived  a  fecret  hatred  againft  Ofcar,  and  had  before-. 
hand  contrived  to  kill  him  at  the  feaft,  to  which  he  here  invites  him. 

+  He  alludes  to  the  battle  of  Ofcar  againft  Caros,  king  ofjiiips ;  who  is  fuppof- 
ed  to  be  the  fame  with  Caraufuts  the  ufurper. 

H  Cathmor,  great  in  battle,  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul,  and  brother  of  Cairbar 
king  of  Ireland,  had,  before  the  infurrefiion  of  the  Firblog,  paffed  over  into  Inis- 
luina,  fuppofed  to  be  a  part  of  South-Britain,  to  aftift  Conmor  king  of  that  place 
a.Niiuft  his  enemies,  Cathmor  was  fuccefsful  in  the  war,  but,  in  the  courfe  of  it, 
Conmor  was  cither  killed,  or  died  a  natural  deatih.  Cairbar,  upon  intelligencfe  of 
the  ci:,i;;ns  ot  Fiuf;al  to  dt  throne  him,  had  difpatched  a  meffenger  for  Cathmor, 
wlio  rctuined  into  Ireland  a  few  days  before  the  opening  of  the  poem. 

Caubar  here  takes  ddvautage  of  his  brother's  abfence,  to  perpetrate  his  ungene- 
rous dcfigas  againll  OLar ;  for  the  nobk;  fpirit  of  Cathmor,  had  he  been  prefent, 
would  not  have  permifted  the  laws  of  that  hofpitality,  for  which  he  was  fo  reno\,va- 
ed  limfclf,  to  be  violated.  The  brothers  form  a  contraft  :  we  do  not  deleft  the 
mean  foul  of  Cijirbar  more,  than  we  admire  the  difinterefted  and  generous  mind  of 
Cathmor. 

^  Fingal's  army  heard  the  joy  that  was  in  Cairbar's  camp.  The  charafter  given 
of  C-ubmor  is  agreeable  10  the  times.  Some,  througli  uQentation,  were  hofpitable  ; 
and  others  fell  naturally  into  a  cuftom  handed  down  from  their  anceftors.  But  what 
marks  flrongly  the  charafter  of  Cathmor,  is  his  averfion  to  praife  ;  for  he  is  repre- 
fented  to  dwell  in  a  wood  to  avoid  the  thanks  of  his  gueils;  which  is  fliil  a  higher  , 
degree  of  generofitv  than  that  of  Axylus  in  Homer;  for  the  poet  doe»  not  fay,  hut 

the 


Book  I.  An  EPIC   POEM.  259 

thought  that  mighty  Cathmor  came.  Cathmor,  the  friend 
.  of  flrangers  !  the  bi-other  of  red-haired  Cairbar.  Their 
I  fouls  were  not  the  fame.  The  light  of  heaven  was  in  the 
i  bofom  of  Cathmor.  His  towers  rofe  on  the  banks  of  Atha : 
■  feven  paths  led  to  his  halls.  Seven  chiefs  flood  on  the 
paths,  and  called  the  flranger  to  the  feafl !  But  Cathmor 
dwelt  in  the  wood,  to  Ihun  the  voice  of  praife ! 

Olla  came  with  his  fongs.     Ofcar  went  to  Cairbar's 

feaft.    Three  hundred  warriors  ftrode,  along  Moi-lena  of 

the  Hreams.    The  grey  dogs  bounded  on  the  heath  :  their 

I  hmvling  reached  afar.     Fingal  faw  the  departing  hero. 

f  The  foul  of  the  king  was  fad.    He  dreaded  Cairbar's  gioo- 

!  my  thoughts,  amidft  the  feaft  of  iliells.    My  fon  raifed  high 

i  the  fpear  of  Cormac.    An  hundred  bards  met  him  with 

fongs.    Cairbar  concealed,  with  fmiles,  the  death,  that  was 

dark  in  his  foul.    The  feaft  is  fpread.    The  fliells  refound. 

Joy  brightens  the  face  of  the  hoft.    But  it  was  like  the 

parting  beam  of  the  fun,  when  he  is  to  hide  his  red  head 

in  a  ftorm ! 

Cairbar  rifes  in  his  arms.  Darknefs  gathers  on  his 
brow.  The  hundred  harps  ceafe  at  once.  The  clang  *  of 
fhields  is  heard.  Far  diftant  on  the  heath  Olla  raifed  a 
fong  of  woe.  My  fon  knew  the  fign  of  death  ;  and,  riilng, 
feized  his  fpear.  "  Ofcar,"  faid  the  dark-red  Cairbar, 
*'  I  behold  the  fpear  |  of  Erin.     The  fpear    of  Temo- 

ra 

the  ^ood  man  might,  at  the  head  of  his  own  tabic,  have  heard  with  pieafiire  the 
praiie  bellowed  on  him  by  the  psoplc  he  emcrtaintd. 

iS  o  nation  in  the  world  earned  hofpitahty  to  a  greater  length  than  the  anci- 
ent Scots.  It  was  even  infamous,  for  many  ages,  in  a  man  of  condition,  to  have 
the  door  of  his  how fc  fhut  at  all,  LJc,  as  the  bards  exprefs  it,  the  Jl^anga  Jliould 
come  and  behold  hii  contraBed  Joid.  Some  of  the  chiefs  were  po^Veiled  of  this  hof- 
pitable  difpofuion  to  an  extravagant  degree;  and  the  bards,  perhaps  upon  a  pri- 
vate account,  never  failed  to  recommend  it,  in  th?ir  eulo;;iu,ps.  Cean  uia'  va  dai\ 
or  the  point  to  which  all  the  reads  of  the  Jlr  angers  Lad,  w  s  an  invariable  epithet  given 
by  them  to  the  chiefs ;  ou  tiie  contrary,  thsy  diftingnifhed  the  inhofpitable  by  the 
title  of  the  cloud  which  the  flrangers  Jlam.  This  lall  however  was  fo  uncommon, 
that  in  all  the  old  poems  I  have  ever  met  with,  1  found  but  one  m.an  branded  with 
this  ignominious  appellation ;  and  that,  perhaps,  only  founded  upon  a  private  quar- 
rel, which  fubfifted  between  him  and  the  patron  of  the  bard,  who  wrote  ibe  poem. 

*  When  a  chief  was  determined  to  kill  a  perfon  already  Jn  his  power,  it  was 
lifiial  to  lignify,  that  his  death  was  intended,  by  the  found  of  a  fhield  firuck  with 
the  blunt  end  of  a  fpear  :  at  the  fame  time  that  a  bard  at  a  diftance  raifed  the  death  - 
Jong. 

+  Cormac,  the  fon  of  Arth,  had  given  the  fpear,  which  is  here  the  foundation 
of  the  quarrel,  to  Ofcar,  when  he  came  to  congratulate  him,  upon  Swaran's  being 
txpclled  from  Ireland. 


26o  T    E    M    O    R    A : 

ra  *  glitters  In  thy  hand,  fon  of  woody  Morven !  It  was 
the  pride  of  an  hundredf  kings  :  the  death  of  heroes  of 
old.  Yield  it,  fon  of  OlTian,  yield  it  to  car-borne  Cair- 
bar  !" 

"  Shall  I  yield,"  Ofcar  replied,  "  the  gift  of  Erin's 
injured  king  :  the  gift  of  fair-haired  Cormac,  when  Ofcar 
fcattered  his  foes  ?  I  came  to  Cormac's  halls  of  joy,  when 
Swaran  fled  from  Fingal.  Gladnefs  rofe  in  the  face  of 
youth.  He  gave  the  fpear  of  Temora.  Nor  did  he  give 
it  to  the  feeble :  neither  to  the  weak  in  foul.  The  dark- 
nefs  of  thy  face  Is  no  ftorm  to  me :  nor  are  thine  eyes  the 
flame  of  death.  Do  I  fear  thy  clanging  fhield  ?  Tremble 
I  at  Olla's  fong  ?  No:  Cairbar,  frighten  the  feeble :  Ofcar 
is  a  rock  !' 

"  AViLT  thou  riot  yield  the  fpear  ?'*  replied  the  rifm|_ 
pride  of  Cairbar.  "  Are  thy  words  fo  mighty,  becaufd 
Fingal  is  near  ?  Fingal  with  aged  locks,  from  Morven'f 
hundred  groves  !  He  has  fought  with  little  men.  But  h( 
mud  vanilh  before  Cairbar,  like  a  thin  pillar  of  mifl  bei 
fore  the  winds  of  Atha  |]  i"  "  Were  he,  who  fought  with 
little  men,  near  Atha's  haughty  chief  j  Atha's  chief  would 
yield  green  Erin,  to  avoid  his  rage !  Speak  not  of  the 
jiiighty,  O  Cairbar  !  Turn  thy  fword  on  me.  Our 
flrength  is  equal :  but  I'ingal  is  renowned  !  th^  firft  of 
mortal  men  !" 

Their  people  faw  the  darkening  chiefs.    Their  crowd- 

'  y       ■    ■  ^ 

laifed  the  fong  of  battle.    The  trembling  joy  of  Ofcars  ' 
foul  arofe:  the  wonted  joy  of  his  foul,  when  Fingal's  horn 

was  heard.    Dark  as  the  fwelling  wave  of  ocean  before  \ 

the„rirmg  winds,  when  it  bends  its  head  near  the  coaft,  I 

came  on  the  hod  of  Cairbar !  ' 

Daughter 

*  Ti'  mor-r',  tke  hmjt  of  the  gnat  king,  the  name  of  the  loyal  palace  of  the  fu- 
preme  kinr,s  of  Ireland. 

+  Hundred  here  is  an  indefinite  number,  and  is  only  intended  to  exprefs  a  great 
many.  It  was  probably  the  hyperbolical  phrafes  of  bards,  that  gave  the  firft  hint 
to  the  I.ifh  Senachies  to  place  the  origin  of  their  monarchy  in  fo  remote  a  period  as 
they  have  done. 

I  Atha,  Jliaibw  ri^cr  :  the  name  of  Cairbar's  feat  in  Connaught, 


ing  fleps  are  heard  around.     Their  eyes  roll  in  fire. 
thoufand  fwords  are  half  unfheathed.     Red-haired  OIU    | 


jBoOKl.  An   epic   poem.  261 

'I  Daughter  of  Tofcar  *  !  why  that  tear?  He  is  not 
fallen  yet.  Many  were  the  deaths  of  his  arm  before  my 
hero  fell ! 

Behold  they  fall  before  my  fon,  like  groves  in  the  de- 
fart  ;  when  an  angry  ghofl  rulhes  through  night,  and 
takes  their  green  heads  in  his  hand  ! — Morlath  falls.    Ma- 

:  ronnan  dies.  Conachar  trembles  in  his  blood  !  Cairbar 
Hirinks  before  Ofcar's  fword !  He  creeps  in  darknefs  be- 
hind a  ftone.  He  lifts  the  fpear  in  fecret :  he  pierces  my 
dear's  fide  !    He  falls  forward  on  his  fhield :  his  knee 

!  fuftains  the  chief.    But  flill  his  fpear  is  in  his  hand.    See, 

.  gloomy  Cairbar  f  falls  !  The  fteel  pierced  his  forehead, 
and  divided  his  red  hair  behind.    He  lay,  like  a  fliattered 

.  rock,  which  Cromla  fliakes  from  its  fhitggy  fide ;  when 
the  green  vallied  Erin  iliakes  its  mountains  from  fea  to  fea! 

But 

Malvina,  the  daughter  of  Tofcar,  to  whom  is  addrefTed  that  part  of  the  poem 
1  rekted  to  the  death  of  Ofcar  her  lover. 

The  Irifh  hiflorians  place  the  death  of  Cairbar,  in  the  latter  end  of  the    third 

r\- :  tliey  fay,  he  was  killed  in  battle  againft  Ofcar  the  fon  of  Offian,  hut  they 

ihat  he  fell  by  his  hand. 

1.  is,  however,  certain,  that  the  Irifh  bards  difj^iiife,  in  fome  meafure,  this  part 

I  of  their  hiftory.    An  Irilh  poem  on  this  fubjcft,  v/hich,  undoubtedly,  was  the  fource 

1  of  their  information,  concerning  the  battle  of  Gabhra,  where  Cairbar  fell,  is  juft 

1  now  in  my  hands.    As  a  tranflation  of  the  poem  (which,  though  evidently  no  very 

j  ancient  compofition,  docs  not  want  poetical  merit)  w»uid  ext'cRd  this  note  to  too 

I  great  a  length,  I  {liall  only  give  the  llory  of  it  in  brief,  with  fome  extracts  from 

i  ihe  original  Irilh. 

j       Ofcar,  fays  the  Irifla  bard,  was  invited  to  a  feaft,  at  Temora,  by  Cairbar  king 
of  Ireland.     A  diipute  arofe  between  the  two  heroes,  concerning  the  exchange  of 
,  which  was  ufually  made,  between  the  guefls  and  tht^ir  hoft,  upon  luch  oc- 
-s.     In  the  courfe  of  their  altercation,  Caiibar  faid,  in  a  boaftfiil  manner,  that 
yald  hunt  on  the  hills  of  Albion,  and  carry  the  fpoils  of  it  into  Ireland,  in 
of  all  the  efforts  of  its  inhabitants.     The  original  words  are : 
Eriathar  buan  fin  ;  Briathar  buan 
A  bheireadhan  Cairbre  rua', 
Gu  tuga'  fe  fealg,  agus  creach 
A  \\'  Albin  an  la'r  na  mhaireach. 
I  Olcar  replied,  that,  the  next  day,  he  himfelf  would  carry  into  Albion  the  fpoifc  of 
the  five  provinces  of  Ireland,  in  fpite  of  the  oppofition  of  Cairbar. 
Briathar  eile  an  aghai'  fin 
A  bheirea'  an  t'  Ofcar,  og,  calma 
Gai'n  tugadh  fe  f'alg  agus  creach 
Do  AW  Albin  an  la'r  na  mhaireach,  S:c. 
f  Ofcar,  in  confcquence  of  his  threats,  began  to  lay  wafle  Ireland ;  but  as  he  return- 
''  ed  with  the  fpoil  into  Ulft'^r,  thro'  the  narrow  pafs  of  Gabhra  {Caoil ghUn  Ghahhra) 
lie  was  met,  by  Cairbar,  and  a  battle  enfued,  in  which  both  the  heroes  fell  by  mu- 
tual wounds.    The  bard  gives  a  very  curious  lift  of  the  followers  of  Ofcar,  as  they 
,   inarched  to  battle.   They  appear  to  have  been  five  hundred  in  number,  commanded, 
a3»the  poet  expreffes  it,  by  Jive  heroes  of  the  blood  of  kings.     This  poem  mentions 
f  FJngal,  as  arriving  from  Scotland,  before  Ofcar  died  ot  his  wounds. 


262  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

But  never  more  fhall  Ofcar  rife  !  He  leans  on  his  bof- 
fy  fhield.  His  fpear  is  in  his  terrible  hand.  Erin's  fons 
ftand  diftant  and  dark.  Their  fnouts  arife  like  crouded 
ftreams.  Moi-lena  echoes  wide.  Fingal  heard  the  found. 
He  took  the  fpear  of  Selma.  His  fteps  are  before  us  on 
the  heath.  He  fpoke  the  words  of  woe.  "  I  hear  the 
noife  of  war.  Young  Ofcar  is  alone.  Rife,  fons  of  Mor- 
ven  :  join  the  hero's  fword  !" 

OssiAN  rufhed  along  the  hesth.  Fillan  bounded  over 
Moi-lena.  Fingal  ftrode  in  his  ftrength.  The  light  of  his 
fliield  is  terrible.  The  fons  of  Erin  faw  it  far  diftant. 
They  trembled  in  their  fouls.  They  knew  that  the  wrath 
of  the  king  arofe;  and  they  forefaw  their  death.  We  firft 
arrived.  We  fought.  Erin's  chiefs  withftood  our  rage. 
But  when  the  king  came,  in  the  found  of  his  courfe,  \vhat 
heart  of  Heel  could  ftand !  Erin  fled  over  Moi-lena.  Death 
purfued  their  flight.  "We  faw  Ofcar  on  his  fliield.  We 
law  his  bloood  around.  Silence  darkened  every  face. 
Each  turned  his  back,  and  wept.  The  king  fl:rove  to  hide 
his  tears.  His  grey  beard  whiftled  in  the  wind.  He  bends 
his  liead  above  the  chief.    His  words  are  mixed  with  fighs. 

"  Ap.t  thou  fallen,  O  Ofcar,  in  the  midft  of  thy  couril  f^ 
The  heart  of  the  aged  beats  over  thee !  He  fees  thy  com- 
ing v/ars  !  The  wars,  which  ought  to  come,  he  fees  !  They 
arc  cut  off  from  thy  fame  !  When  fnall  joy  dwell  at  Sel- 
ma ?  •  When  fliall  grief  depart  from  Morven  ?  My  fons  fail 
by  degrees:  Fingal  is  the  lail  of  his  race.  My  fame  be- 
gins to  pafs  away.  Mine  age  will  be  without  friends.  I 
fhall  fity  a  grey  cloud,  in  my  hall.  I  fliall  not  hear  the 
return  of  a  ion,  in  his  founding  arms.  Weep,  ye  heroes 
of  Morven  !   never  more  fhall  Ofcar  rife  !" 

And  they  did  weep,  O  Fingal !  Dear  was  the  hero  to 
thdir  fouls.  He  went  out  to  battle,  and  the  foes  vaniflied. 
He  returned,  in  peace,  amidft  their  joy.  No  father  mourn- 
ed his  ion  flain  in  youth:  no  brother,  his  brother  of  love. 
They  fell  without  tears,  for  the  chief  of  the  people  is  low  : 
Bran  *  is  hov/ling  at  his  feet :  gloomy  Luath  is  fad  ;  for 
he  had  often  led  them  to  the  chace  j  to  the  bounding  roe 
of  the  defart ! 

Wk;. 

*  jBian  was  one  of  Fing^l's  dogs.     Bran  figiiifies  ammntaiv-ftrtam. 


Book  I.  An  EPIC    POEM.  263 

When  Ofcar  faw  his  friends  around,  his  heaving  bread 
avoie.  "  The  groans,"  he  laid,  "of  aged  chiefs:  the 
howling  of  my  dogs :  the  fudden  burfts  of  the  fong  of  grief, 
have  melted  Ofcar's  foul :  niy  foul,  that  never  melted  be- 
fore. It  was  like  the  ilcel  of  my  fword.  Offiau,  carry  me 
to  my  hills  !  Ralfe  the  Itones  of  my  renown.  Place  the 
horn  of  a  deer:  place  my  fv^-ord,  by  my  fide.  The  torrent 
hereafter  may  raife  the  earth  :  the  hunter  may  find  the 
fteel,  and  fay,  This  has  been  Ofcar*s  fword,  the  pride  of 
other  years  !"  "  Failed  thou,  fon  of  my  fame  !  Shall  I 
never  fee  thee,  Ofcar !  When  others  hear  of  their  fons  ; 
iliall  I  not  hear  of  thee  ?  The  mofs  is  on  thy  four  grey 
ftones.  The  mournful  wind  is  there.  The  battle  fliall  be 
fought  without  thee.  Thou  flialt  not  purfue  the  dark- 
brown  hinds.  When  the  warrior  returns  from  battles, 
and  tells  of  other  lands ;  "  I  have  feert  a  tomb,"  he  will 
fay,  "  by  the  roaring  dream,  the  dark  dwelling  of  a  chief. 
He  fell  by  car-borne  Ofcar,  the  drd  of  mortal  men."  I, 
perhaps,  iliall  hear  his  voice.  A  beam  of  joy  will  rife  in 
my  foul.'* 

Night  would  have  defcended  in  forrow,  and  morning 
returned  in  the  fliadow  of  grief.  Our  chiefs  would  have 
ftood,  like- cold  dropping  rocks  on  Moi-lena,  and  have 
forgot  the  war ;  did  not  the  king  difperfe  his  grief,  and 
raife  his  mighty  voice.  The  chiefs,  as  new-wakened  from 
dreams,  lift  up  their  heads  around. 

"  How  long  on  Moi-lena  Hiall  we  weep  ?  Hov/  long 
pour  in  Erin  our  tears  ?  The  mighty  will  not  return.  Of- 
car fliall  not  rife  in  his  drength.  The  valiant  mud  fall  in. 
their  day,  and  be  no  more  known  ^on  their  hills.  Where 
are  our  fathers,  O  warriors !  the  chiefs  of  the  times  of 
old  ?  They  have  fet,  like  dars  that  have  (hone.  We  only 
hear  the  found  of  their  praifc.  But  they  were  renowned 
in  their  years  :  the  terror  of  oth^.r  times.  Thus  iliall  we 
pafs  away,  in  the  day  of  our  fail.  Then,  let  us  be  re- 
no'vned  when  we  may,  and  leave  our  fame  behind  us  j 
like  the  iad  beams  of  the  fun,  when  he  hides  his  red  head 
in  the  wed  :  the  traveller  mourns  his  abibnce,  thinking 
of  the  flame  of  his  beams,  Ullin,  my  aged  bard  !  take 
thou  the  fliip  of  the  king.    Carry  Ofcar  to  oelnia  of  harps. 

Let 


2^4  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

Let  the  daughters  of  Morvcn  weep  :  we  mufl  fight  in 
Erin,  for  the  race  of  fallen  Gormac.  The  days  of  my 
years  begin  to  fail.  I  feel  the  weaknefs  of  my  arm.  My 
fathers  bend  from  their  clouds,  to  receive  their  grey- 
hair'd  fon.  But,  before  I  go  hence,  one  beam  of  fame 
fliall  rife.  My  days  fliall  end,  as  my  years  begun,  in  fame. 
My  life  (hall  be  one  ilream  of  light,  to  bards  of  other 
times !" 

Ullin  rais'd  his  white  fails.  The  wind  of  the  fouth 
came  forth.  He  bounded  on  the  waves  toward  Selma.  I 
remained  in  my  grief,  but  my  words  were  not  heard.  The 
feaft  Is  fpread  on  Moi-lena.  An  hundred  heroes  reared 
the  tomb  of  Cairbar.  No  fong  is  raifed  over  the  chief. 
His  foul  had  been  dark  and  bloody.  The  bards  remem- 
bered the  fall  of  Cormac !  what  could  they  fay  in  Cairbar's 
praife  ? 

Night  came  rolling  down.  The  light  of  an  hundred 
oaks  arofe.  Fingal  fat  beneath  a  tree.  Old  Althan  *  flood 
in  the  midft.  He  told  the  tale  of  fallen  Cormac.  Althan 
the  fon  of  Conachar,  the  friend  tDf  car-borne  Cuthullin. 
He  dwelt  with  Cormac  in  windy  Temora,  when  Seme's 
fon  fell  at  Lego's  flream.  The  tale  of  Althan  was  mourn^ 
ful.    The  tear  was  in  his  eye,  when  he  fpoke. 

I  "  The  fetting  fun  was  yellow  on  Dora  |}.  Grey  even- 
ing began  to  defcend.  Temora's  woods  fhook  with  tl^e 
blad:  of  the  unconilant  wind.  A  cloud  gathered  in  the 
well.  A  red  ftar  looked  from  behind  its  edge.  I  flood  in 
the  wood  alone.  I  faw  a  ghofl  on  the  darkening  air!  His 
flride  extended  from  hill  to  hill.  His  fhield  was  dim  en 
his  fide.  It  was  the  fon  of  Semo,.  I  knev/  the  warri- 
or's face.  But  he  paffed  away  in  his  blaft;  and  all  was  dark 
around!  My  foul  was  fad.  I  went  to  the  hall  of  fhells.  A 
thoufand  lights  arofe.  The  hundred  bards  had  flrung  the 
harp.  Cormac  flood  in  the  midll,  like  the  morning  flar,  i 
when  it  rejoices  on  the  eaflern  hill,  and  its  young  beams  j 

are 

"  Althan,  the  fon  of  Cor.acbar,  was  the  chief  bard  of  Arth  king  of  IrelaniJ.  After 
the  a.  uih  of  Arlh,  Ahhan  attended  his  fon  Cormac,  and  was  prefent  at  his  death. 
He  had  made  his  efcape  from  Cairbar,  by  means  of  Cathmor,  and  coming  to  Fin- 
Eai,  related,  as  here,  the  death  of  his  mafier  Cormac, 

-'•■  Aithifn  fpeaks. 

!!  Doiia,  tkc  UKodr  fide  of  a--r:oztniain;  it  is  bote  ?  hill  in  the  neighbo«rboot1 


:)aK  I.  An   epic   POEM.  265 

bathed  in  fliowers.    Bright  and  f:lent  is  its  progreis 

)ft,  but  the  cloud,  that  fliail  hide  it,  is  near  !  The  fwcrd 
If  Artho  *  was  in  the  hand  of  the  king.  He  looked  with 
joy  on  its  polifhed  iluds :  thrice  he  attempted  to  draw  it, 
pnd  thrice  he  failed :  his  yellow  locks  are  fpread  on  his 
flioulders  :  his  cheeks  of  youth  are  red.  I  mourned  over 
the  beam  of  youth,  for  he  was  foon  to  fet ! 

"  Altiian  !"  he  faid,  w-ith  a  fmile,  "  didfl  thou  be- 
hold my  father  ?  Heavy  is  the  fword  of  the  king  ;  furely 
his  afm  was  ilrong.  O  that  I  were  like  him  in  battle, 
when  the  rage  of  his  wrath  arofe !  then  would  I  have  met,  . 
with  Cuth'dUin,  the  car-borne  fon  of  Cante'la  !  But  years 
mn.y  come  on^,  O  Althan !  and  my  arm  be  flrong.  Haft 
thou  heard  of  Semo's  fon,  the  ruler  of  high  Temora  ?  He 
might  have  returned  with  his  fame.  He  promifed  to  re- 
turn to-night.  My  bards  wait  him  with  fongs.  My  feafl 
is  fpread  in  the  hall  of  kings." 

"  I  HEARD  Cormac  in  filence.  My  tears  began  to  flow* 
I  hid  them  wath  my  aged  locks.  The  king  perceived  my 
grief.  "  Son  of  Conachar  !"  he  faid,  "  is  the  fon  of  Se- 
mo  f  low  ?  Why  burfts  the  ligh  in  fecret  ?  Why  de- 
scends the  tear  ^  Comes  the  car-borne  Torlath  ?  Comes 
the  found  of  red-haired  Cairbar  ?  They  come  !  for  I  be- 
hold thy  grief.  Moify  Tura*s  chief  is  low  !  SKall  I  not 
'-  'h  to  battle?  But  I  cannot  lift  the  fpear  !  O  had  mine 
1  the  ftrength  of  Cuthullin,  foon  would  Cairbar  fly  : 

:  fame  of  my  fathers  would  be  renewed  j  and  the  deeds 
-ther  times  !" 

■'  He  took  his  bow.  The  tears  flow  down  from  both 
hi:  fparkling  eyes.  Grief  faddens  round.  The  bards  bend 
forvv'ard,  from  their  hundred  harps.  The  lone  bh-it  touch- 
ed their  trembling  firings.  The  found  j|  is  fad  and  low ! 
A  voice  is  heard  at  a  dillance,  as  of  one  in  grief.  It  was 
i\.Ynl  of  other  times,  who  came  from  dark  Slimora||.  He 
L  1  told 

■  Arth,  or  Artho,   the  fnther  of  Cormac  king  of  Ireland. 

■  Cuthullin  is  Ciillcc;  the  king  of  Tura  from  a  caflle  of  that  name  on  the  coaft  of 
; ,  where  he  dwelt,  before  he  undertook  the  management  of  the  affui.s  of  Ire- 

.,   in  the  minority  of  Cormac. 

riiat  prophetic  found,  mentioned  in  other  poems,  which  the  harps  of  the 
\  omitted  before  the  death  of  a  perfon  worthy  and  renowned.     It  is  here  an 
i^.ii^ii  of  the  death  of  Cormac,  which  foon  after  followed. 

^  Siimora,  a  hill  in  Connaught,  near  which  Cuthullin  was  killed. 


266  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

told  of  the  fall  of  Cuthullin.    He  told  of  his  mighty  deeds. 
The  people  were  fcattered  round  the  tomb.    Their  arms  I 
lay  on  the  ground.     They  had  forgot  the  war  ;   for  he,  ! 
their  fire,  was  feen  no  more  ! 

"  But  who,"  faid  the  foft-voiced  Carril,  "  who  come 
like  bounding  roes  ?  Their  ftature  is  like  young  trees  in  j 
the  valley,,  growing  in  a  fhower  !  Soft  and  ruddy  are  their 
cheeks  !   Fearlefs  fouls  look  forth  from  their  eyes  !  Who, 
but  the  fons  of  Ufnoth*,  chief  of  ftreamy  Etha  ?    The  , 
people  rife  on  every  fide,  like  the  flrength  of  an  half-  j 
extinguiflied  fire,  when  the  winds  come,  fudden,  from  the 
defart,  on  their  ruffling  wings.    Sudden  glows  the  dark 
brow  of  the  hill :  the  pafTnig  mariner  lags,  on  his  winds. 
The  found  of  Caithbat'sf  fhield  was  heard.    The  warriors 
faw  Cuthullin  ||  in  Nathos.    So  rolled  his  fparkling  eyes ! 
his  fleps  were  fuch  on  heath  ! — Battles  are  fought  at  Lego. 
The  fv/ord  of  Nathos  prevails.    Soon  Ihalt  thou  behold 
him  in  thy  halls,  king  of  Temora  of  groves  !" 

"  Soon  may  I  behold  the  chief!"  replied  the  blue-eyed 
king.  "  But  my  foul  is  fad  for  Cuthullin.  His  voice  was 
pleafant  in  mine  ear.  Often  have  we  moved,  on  Dora,  to 
the  chace  of  the  dark-brown  hinds.  His  bow  was  unerr- 
ing on  the  hills.  He  fpoke  of  mighty  men.  He  told  of 
the  deeds  of  my  fathers.  I  felt  my  rifing  joy.  But  fit 
thou  at  the  feaft,  O  Carril :  I  have  often  heard  thy  voice 
Sing  in  praile  of  Cuthullin.    Sing  of  Nathos  of  Etha  §  :'" 

"  Day  rofe  on  Temora,  with  all  the  beams  of  the  eaif. 
Crathin  came  to  the  hall,  the  fon  of  old  Gellama^.    "  I 

behold," 

*  UAioth,  chief  of  Eilia,  a  diflrift  on  the  weflern  coaft  of  Scotland,  had  thrc: 
Tons,  Nathos,  Althos,  and  Ardan,  by  Sliffama  the  fifler  of  Cuthullin.  The  three 
iDiothers,  when  very  young,  were  fent  over  to  Ireland  by  their  father,  to  learn  ili'i 
life  of  arms  under  their  uncle,  whofe  military  fame  was  very  great  in  that  kingdom. 
They  had  juft  arrived  in  Ulfler  when  the  news  of  Cuthullin's  death  arrived.  Na- 
thos, the  eldefi  of  the  three  brothers,  took  the  command  of  Cuthullin's  army,  and 
made  head  againft  Cairbar  the  chief  of  Atha.  Cairbar  having,  at  laft,  murdered 
young  king  Cormac,  at  Temora,  the  army  of  Nathos  Ihifted  fides,  and  the  bro- 
thers were  obliged  to  return  into  Ulfter,  in  order  to  pafs  over  into  Scotland.  The 
fequcl  cf  their  mournful  ftory  is  related,  at  large,  in  the  poem  of  Dar-thula, 

t  Caithbat  was  grandfather  to  Cuthulliii  ;  and  his  fhield  was  made  ufe  of  to 
alarm  his  poflerity  to  the  battles  of  his  family. 

II  That  is,  they  faw  a  manifett  likcnefs  between  the  perfon  of  Nathos  and-  Cu- 
ihullin. 

§  Nathos,  the  fon  of  Ufnoth. 

f  Geal-lamha,  zv/i:k  handed. 


Book  I.  An  EPIC    POEM.  267 

behold,"  he  faid,  "  a  cloud  in  the  defart,  king  of  Erin  ! 
a  cloud  it  feemed  at  firfl,  but  now  a  croud  of  men  !  One 
strides  before  them  in  his  llrength.  His  red  hair  flies  in 
wind.  His  fhield  glitters  to  the  beam  of  the  eafl.  His 
fpear  is  in  his  hand.'*  *'  Call  him  to  the  feafl:  of  Temora," 
replied  the  brightening  king.  "  My  hall  is  the  houfe  of 
llrangers,  fon  of  generous  Gellama !  It  is  perhaps  the 
chief  of  Etha,  coming  in  all  his  renown. — Hail,  mighty* 
ftranger  !  art  thou  of  the  friends  of  Cormac  ? — But,  Car- 
ril,  he  is  dark,  and  unlovely.  He  draws  his  fword.  Is 
that  the  fon  of  Ufnoth,  bard  of  the  times  of  old  ?" 

"  It  is  not  the  fon  of  Ufnoth  !"  faid  Carril.  "  It  is 
Cairbar  thy  foe. — Why  corned  thou  in  thy  arms  to  Te- 
mora  ?  chief  of  the  gloomy  brow.  Let  not  thy  fword  riie 
againft  Cormac  !  AVhither  doll  thou  turn  thy  fpeed  ?'* 
He  pafled  on  in  darknefs.  He  feized  the  hand  of  the  king. 
Cormac  forefaw  his  death  :  the  rage  of  his  eyes  arofe. 
"  Retire,  thou  chief  of  Atha  !  Nathos  comes  with  war. 
Thou  art  bold  in  Cormac's  hall,  for  his  arm  is  weak.'* 
The  fword  entered  the  llde  of  the  king.  He  fell  in  the 
halls  of  his, fathers.  His  fair  hair  is  in  the  dull.  His 
blood  is  fmoking  round. 

"  Art  thou  fallen  in  thy  hallsf?"  faid  Carril,  "  O  fon 
of  noble  Artho  !  The  fnieid  of  Cuthullin  was  not  near  ; 
nor  the  fpear  of  thy  father.  Mournful  are  the  mountains 
of  Erin  ;  for  the  chief  of  the  people  is  low  i  Bieft  be  thy 
foul,  O  Cormac  !  thou  art  darkened  in  thy  youth." 

"  His  words  came  to  the  ears  of  Cairbar.  He  clofed  [{ 
us  in  the  midil:  of  darkilds.--  He  feared  to  ftretch  his  fword 
to  the  bards  § ,  though  his  foul  was  dark.  Long  we  pined 
alone  !    At  length,  the  noble  Cathmor  <[[came.    He  heard 


*  Pfom  ihis  expreffion,  we  underfiand,  that  Cairbar  had  entered  tire  palace  of 
Temora,  in  the  midft  of  Cormac's  fpeech. 

t  Ahhan  fpeaks. 

11  That  is,  iiimfelf  and  Carril,  as  it  afterwards  appears. 

^  The  pcrfons  of  the  bards  were  fo  facr-id,  that  even  he,  wI\o  had  juft  murdered 
^is  foTereign,  feared  to  kill  them. 

?  Cathmor  appears  the  fame  difinterefied  hero  upon  every  orca/ion.  His  hu- 
manity and  generofity  were  unparalleled:  in  fliort,  he  had  no  fju't,  but  too  muchr 
attachment  to  fo  bad  a  brother  as  Cairbar,  His  family  cnnnettion  v.-ith  Caiibar 
prevails,  as  he  exprefles  it,  over  every  other  conlideration,  and  makes  him  engagi; 
in  a  war.  of  -.vhich  lie  does  not  approve. 


258  T    E    M    O    R    A  : 

our  voice  from  the  cave.    He  turned  the  eye  O'f  his  wrath 
on  Cairbar. 

'•  Brother  of  Cathmor,"  he  faid,  "  hov/  lo]}g  vilt 
thou  pain  my  foill  ?  Thy  heart  is  a  rock :  thy  thoughts 
are  dark  and  bloody.  But  thou  art  the  brother  of  Cath- 
mor ;  and  Cathmor  llrall  fhine  in  thy  war.  But  my  foul 
is  not  like  thine,  thou  feeble  hand  in  fight  !  The  light  of 
my  bofom  is  ftained  with  thy  deeds.  Bards  will  not  fmg 
of  my  renown  :  they  may  fay,  "  Cathmor  was  brave,  but 
he  fought  for  gloomy  Cairbar."  They  v/iil  pafs  over  my 
tomb  in  filence.  My  fame  fhall  not  be  heard,  Cairbar  ! 
loofe  the  bards.  They  are  the  fons  of  future  times.  Their 
voice  fliall  be  heard  in  other  years  ;  after  the  kings  of  Te- 
mora  have  failed."  We  came  forth  at  the  words  of  the 
chief.  We  faw  him  in  his  ftrength.  lie  was  like  thy 
youth,  O  Fingal,  when  thou  firft  didfl  lift  the  fpear.  His 
face  was  like  the  plain  of  the  fun,  when  it  is  bright.  No 
darknefs  travelled  over  his  brow.  But  he  came  with  his* 
thoufands  to  aid  the  red-haired  Cairbar.  Now  he  comes 
to  revenge  his  death,  O  king  of  woody  Morven." 

"  Let  Cathmor  come,"  replied  the  king.  "  I  love  a 
foe  fo  great.  His  foul  is  bright.  His  arm  is  flrong.  His 
battles  are  full  of  fame.  But  the  little  foul  is  a  vapour, 
that  hovers  round  the  marfhy  lake.  It  never  rifes  on  the 
green  hill,  left  the  winds  fhould  meet  it  there.  Its  dwell- 
ing is  in  the  cave  :  it  fends  forth  the  dart  of  death  !  Our 
young  heroes,  O  warriors,  are  like  the  renown  of  our 
fathers.  They  fight  in  youth.  They  fall.  Their  names 
are  in  fong.  Fingal  is  amid  his  darkening  years.  He  muft  i 
not  fall,  as  an  aged  oak,  acrofs  a  fecret  ftream.  ■  Near  it 
are  the  fteps  of  the  hunter,  as  it  lies  beneath  the  wind. 
"  How  has  that  tree  fallen  ?"  he  fays,  and,  whiiUing, 
ftrides  along.,  Raife  the  fong  of  joy,  ye  bards  of  Morven. 
Let  our  fouls  forget  the  paft.  The  red  liars  look  on  us 
from  clouds,  and  filently  defcend.  Soon  fhall  the  grey 
beam  of  the  morning  rife,  and  iliew  us  the  foes  of  Cor- 
mac.  Fillan  !  my  fon,  take  thou  the  fpear  of  the  king. 
Go  to  Mora's  dark-browli  fide.  Let  thine  eyes  travel  over 
the  heath.  Obferve  the  foes  of  Fingal:  obferve  the  courie  ! 
of  generous  Cathraor.    I  hear  a  diftant  found,  like  falling  ; 

rocks 


Book  I.  Ax   EPIC   POEM.  269 

rocks  in  the  defart.  But  ftrike  thou  the  Hiield,  at  times, 
that  they  may^not  come  through  night,  and  the  fame  of 
"' '  ^rven  ceafe.    I  begin  to  be  alone,  my  fon.    I  dread  the 

1  of  my  renown  !" 

The  voice  of  bards  arofe.     The  king  leaned  on  the 

fiield  of  Trennior.    Sleep  defcended  on  his  eyes.     His 

future  battles  arofc  in  his  dreams.    The  hoil  are  fieeping 

around.    Dark-haired  Fillan  obferves  the  foe.     His  fteps 

,^  on  a  diftant  hill.     We  hear,  at  times,  his  clan^^ing 

!d. 


T  £  M  O 


T      E      M      O      R      A 


A  N 

EPIC        POEM. 
BOOK     11. 


ARGUMENT. 


THIS  book  opens,  we  may  fuppofe,  about  midnight,  with  a  foliloquy  of  Offian, 
^•  ho  had  retired  from  the  reft  of  the  army,  to  mourn  for  his  fon  Ofcar.  Upon 
iKjring  the  noife  of  Cathmor's  army  approaching,  he  went  to  find  out  his  bro- 
ther Fillan,  who  kept  the  watch,  on  the  hill  of  Mora,  in  the  front  of  Fingal's 
army.  In  the  converfation  of  the  brothers,  the  cpifode  of  Conar,  the  fon  of 
Trenmor,  who  was  the  firft  king  of  Ireland,  is  introduced,  which' lays  open  the 
oiigin  of  the  contefls  between  the  Cael  and  Firblog,  the  two  natiorjs  who  firft 
pofleHed  themfelves  of  that  ifland.  Oflian  kindles  a  fire  on  Mora;  upon  which 
Cathmor  defifted  from  the  defign  he  had  formed  of  furprifing  the  army  of  the 
Caledonians,  He  calls  a  council  of  his  chiefs  ;  reprimands  Foldath  for  advifing 
a  night-attack,  as  the  Iriflj  army  were  fo  much  fuperior  in  number  to  the  enemy. 
The  bard  Fonar  introduces  the  (lory  of  Crothar,  the  anceflor  of  the  king,  which 
ihrows  further  light  on  the  hiftory  of  Ireland,  and  the  original  pretenfions  of  the 
family  of  Atha,  to  the  throne  of  that  kingdom.  The  Irlfh  chiefs  lie  down  to 
reft,  and  Cathmor  himfelf  undertakes  the  watch.  In  his  circuit,  round  the  ar- 
''IV,  he  is  met  by  Oflian.  The  interview  of  the  two  heroes  is  defcribed.  Cath- 
.  r  obtains  a  promife  from  Offian,  to  order  a  funeral  elegy  to  be  fung  over  the 
_.ave  of  Cairbar;  it  being  the  opinion  of  the  times,  that  the  fouls  of  the  dead 
could  not  be  happy,  till  their  ekgies  were  fung  by  a  bard.  Morning  comes. 
Cathmor  and  Offian  part ;  and  the  latter,  cafually  meeting  with  Carril  the  foa 
of  Kinfena,  fends  that  bard,  with  a  funeral  fong,  to  the  tomb  of  Cairbar. 

tTpATHER  of  heroes!    O  Trenmor!    high  dweller 

X^     of  eddying  winds  !    where  the  dark-red  thunder 

marks  the  troubled  clouds  !  open  thou  thy  ftormy  hails. 

Let  the  bards  of  old  be  near.    Let  them  draw  near,  with 

fongs, 

*  Though  this  book  has  little  aftion,  it  is  not  the  leaft  important  part  of  Temora. 
The  poet,  in  feveral  epifodes,  runs  up  the  caufe  of  the  war  to  the  very  fource.  The 
firft  population  of  Ireland,  the  wars  between  the  two  nations  who  originally  pol- 
feffcd  that  ifland,  its  firll  race  of  kings,  and  the  revolutions  of  its  government,  are 

important 


272  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

longs,  and  their  half-vlewleiii  harps.  No  dweller  of  mifty 
valley  comes  !  No  hunter,  unknown  at  his  ftreanis  !  It  is 
the  car-borne  Ofcar,  from  the  fields  of  war.  Sudden  is 
thy  change,  my  fon,  from  what  thou  wert  on  dark  Moi- 
!ena  !  The  blall  folds  thee  in  its  Ikirt,  and  ruftles  through 
the  fky  1  Doft  thou  not  behold  thy  father,  at  the  flream  i 
of  night  ?  The  chiefs  of  Morven  fleep  far-diflant.  They 
have  loft  no  fon  :  But  ye  have  loft  a  hero,  chiefs  of  re- 
founding  Morven  !  Who  could  equal  his  ftrength,  when 
battle  rolled  againft  his  fide,  like  the  darknefs  of  crouded 
waters  ?— Why  this  cloud  on  Offian's  foul  ?  It  ought  to 
burn  in  danger.  Erin  is  near  with  her  hoft.  The  king  of 
Selma  is  alone.  Alone  thou  {halt  not  be,  my  father,  while 
I  can  lift  the  fpear  ! 

I  ROSE,  in  all  my  arms.  I  rofe,  and  liftened  to  the 
wind.  The  lliield  of  Fillan*  is  not  heard.  I  tremble  for 
the  fon  of  Fingal.  "  Why  fliould  the  foe  come  by  night  ? 
Why  fliould  the  dark-haired  warrior  fall  r"  Diftant,  ful- 
len  murmurs  rife  ;  like  the  noife  of  the  lake  of  Lego, 
when  its  waters  ihrink,  in  the  days  of  froft,  and  all  its 
burfting  ice  refounds  :  the  people  of  Lara  look  to  heaven, 
and  forefee  the  ftorm  I — My  fteps  are  forward  on  the 
heath  :  the  fpear  of  Ofcar  in  my  hand  !  Red  ftars  looked 
from  high.    I  gleamed  along  the  night. 

I  SAW  Fillan,  filent,  before  me,  bending  forward  from 
Mora's  rock.  He  heard  the  ftiout  of  the  foe.  The  joy  of 
his  foul  arofe.    He  heard  my  founding  tread,  and  turned 

his 

s'.nportant  fafts^  and  arc  delivered  by  the  poet,  with  fo  Uttle  mixture  of  the  fabu" 
Jous,  that  one  cannot  help  preferring  his  accounts  to  the  improbable  fitlions  of  the 
Scotch  and  I  liih  hifionans.  The  Milefian  fables  bear  about  them  the  marks  of  late 
invcniion.  I'o  trace  their  legends  to  their  fource  would  be  no  difficult  talk;  but  a 
difojuifitioa  of  this  fort  would  extend  this  note  too  far. 

*  We  underftand,  from  the  preceding  book,  that  Cathmor  was  near  with  an  <■ 
army.  When  Cairbar  was  killed,  the  tribes  who  attended  him  fell  back  t-o  Cath-i 
mor;  who,  as  it  afterwards  appears,  had  taken  a  refolution  to  lurprifc- Fingal  by 
night.  Fillan  was  difoatched  to  the  hill  of  Mora,  which  was  in  the  front  of  the 
Caledonians,  to  obferve  the  motions  of  Cathmor.  In  this  lituation  were  affairs 
when  OiHaa,  upon  hearing  the  noife  of  the  approaching  enemy,  went  to  find  oat  \ 
bis  brother.  Their  converfation  naturally  introduces  the  epifode,  concerning  Co- 
llar the  fon  of  Trcnmor,  the  firft  Irifh  monarch,  which  is  fo  neceffary  to  the  un- 
cJsrfianding  the  foundation  of  the  rebellion  and  ufurpation  of  Cairbar  and  Cathmor. 
Fillan  was  the  youngeft  of  the  fons  of  Fingal,  then  living.  He  and  Bofmina,  mei}- 
tioned  in  the  batti:  of  Lor  a,  were  the  only  children  of  the  king,  by  Clatho  the 
daughter  of  Cathulla  king  of  Inis-tore,  whom  he  had  taken  to  wife,  after  the  deatk 
of  Roo-crana,  the  daughter  of  Connac  Mac-Conar  king  of  Irelsnd. 


Book  II.        An   EPIC   POEM.  273 

his  lifted  fpear.  "  Corned  thou,  fon  of  night,  in  peace  ? 
or  dofl  thou  meet  my  wrath  ?  The  foes  of  Fingal  are 
mine.  Speak,  or  fear  my  fteel.  I  ftand  not,  in  vain,  the 
I  fhield  of  Morven's  race."  "  Never  mayfl  thou  fta^d  in 
vain,  fon  of  blue-eyed  Clatho  !  Fingal  begins  to  be  alone. 
Darknefs  gathers  on  the  lait  of  his  days.  Yet  he  has  two 
*  fons  who  ought  to  fhine  in  war  ;  who  ought  to  be  two 
beams  of  light,  near  the  fteps  of  kis  departure." 

"  Son  of  Fingal,"  replied  the  youth,  "  it  is  not  long 
fmce  I  raifed  the  fpear.  Few  are  the  marks  of  my  fword 
in  war.  But  Fillan's  foul  is  fire  !  The  chiefs  of  Bolga  f 
croud  around  the  fiiield  of  generous  Cathmor.  Their  ga- 
thering is  on  that  heath.  Shall  my  fteps  approach  their 
hod  ?  I  yielded  to  Ofcar  alone,  in  the  ftrife  of  the  race 
on  Cona  1" 

"  Fill  AN,  thou  fnalt  not  approach  their  hoft  ;  nor  fall 

before  thy  fame  is  known.    My  name  is  heard  in   fong  : 

Vvhen  needful,  I  advance.     From  the  Ikirts  of  night  I  (hall 

view  them,  over  all  their  gleaming  tribes.     Why,  Fillan, 

didft  thou  fpeak  of  Ofcar !  why  awake  my  figh  ?    I  niuft 

forget  II  the,  warrior,  till  the  ftorm  is  rolled  away.     Sad- 

nefs  ought  not  to  dwell  in  danger,  nor  the  tear  in  the  eye 

i  of  war.     Our  fathers  forgot  their  fallen  fons,  till  the  noife 

i'  of  arms  was  pafr.    Then  forrow  returned  to  the  tomb,  and 

the  fong  of  bards  arofe.    The  memory  of  thofe  who  fell, 

M  m  quickly 

~  That  is,  two  fons  in  Ireland.     Fergus,  the  fecond  fon  of  Fingal,  was,  at  that 
time,  on  an  expedition,  which  is  mentioned  in  one  of  the  Icifer  poems.     He,  ac- 
cording to  fome  traditions,  was  the  anceftor  of  Fergus,  the  fon  of  Ere  or  Arcath, 
'   commonly  cMud  Fergus  the  Jkond  in  the  ScoichhiHoncs.     Tlie  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Fcr;:us,    over  the  Scots,  is  placed,  by  the  nioft  approved  annals  of  Scot- 
land, in  the  fouith  year  of  the  fifth  age  ;  a  full  century  after  the  death  of  OCian. 
The  genealogy  of  his  fainilv  is  recorded  thus  by  the  Highland  Senachies  ;  Fei<rus 
\   Mac-Arcath,  Mac-Chongad,  Mac-Fergus,  Mac-Fion-giid  na  Ivii' :  i.  c.  Fergus  ;''e  'on 
\   of  Arcath,  the  fon  of  Congal,  the  fon  of  Fergus,  the  fon  of  Fingal  die  viaorious. 
I   This  fubjett  is  treated  more  at  large,  in  the  differtation  annexed  to  the  poems. 
r        f  The  fouthern  paits  of  Ireland  went,  for  fome  time,  under  the  n  'me  cf  B  jlga, 
I    from  the  Fir-bolg  or  Bcigse  of  Britain,  who  fettled  a  color;v  there.  Bolg  iigmfies  a 
1    quiver,  from  which  proceeds  Fir-bdg,  i.   e.   bcw-mcn;  fo  called  from  their  ufing 
I    bows,  more  than  any  of  the  neighbouring  nations. 

I  li  After  this  paffage.  Clear  is  not  mentioned  in  all  Temora.  The  fittiations  of 
the  charafters  who  acl  in  the  poem  are  fo  interefling,  that  others,  foreign  to  the 
fubjeft,  could  not  be  introduced  with  any  lufire,  Thouyh  the  epifod.-,  which  fol- 
lows, may  feem  to  flow  naturally  enough  from  the  converfation  of  th:  bothers,  yet 
I  have  fl-jcwn,  in  a  preceding  note,  and,  more  at  large,  in  the  differtation  annexed 
to  this  collection,  thit  the  poet  had  a  farther  defign 'in  view. 


274  T    E    M    O    R    A  : 

quickly  followed  the  departure  of  war.  "When  the  tu- 
mult of  battle  is  paft,  the  foul,  in  filence,  melts  away, 
for  the  dead. 

"  CoNAR*  was  the  brother  of  Trathal,  firft  of  mortal 
men.  His  battles  were  on  every  coaft.  A  thoufand  dreams 
rolled  dov/n  the  blood  of  his  foes.  His  fame  filled  green 
Erin,  like  a  pleafant  gale.  The  nations  gathered  in  Ullin, 
and  they  bleffed  the  king  ;  the  king  of  the  race  of  their 
fathers,  from  the  land  of  Selma. 

"  The  chiefs  f  of  the  fouth  were  gathered,  in  the  dark- 
nefs  of  their  pride.  In  the  horrid  cave  of  Moma  they 
mixed  their  fecret  words.-  Thither  often,  they  faid,  the 
fpirits  of  their  fathers  came  ;  fhewing  their  pale  forms 
from  the  chinky  rocks  ;  reminding  them  of  the  honour 
of  Bolga.  "  Why  fhould  Conar  reign,"  they  faid,  "  the 
fon  of  refounding  Morven  ?" 

"  They  came  forth,  like  the  flreams  of  the  defart,with 
the  roar  of  their  hundred  tribes.  Conar  was  a  rock  before 
them  :  broken,  they  rolled  on  every  fide.  But  often  they 
returned,  and  the  fons  of  Selma  fell.  The  king  flood, 
among  the  tombs  of  his  warriors.  He  darkly  bent  his 
mournful  face.  His  foul  was  rolled  into  itfelf ;  and  he 
had  marked  the  place  where  he  was  to  fall  ;  when  Tra- 
thal came  in  his  ftrength,  his  brother,  from  cloudy  Mor- 
ven.   Nor  did  he  come  alone.    Colgar  ||  v/as  at  his  fide  ; 

Colgar 

*  Conar,  the  firft  king  of  Ireland,  v/as  the  fon  of  Trenmor,  the  great-grand-fa- 
ther  of  Fiiigjil.     It  was  on  account  of  this  family-connection,  th^t  Fingal  was  en- 
jiaged  in  fo  many  wars  in  the  caufe  of  the  race  of  Conar.     Though  few  of  the  ac- 
tions of  Trenmor  arc  mentioned,  he  was  the  moft  renowned  name  of  antiquity. 
The  moft  probable  opinion  concerning  him  is,  that  he  was  the  firft,  who  united  the   j 
tr)bes  of  the  Caledonians,  and  commanded  them,  in  chief,  againft  the  incurfions 
of  the  Romans.    The  genealogifls  of  the  North  have  traced  his  family  far  back,  and  I 
given  a  lift  of  his  anceftors  to  Cuan-mor  nan  lav,  or  Coninor  of  the  fwords,  who,   | 
according  to  them,  was  the  fiift  who  crolftd  \\\t  great fea,  lo  Caledonia,  from  which 
circumftance  his  name  proceeded,  which  fignifies  ^rt'ai  ocean.     Genealogies  of  fo 
ancient  a  date,   however,  are  little  to  be  depended  upon. 

t  The  chiefs  of  the  Fir-boig  who  pofleffed  themfelves  of  the  fouth  of  Ireland, 
prior,  peihaps,  to  the  fettlement  of  the  Cad  of  Caledonia,  and  the  Hebrides,  in 
XJlfter.  From  the  fequel,  it  appears  that  the  Fir-bolg  were,  by  much,  the  moft 
powerful  nation ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  Cael  muft  have  fubmitted  to  them, 
Had  they  not  received  fuccours  from  their  mother-country  under  the  command  of 
Trathal. 

II  Co\g-tr,Jicrcch-locking  warrior.  ^i\\'m-coxmz,  blue  eyes.  Colgar  was  the  eldeft 
of  the  fons  of  Tia.'hal:  Comhal,  who  was  the  father  of  Fingal,  was  very  young 
V.'hen  the  prefcnt  expedition  to  Ireland  happened.     It  is  remarkable,  that,  of  all 

the 


Book  II.         An  EPIC    POEM.  275 

Colgar  the  fon  of  the  king  and  of  white-bofomed  Sulin- 
I  corma. 

I  "  As  Trenmor,  clothed  with  meteors,  defcends  from 
[the  halls  of  thunder,  pouring  the  dark  ftorm  before  him 
over  the  troubled  fea  ;  fo  Colgar  defcended  to  battle,  and 
waited  th^  echoing  field.  His  father  rejoiced  over  the 
hero  :  but  an  arrow  came !  His  tomb  w^as  raifed,  v/ithout 
a  tear.  The  king  was  to  revenge  his  fon.  He  lightened 
forward  in  battle,  till  Bolga  yielded  at  her  ftreams ! 

"  When  peace  returned  to  the  land :  when  his  blue 
,  waves  bore  the  king  to  Morven  ;  then  he  remembered  his 
fon,  and  poured  the  filent  tear.  Thrice  did  the  bards,  at 
:  the  cave  of  Furmono,  call  the  foul  of  Colgar.  They  call- 
:  ed  him  to  the  hills  of  his  land.  He  heard  them,  in  his 
I  mill.  Trathal  placed  his  fv/ord  in  the  cave,  that  the  fpirit 
of  his  fon  might  rejoice." 

"  Colgar*,  fon  of  Trathal  !'*  faid  Fillan,  "  thou  wert 

renowned  in  youth  !    But  the  king  hath  not  marked  my 

fword,  bright-ftreaming  on  the  field.    I  go  forth  with  the 

croud  :    I  return,  without  my  fame.     But  the  foe   ap- 

;  preaches,  Ofiian  !    I  hear  their  murmur  on  the  heath. 

,  The  found  of  their  Heps  is  like  thunder,  in  the  bofom  of 

,  the  ground  ;  when  the  rocking  hills  fliake  their  groves, 

and  not  a  blafl  pours  from  the  darkened  Iky  1" 

OssiAN  turned,  fudden,  on  his  fpear.    He  raifed  the 
flame  of  an  oak  on  high.     I  fpread  it  large,  on  Mora's 

■  wind.    Cathmor  ftopt  in  his  courfe.     Gleaming  he  flood, 

■  like  a  rock,  on  whofe  fides  are  the  wandering  of  blafts  ; 
1  which  feize  its  echoing  fides,  and  clothe  them  over  with 

ice.    So  flood  the  friendf  of  flrangers  !    The  winds  lift  his 

heavy 

the  ancefiors  of  Fins;al,  tradition  makes  the  lead  mention  of  Comhal ;  which,  pro- 
bably, proceeded  from  the  unfortunate  life  and  untimely  death  of  that  hero.    From 

■  feme  paffages,  concerning  him,  we  learn,  indeed,  that  he  was  brave,  but  he  wanted 
:    conduft. 

*  The  poem  begins  here  to  mark  flrongly  the  charafler  of  Fil'.an,  who  is  to  make 

■  fo  great  a  figure  in  the  fcquel.  He  has  the  impatience,  the  ambition  and  fire  which 
are  peculiar  to  a  young;  hero.  Kindled  with  the  fame  of  Colgar,  he  forgets  his  un- 
timely fall.     From  Fillan's  exprcffions  in  this  paffage,  it  would  feem,  that  he  was 

I    neglefted  by  Fingal,  on  account  of  his  youth. 
.    t  C'lthmor  is  diftinguifhed,  by  this  honourable  title,  on  account  of  his  genero- 
Cty  to  fl.angers,  which  was  fo  great  as  to  be  remarkable  even  in  thole  days  of  hof- 
pitaliiy, 


276  T    E    M    O    R    A 


heavy  locks.  Thou  art  the  tallefl  of  the  race  of  Erin, 
king  of  ftreamy  Atha  ! 

"  First  of  bards,"  faid  Cathmor,  "Fonar*,  call  the 
chiefs  of  Erin.  Call  red-haired  Cormar  ;  dark-browed 
Malthos  ;  the  fidelong-looking  gloom  of  Maronan.  Let 
the  pride  of  Foldath  appear.  The  red-rolling  eye  of  Tur- 
lotho.  Nor  let  Hidalla  be  forgot  :  his  voice,  in  danger, 
is  the  found  of  a  Ihovv^er,  when  it  falls  in  the  blafled  vale, 
near  Atha's  falling  ftream.  Pleafant  is  its  found,  on  the 
plain,  whilft  broken  thunder  travels  over  the  fky  !" 

They  came,  in  their  clanging  arms.  They  bent  for- 
ward to  his  voice,  as  if  a  fpirit  of  their  fathers  fpoke  from 
a  cloud  of  night.  Dreadful  fhone  they  to  the  light ;  like  the 
fall  of  the  ftream  of  Brumoj,  when  the  meteor  lights  it, 
before  the  nightly  ftranger.  Shuddering,  he  ftops  in  his 
journey,  and  looks  up  for  the  beam  of  the  morn  ! 

"  Why  II  delights  Foldath,"  faid  the  king,  "  to  pour 
the  blood  of  foes  by  night  ?  Fails  his  arm  in  battle,  in  the 
beams  of  day  ?  Few  are  the  foes  before  us  ;  why  fhould 
we  clothe  us  in  fhades  ?  The  valiant  delight  to  fhine,  in 
the  battles  of  their  land  !  Thy  counfel  was  in  vain,  chief 
of  Moma  !  the  eyes  of  Morven  do  not  fleep.  They  are 
watchful,  as  eagles,  on  their  mofTy  rocks.  Let  each  col- 
lefl:,  beneath  his  cloud,  the  ftrength  of  his  roaring  tribe. 
To-morrow  I  move,  in  light,  to  meet  the  foes  of  Bolga  ? 
Mighty  was  he§  that  is  low,  the  race  of  Borbar-duthul !" 

"  Not  unmarked,"  faid  Foldath,  "  were  my  fteps  be- 
fore thy  race.  In  light,  I  met  the  foes  of  Cairbar.  The 
warrior  praifed  my  deeds.  But  his  ftone  was  raifed  with- 
out 

*  Fcnar,  theman  of  Jong.  Before  the  introdufiion  of  ChriRianity  a  name  was  not 
impofed  upon  any  perlon,  till  he  had  diftinguifhed  himfelf  by  ibme  remaikable  ac- 
tion, froih  which  his  name  fliould  be  derived. 

+  Brumo  was  a  place  of  woifliip  (Fmg.  b.  6.)  in  Craca,  which  is  fuppofed  to 
be  one  of  the  ifles  of  Shetland.  It  was  thought,  that  the  fpirits  of  the  deceafed 
haunted  it,  by  ni;jht,  which  adds  more  terror  to  the  defcription  introduced  here, 
The  horrid  circle  of  Brumo,  where  often,  they /aid,  the  ghoJIs  of  the  dead  howled  rowd 
the  fione  of  fear. 

\  Fiom  this  patTage,  it  appears,  that  it  was  Foldath  who  had  advlfed  the  night- 
attack.  The  gloomy  charafter  of  Foldath  is  properly  contrafted  to  the  generous, 
the  open  Cathmor. 

^  By  this  exclamation  Cath.Tior  intimates  that  he  intends  to  revenge  the  dcatk  of 
his  brother  Cairbar. 


Book  II.        An   EPIC   POEM.  277 

out  a  tear  !  No  bard  fung*  over  Erin's  king.  Shall  his 
foes  rejoice  along  their  molfy  hills  ?  No :  they  muft  not 
rejoice !  He  was  the  friend  of  Foldath  !  Our  words  were 
mixed,  in  fecret,  in  Moma's  fdent  cave  ;  whilft  thou,  a 
boy  in  the  field,  purfuedft  the  thiftle's  beard.  With  Mo- 
ma's fons  I  fliall  rufh  abroad,  and  find  the  foe,  on  his 
dufky  hills.  Fingal  fhall  lie,  without  his  fong,  the  grey- 
haired  king  of  Selma." 

"  Dost  thou  think,  thou  feeble  man,"  replied  Cath- 
mor,  half -en  raged  :  "  uoft  thou  think  Fingal  can  fall, 
without  his  fame,  in  Erin  ?  Could  the  bards  be  filent,  at 
the  tomb  of  Selma's  king  ?  The  fong  would  burfl  in  fe- 
cret !  the  fpirit  of  the  king  would  rejoice  !  It  is  when  thou 
ilialt  fall,  that  the  bard  fhall  forget  the  fong.  Thou  art 
dark,  chief  of  Moma,  though  thine  arm  is  a  tempeft  in 
war.  Do  I  forget  the  king  of  Erin,  in  his  narrov/  houfe  ? 
My  foul  is  not  loft  to  Cairbar,  the  brother  of  my  love !  I 
marked  the  bright  beams  of  joy,  which  travelled  over  his 
cloudy  mind,  when  I  returned,  with  fame,  to  Atha  of  the 
flreams." 

Tall  they  removed,  beneath  the  words  of  the  king, 
each  to  his  own  dark  tribe  ;  where,  humming,  they  rolled 
on  the  heath,  faint-glittering  to  the  ftars  ;  like  waves,  in 
a  rocky  bay,  before  the  nightly  wind.  Beneath  an  oak, 
lay  the  chief  of  Atha.  His  fhield,  a  dufky  round,  hung 
high.  Near  him,  againft  a  rock,  leaned  the  fair  flranger | 
of  Inis-huna  ;  that  beam  of  light,  with  wandering  locks, 
from  Lumon  of  the  roes.  At  diflance  rofe  the  voice  of 
Fonar,  with  the  deeds  of  the  days  of  old.  The  fong  fails, 
at  times,  in  Lubar's  growing  roar  ! 

"  Crothar|j,"  begun  the  bard,  "  firfl  dwelt  at  Atha's 

mofiy 

*  To  have  no  funeral  elegy  fung  over  his  tomb,  was,  among  the  Celtx,  reckoned 
the  greateft  misfortune  that  could  befal  a  man ;  as  his  foul  could  not  otherwife  be 
admitted  to  the  airy  hall  of  his  fathers. 

t  B-  the  flranger  of  h.ii-huna,  is  meant  Sul-malla,  the  daughter  of  Conmo 
king  of  Inis-huna,  the  ancient  name  of  that  part  of  South-Britain,  which  is  next 
to  the  Irifli  coaft.  She  had  followed  Cathmor  in  difguife.  Her  llory  is  related  at 
large  in  the  fourth  book. 

Il  Crothar  was  the  anceftor  of  Cathmor,  and  the  firft  of  his  family  who  had  fet- 
tled in  Atha.  It  was,  in  his  time,  that  the  firft  wais  were  kindled  between  the  Fir- 
bolg  and  Cuel,  The  propiicty  of  the  epiiode  is  evident;  as  the  conteH;  which  ori- 
ginally rofe  between  Crothar  and  Conar,  fubfillcd  afterwards  between  their  pollerj- 
ty,  and  was  the  foundation  of  the  (lory  of  the  poem. 


27S  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

mofly  flream  !  A  thoufandf  oaks,  from  the  mountains^ 
formed  his  echoing  hall.  The  gathering  of  the  people  was 
there,  aromid  the  feail  of  the  blue-eyed  king.  But  who, 
among  his  chiefs,  was  like  the  (lately  Crothar  ?  Warriors 
kindled  in  his  prefence.  The  young  figh  of  the  virgins 
rofe.  In  Alnecma  ||  was  the  warrior  honoured  ;  the  firfl: 
of  the  race  of  Bolga. 

"  He  purfued  the  chace  in  Ullin  ;  on  the  mofs-covered 
top  of  Drumardo.  From  the  wood  looked  the  daughter 
of  Cathmin,  the  blue-rolling  eye  of  Con-lama.  Her  figh 
rofe  in  fecret.  She  bent  her  head,  midfl  her  wandering 
locks.  The  moon  looked  in,  at  night,  and  faw  the  white- 
tolling  of  her  arms ;  for  Ihe  thought  of  the  mighty  Cro- 
thar, in  the  feafon  of  dreams. 

"Three  days  feafted  Crothar  wuth  Cathmin.  On  the 
fourth  they  awaked  the  hinds.  Con-lama  moved  to  the 
chace,  with  all  her  lovely  fteps.  She  met  Crothar  in  the 
narrow  path.  The  bow  fell,  at  once,  from  her  hand. 
She  turned  her  face  away,  and  half-hid  it  with  her  locks. 
The  love  of  Crothar  rofe.  He  brought  the  white-bofomed 
maid  to  Atha.  Bards  raifed  the  long  in  her  prefence. 
Joy  dv/elt  round  the  daughter  of  Cathmin. 

"  The  pride  of  Turloch  rofe,  a  youth  who  loved  ihe 
white-handed  Con-hima.  He  came,  v/ith  battle,  to  Al- 
necma ;  to  Atha  of  the  roes.  Cormul  went  forth  to  the 
ftrife,  the  brother  of  car-borne  Crothar.  He  went  forth, 
but  he  fell.    The  figh  of  his  people  rofe.    Silent  and  tall, 

acrofs 

t  From  this  circumftance  we  may  learn  that  the  art  of  building  with  flone  was 
noi  I'nown  in  Ireland  fo  early  as  the  days  of  Crothar.  When  the  colonies  wera 
ion:;  fettled  in  the  country,  the  arts  of  civil  life  began  to  increafe  among  them,  for 
we  find  mention  made  of  th'?  tow-^rs  of  Atha  in  the  time  of  Cathmor,  which  could 
rot  well  be  applied  to  wooden  buildings.  In  Caledonia  they  be^  un  very  eaily  to 
b  liid  with  ftone.  None  of  the  houfes  of  Fingal,  excepting  Ti-folrmal,  were  of 
\  ood.  Ti-foirmal  was  the  gieat  hall  where  the  bards  met  to  repeat  their  compofi* 
t' on.s  annually,  before  they  fubmitted  them  to  the  judgment  of  the  king  in  Selma. 
By  Torne  accident  or  other,  this  wooden  houfe  happened  to  be  burnt,  and  an  anci- 
rnt  bard,  in  the  charafter  of  Offian,  h;is  left  us  a  curious  catalogue  of  thefurnitur? 

iiich  it  contained.    The  poem  is  not  juft  now  in  my  hands,  otherwife  I  would  lay 

:  -c  a  traiiilation  of  it  before  the  reader.    It  has  little  poetical  merit,  and  evidently 

:  :;:.  the  marks  of  a  later  period. 
11  Alnecma,  or  Alnecmacht,  was  the  ancient  name  of  Connaught.    Ullin  is  fiill 

;;  Irifh  name  of  the  province  of  Ulfter.     To  avoid  the  multiplying  of  notes,  I 
-\?.\\  here  give  the  fignification  of  the  names  in  this  epifode.    Drumardo,  high-ridge. 

athmin,  calm  in  battle.  Con-lamha,  Joft  hand.  Turloch,  man  of  the  quiver ^ 
.'ormul,  blue  eye. 


Book  II.  An   EPIC    POEM.  £79 

I  acrofs  the  flream,  came  the  darkening  flrcngth  of  Cro- 
;  thar:  he  rolled  the  foe  from  Alnecma.    He  returned,  midft 

the  joy  of  Con-lama. 

I      "  Battle  on  battle  comes.    Blood  is  poured  on  blood. 

'  The  tombs  of  the  vaUant  rife.    Erin's  clouds  are  hung 

round  with  ghofts.    The  chiefs  of  the  fouth  gathered  round 

the  echoing  fiiield  of  Crothar.    He  came,  with  death,  to 

the  paths  of  the  foe.    The  virgins  wept,  by  the  itreams 

of  Uliin.    They  looked  to  the  mift  of  the  hill:  No  hunter 

defcended  from  its  folds.     Silence  darkened  in  the  land. 

j  Blafts  fighed  lonely  on  graffy  tombs. 

"  Descending  Hke  the  eagle  of  heaven,  with  all  his 

I  ruftling  wings,  when  he  forfakes  the  blaft,  with  joy,  the 

I  fon  of  Trenmor  came  ;  Conar,  arm  of  death,  from  Mor- 

ven  of  the  groves.    He  poured  his  might  along  green  Erin. 

Death  dimly  ftrode  behind  his  fword.    The  fons  of  Bolga 

i  fled,  from  his  courfe,  as  from  a  flream,  that,  burfting  from 

I  the  ftormy  defart,  rolls  the  fields  together,  with  all  their 

j  echoing  woods.     Crothar  *  met  him  in  battle  :  but  Alnec- 

I  ma's  warriors  fled.    The  king  of  Atha  flowly  retired,  in 

'  the  grief  of  his  foul.    He,  afterwards,  flione  in  the  fouth; 

.  but  dim  as  the  fun  of  autumn  ;   when  he  vifits,  in  his 

.;  robes  of  mift,  Lara  of  dark  ftreams.    The  withered  grafs 

is  covered  with  dew  :  the  field,  though  bright,  i^ad  !" 

"  Why  wakes  the  bard  before  me,"  faid  Cathmor^ 
"  the  memory  of  thofe  who  fled  ?  Has  fome  ghoft,  from 
his  duflcy  cloud,  bent  forward  to  thine  ear ;  to  frighten 
Cathmor  from  the  field,  with  the  tales  of  old  ?  Dwellers 
of  the  flvirts  of  night,  your  voice  is  but  a  blaft  to  me ; 
which  takes  the  grey  thiftle's  beard  and  ftrews  its  head  on 
ftreams.    Within  my  bofom  is  a  voice.     Others  hear  it 

not. 

*  The  delicacy  here,  with  regard  to  Crolhar,  is  proper.  As  he  was  the  ancef- 
tor  of  Cathmor,  'to  whom  the  epilbde  is  addreffed,  the  bard  foftens  his  defeat,  by 

i  only  mentioning  that  his  people  ^ed.  Cathmor  took  the  fong  of  Fonar  in  an  unfa- 
vourable light.  The  bards,  being  of  the  order  of  the  Druids,  who  pretended  to  a 
foreknowledge  of  events,  \»ere  fuppofed  to  have  fome  fupernatural  prefcience  of 
futurity.  The  king  thviught,  that  the  choice  of  Fonar's  fong  proceeded,  from  his 
forefccing  the  unfortunate  iffue  of  the  war;  and  that  his  own  fate  was  fhadowed  out, 
in  that  oif  his  anceftor  Crothar.     The  attitude  of  the  bard,  after  the  reprimand  of 

;  bis  patron,  is  pifturefque  and  affefting.  We  adni'.re  the  fpeech  of  Caihir.or,  but 
lament  ths  cffett  it  has  on  the  feeling  foul  of  the  good  old  r-cet. 


28o  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

not.  His  foul  forbids  the  king  of  Erin  to  (lirink  back 
from  war.'* 

Abashed,  the  bard  fmks  back  in  night :  retired,  he 
bends  above  a  ftream.  His  thoughts  are  on  the  days  of 
Atha,  when  Cathmor  heard  his  fong  with  joy.  Kis  tears 
come  rolling  down.    The  winds  are  in  his  beard. 

Erin  fleeps  around.  No  fieep  comes  down  on  Cath- 
mor's  eyes.  Dark,  in  his  foul,  he  fav/  the  fpirit  of  low- 
laid  Cairbar.  He  faw  him,  without  his  fong,  rolled  in  s 
blaft  of  night.  He  rofe.  His  (teps  were  round  the  hoft. 
He  ftruck,  at  times,  his  echoing  ftiield.  The  found  reach- 
ed Oflian's  ear,  on  Mora's  moffy  brow. 

"  FiLLAN,"  I  faid,  "  the  foes  advance.  I  hear  the 
fhield  of  war.  Stand  thou  in  the  narrow  path.  Olllan 
fhall  mark  their  courfe.  If  over  my  fall  the  hoft  fliould 
pour,  then  be  thy  buckler  heard.  Awake  the  king  on 
his  heath,  left  his  fame  fliould  fly  away."  I  ftrode  in  all 
my  rattling  arms  ;  wide-bounding  over  a  ftream,  that 
darkly-winded,  in  the  field,  before  the  king  of  Atha.  Green 
Atha's  king,  with  lifted  fpear,  came  forward  on  my  courfe. 
Now  would  we  have  mixed  in  horrid  fray,  like  two  con- 
tending ghofts,  that,  bending  forward  from  two  clouds, 
fend  forth  the  roaring  winds ;  did  not  Offian  behold,  on 
high,  tH'e  helmet  of  Erin's  kings.  The  eagle's  wing  fpread 
over  it,  ruftling  in  the  breeze.  A  red  ftar  looked  through 
the  plumes.    I  ftopt  the  lifted  fpear. 

"  Thk  helmet  of  kings  is  before  me!  Who  art  thou, 
fon  of  night  ?  Shall  Ollian's  fpear  be  renowned,  when 
thou  art  lowly-laid  ?"  At  once  he  dropt  the  gleaming 
lance.  Growing  before  me  feemed  the  form.  He  ftretched 
his  hand  in  night.     He  fpoke  the  words  of  kings. 

"  Friend  of  the  fpirits  of  heroes,  do  I  meet  thee  thus 
in  Ihades  ?  I  have  wiflred  for  thy  ftately  fteps  in  Atha,  in 
the  days  of  joy.  Why  ftiould  my  fpear  now  arife  ?  The 
fun  muft  behold  us,  Offian  ;  when  we  bend,  gleaming, 
in  the  ftrlfe.  Future  warriors  (hall  mark  the  place  ;  and, 
fhuddering,  think  of  other  years.  They  lliall  mark  it, 
like  the  haunt  of  ghofts.  pleiifant  and  dreadful  to  the  foul." 

"  Shall  it  then  be  forgot,"  I  faid,  "  where  we  meet 
in  peace  ?    Is  the  remembrance  of  battles  always  pleafant 

t© 


Book  II.         An  EPIC   POEM.  281 

to  the  foul  ?  Do  not  we  behold,  with  joy,  the  place  where 

,,  our  fathers  feafled  ?  But  our  eyes  are  full  of  tears,  on  the 

',]  fields  of  their  war.    This  ftone  fliall  rife,  withall  its  mofs, 

;  and  fpeak  to  other  years.     "  Here  Cathmor  and  Offian. 

met !  the  warriors  met  in  peace !"    When  thou,  O  ftone, 

flialt  fail:  when  Lubar's  ftream  fliall  roll  away  ;  then  fliall 

the   traveller   come,    and  bend  here,    perhaps,    in   reft. 

When  the  darkened  moon  is  rolled  over  his  head,  our 

flicidowy  forms  may  come,  and,  mixing  with  his  dreams, 

remind  him  of  this  place.    But  why  turneft  thou  fo  dark 

away,  fon  of  Borbar-duthul  *  ?" 

"  Not  forgot,  fon  of  Fingal,  fliall  we  afcend  thefe 
winds.  Our  deeds  are  ftreams  of  light,  before  the  eyes 
';  of  bards.  But  darknefs  is  rolled  on  Atha :  the  king  is 
ji;  low,  without  his  fong.  Still  there  vvas  a  beam  towards 
il  Cathmor  from  his  ftormy  foul ;  like  the  moon,  in  a  cloud, 
|j  amidft  the  dark-red  courfe  of  thunder.'* 
I:  "  Son  of  Erin,"  I  replied,  "  my  wrath  dwells  not  in. 
f  his  earth  f.  My  hatred  flies,  on  eagle-wing,  from  the  foe 
[:  that  is  low.  He  fliall  hear  the  fong  of  bards.  Cairbar  fliall 
!  rejoice  on  his  winds." 

Cathmor's  fwelling  foul  arofe.  He  took  the  dagger 
from  his  fide,  and  placed  it,  gleaming,  in  my  hand.  He 
placed  it,  in  my  hand,  with  lighs,  and,  filent,  ftrode  away. 
Mine  eyes  followed  his  departure.  He  dimly  gleamed, 
like  the  form  of  a  ghoft,  which  meets  a  traveller,  by 
night,  on  the  dark-fkirted  heath.  His  words  are  dark, 
i  like  fongs  of  old :  with  morning  ftrides  the  unfiniflied 
^  fliade  away ! 

:       jl  Who  comes  from  Lubar's  vale  ?  from  the  fMirts  of 
N  n  the 

*  Borbar-duthul,  thcfurly  xvarrior  of  the  dark-brozon  nes.  That  his  name  fuited 
well  with  his  characior,  we  may  eaGly  conceive,  fiotn  the  ftory  delivered  concern- 
;  in^  him,  by  Malthos,  toward  the  end  of  the  fixth  book.  He  was  tlie  brother  of 
;  «!'nat  Colculla,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  epifoda  which  begins  the  fourth  book. 
I  +  This  reply  abounds  with  the  fcntlmcnts  of  a  noble  mind.  Thoua,h,  of  all  men 
l^  living,  he  was  the  the  moft  injured  by  Cairbar,  vet  he  lays  .afide  his  ra^e,  as  the 
f  Joe  IS  lew.  How  aifferciit  is  this  from  the  behaviour  cf  the  heroes  of  other  ancient 
I    goems  !    CyntJiius  aurcm  vdiit. 

'.  jl  The  morning  of  the  fecond  dav,  from  the  opening  of  the  poem,  comes  oc. 
;  After  the  death  of  CuthuUin,  Carril,  the  fon  of  Kinfena,  his  bard,  retired  to  the 
i  cave  of  Tura,  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Moi-lena,  the  fcene  of  iiie  poem 
.  of  femora.  His  cafual  appearance  here  enables  Olfian  to  fulfil  immediately  the 
pjomife  he  Ii.td  made  to  Cathinor,  of  caufing  the  yj/7ze,''a/.yci«^  to  be  pronounced 
'   ever  the  tomb  of  Cairbar.     This  book  takes  up  otiiy  the  fpace  of  a  few  hours. 


282  T    E    M    O    R    A. 

the  morning  mill  ?  The  drops  |>f  heaven  are  on  his  head. 
His  fteps  are  in  the  paths  of  the  fad.  It  is  Carril  of  other 
times:  he  comes  from  Tura's  filent  cave.  I  behold  it  dark 
in  the  rock,  through  the  thin  folds  of  mill.  There,  Y^Xr 
haps,  Cuthullin  fits,  on  the  blaft  which  bends  its  trees...;; 
Pleafant  is  the  fong  of  the  morning  from  the  bard  of  Erin!  !  | 

''  The  waves  crowd  away,"  faid  Carril :   "  They  crowd  jl 
away  for  fear.    They  hear  the  found  of  thy  coming  forth,  '\l 
O  fun  !  Terrible  is  thy  beauty,  fon  of  heaven,  when  death  : : 
is  defcending  on  thy  locks ;  when  thou  rolleft  thy  vapours 
before  thee,  over  the  blafted  hoft.     But  pleafant  is  thy 
beam  to  the  hunter,  fitting  by  a  rock  in  a  ftorm,  when 
thou  Ihowefl  thyfelf  from  the  parted  cloud,  and  bright- 
enefl  his  dewy  locks:  he  looks  down  on  the  ftreamy  vale, 
and  beholds  the  defcent  of  roes!  How  long  fiialt  thou  rife 
on  war,  and  roll,  a  bloody  iliield,  through  heaven  ?  I  fee 
the  deaths  of  heroes,  dark-wandering  over  thy  face  " 

"  Why  wander  the  words  of  Carril  ?"  I  faid.    "  Does 
the  fon  of  heaven  mourn  ?  He  is  unllained  in  his  course, 
ever  rejoicing  in  his  fire.     Roll  on,  thou  carelefs  light. 
Thou,  too,  perhaps,  mull:  fall.    Thy  darkening  hour  may 
feize  thee,  ftruggiing,   as  thou  rolleft  through   the  fky. 
But  pleafant  is  the  voice  of  the  bard!  pleafant,  to  Offian's 
foul !  It  is  like  the  fhower  of  the  morning,  when  it  comes 
through  the  ruftling  vale,  on  which  the  fun  looks  through 
mift,  juft  rifmg  from  his  rocks.     But  this  is  no  time,  O 
bard,  to  fit  down  at  the  ftrife  of  fong.    Fingal  is  in  arms  , 
on  the  vale.    Thou  feeil  the  flaming  fliield  of  the  king,  j 
His  face  darkens  between  his  locks.    He  beholds  the  wide-  j 
rol  i  ig  of  Erin.    Does  not  Carril  behold  that  tomb,  befide  j 
the  roaring  ftream  ?   Three  ftones  lift  their  grey  heads, 
beneath  a  bending  oak.    A  king  is  lowly  laid  !  Give  thou 
his  foul  to  the  wind.     He  is  the  brother  of  Cathmor ! 
Open  his  airy  hall !    Let  thy  fong  be  a  dream  of  joy  t© 
Cairbar's  darkened  ghoft." 


TEMO  R A 


T      E      M       O      R      A  : 

A  N 

EPIC        POEM. 
BOOK    IIL 


ARGUMENT. 


MORNING  coming  on,  Fingal,  after  a  fpeech  to  his  people,  devolves  the  com- 
mand on  Gaul,  the  fon  of  Morni ;  it  being  the  cuftom  of  the  times,  that  the 
king  fliould  not  engage,  till  the  neceffity  of  affairs  required  his  fuperior  valour 
and  couduft.  The  king  and  Offian  retire  to  the  rock  of  Cormul,  which  over- 
looked  the  field  of  battle.  The  baids  fingthe  war-fong.  The  general  conflifl; 
is  defcribed.  GjuI,  the  fon  of  Morni,  diftinguiflies  himfelf ;  kills  Tur-lathon, 
chief  of  Mo.utb,  and  other  chiefs  of  leffer  name.  On  the  other  hand,  Foldath, 
•who  commanded  the  Irifh  army  (for  Cathmor,  after  the  example  of  Fingal,  kept 
himfelf  from  battle)  fights  gallantly ;  kills  Connal,  chief  of  Dun-lora,  and  ad- 
vances to  engage  Gi'.ul  himfelf.  Gaul,  in  the  mean  time,  being  wounded  in 
the  hand,  by  a  random  arrow,  is  covered  by  Fillan,  the  fon  of  Fingal,  who  per- 
forms prodigies  of  valour.  Night  comes  on.  The  horn  of  Fingal  recals  his  ar- 
my. The  bards  meet  them,  with  a  congratulatory  fong,  in  which  the  praifes  of 
Gaul  and  Fillan  are  particularly  celebrated.  The  chiefs  fit  down  at  a  feaft;  Fin- 
gal miffes  Connal.  The  epifode  of  Conna]  and  Duth-caron  is  introduced;  which 
throws  farther  light  on  the  ancient  hiflory  of  Ireland.  Carril  is  difpatched  to 
raife  the  tomb  of  Connal.  The  a£lion  of  this  book  takes  up  the  fecond  day,  from 
the  opening  of  the  poem. 

WHO  is  that  at  bliie-flreaming  Lubar?  Who,  by 
the  bending  hill  of  roes  ?  Tall,  he  leans  on  an 
oak  torn  from  high,  by  nightly  winds.  Who,  but  Com- 
hal's  fon,  brightening  in  the  lad  of  his  fields  ?  His  grey 
hair  is  on  the  breeze.  He  half  unfheaths  the  fword  of 
Luno.  His  eyes  are  turned  to  Moi-lena,  to  the  dark  mov- 
ing of  foes.  Doft  thou  hear  the  voice  of  the  king  ?  It  is 
like  the  burflingof  a  ftream,  in  the  defart,\vhen  it  comes, 
between  its  echoing  rocks,  to  the  blafted  field  of  the  fun  ! 
"  Wide-skirted  comes  down  the  foe  !  Sons  of  woody 
Selma,  arife.    Be  ye  like  the  rocks  of  our  land,  on  whofe 

brown 


284 


T    E    M    O    R    A 


brown  ficies  are  the  rolling  of  ftreanis.  A  beam  of  joy 
comes  on  my  foul.  I  fee  the  foe  mighty  before  me.  It  is 
when  he  is  feeble,  that  the  fighs  of  Fingal  are  heard  ; 
left  death  fhould  come,  without  renown,  and  darknefs 
dwell  on  his  tomb.  Who  fhall  lead  the  war  againft  the 
hoft  of  Alnecma  ?  It  is  only  when  danger  grows,  that  my 
fword  lliall  Ihine.  Such  was  the  cuftom,  heretofore,  of 
Trenmor  the  ruler  of  winds  ;  and  thus  defcended  to  bat- 
tle the  blue-fhielded  Trathal." 

The  chiefs  bend  toward  the  king.  Each  darkly  feems 
to  claim  the  war.  They  tell,  by  halves,  their  mighty 
deeds.  They  turn  their  eyes  on  Erin.  But,  far  before 
the  reft,  the  fon  of  Morni  ftands.  Silent  he  ftands  ;  for 
who  had  not  heard  of  the  battles  of  Gaul  ?  They  rofc 
within  his  foul.  His  hand,  in  fecret,  feized  the  fword  : 
the  fword  which  he  brought  from  Strumon,  when  the 
ftrength  of  Morni  failed*. 

On 

*  Strumon,  Jlreani  cftke  hill,  the  name  of  the  feat  of  the  family  of  Gaul,  in  tbc 
neighbourhood  of  Sehna.  During  jGaul's  expedition  to  Tromathon,  mentioiud 
in  the  poem  of  Oithcna,  Morni  his  father  died.  Morni  ordeicd  the  fword  cf  SlJti- 
mon,  (which  had  been  prcfcrved,  in  the  family,  as  a  rclique,  from  the  days  of  Co:- 
gach,  the  moft  renowned  of  his  anceftors)  to  be  laid  by  his  fide,  in  the  tomb  : 
at  the  fame  time,  leaving  it  in  cliarge  to  his  fon,  not  to  take  i:  from  thence,  till 
he  was  reduced  to  the  laft  extremity.  Not  long  after,  two  of  his  brothers  beii:;^ 
f.ain,  in  battle,  by  Coldaronnan,  chief  of  Clutha,  Gaul  went  to  his  father's  touiL 
to  take  (he  fwoid.  His  addrefs  to  the  fpirit  of  the  deceafed  hero,  is  the  fubjeft  of 
the  following  flioit  poem. 

GAUL. 

BREAKER  cf  echoing  fliields,  whofe  head  is  deep  in  (hades;  hear  me,  from 
the  darknefs  of  Clora  :  O  fon  of  Colgach,  hear! 
No  ruftling,  like  the  eagle's  wing,  comes  over  the  courfe  of  my  flreams.    Deep 
bofomed  in  the  midft  of  the  defart,  O  king  of  Strumon,  hear  1 

D.vellefl  thou  in  the  fliadovvfy  breeze,  that  pours  its  dark  wave  over  the  grafs ! 
Ceafe  to  flrew  the  beaid  of  the  thiftle  ;   O  chief  of  Clora,  hear  ! 

Or  rideft  thou  on  a  beam,  amidft  the  dark  trouble  of  clouds  ?  Poureft  thou  the 
loud  wind  on  ftas,  to  roll  their  blue  waves  over  ifles  ?  hear  me,  father  of  Gaul ; 
aniidft  thy  terrors,  hear  ! 

The  ruflling  of  eagles  is  heard,  the  murmuring  oaks  (hake  their  heads  on  the- 
hills :  dreadful  and  pleafant  is  thy  approach,  friend  of  the  dwelling  of  heroes. 
MORNI. 
Who  awakes  me,  in  the  midft  of  my  cloud,  where  my  locks  of  mill  fpread  on 
the  winds  ?  Mixed  with  the  noife  of  ftreams,  why  rifes  the  voice  of  Gaul? 
GAUL. 
My  foes  are  around  me,  Morni:  their  dark  {hips  defcend  from  their  waves. 
Give  the  fword  of"  Strumon,  that  beam  which  thou  bidcft  in  thy  night. 

MOPvNL 


Book  III.        An   EPIC    POEM.  285 

On  his  fpear  leans  Fillan  of  Sslma*,  in  the  wandering 
of  his  locks.  Thrice  he  raifes  his  eyes  to  Fingal  :  his 
voice  thrice  fails  him,  as  he  fpeaks.  My  brother  could 
not  boaft  of  battles  :  at  once  he  flrides  away.  Bent  over 
a  diftant  flream,  he  (lands  :  the  tear  hangs  in  his  eye. 
He  ftrikes,  at  times,  the  thiftle's  head,  with  his  inverted 
fpear.  Nor  is  he  unfeen  of  Fingal.  Sidelong  he  beholds 
his  fon.  He  beholds  him,  with  burfting  joy  ;  and  turns, 
amid  his  crowded  foul.  In  filence  turns  the  king  toward 
Mora  of  woods.  He  hides  the  big  tear  with  his  locks. 
At  length  his  voice  is  heard. 

"  First  of  the  fons  of  Morni !  thou  rock  that  defied 
the  ftorm  !  lead  thou  my  battle,  for  the  race  of  low-laid 
Cormac.  No  boy's  ftaff  is  thy  fpear  :  no  harmlefs  beam 
of  light,  thy  fword.  Son  of  Morni  of  lieeds,  behold  the 
foe  !  Deftroy  ! — Fillan,  obferve  the  chief!  He  is  not  calm 
in  flrife  ;  nor  burns  he,  heedlefs,  in  battle.  My  fon,  ob- 
ferve the  chief !  He  is  ftrong  as  Lubar's  ftream,  but  never 
foams  and  roars.  High  on  cloudy  Mora,  Fingal  fhall  be- 
hold the  war.  Stand,  Oilianf,  near  thy  father,  by  the 
falling  ftream.  Raife  the  voice,  O  bards !  Selma,  move 
beneath  the  found.  It  is  my  latter  field.  Clothe  it  over 
with  light." 

As  the  fudden  rifmg  of  winds  ;  or  diftant  rolling  of 
troubled  feas,  when  fome  dark  ghoft,  in  wrath,  heaves 
the  billows  over  an  ille :  an  ifle,  the  feat  of  mill,  on  the 
deep,  for  many  dark-brown  years  !  So  terrible  is  the  found 
of  the  hoft,  wide-moving  over  the  field.  Gaul  is  tall 
before  them.  The  ftreams  glitter  within  his  flrides.  The 
bards  raife  the  fong  by  his  fide.  He  ftrikes  his  fhield  be- 
tween.   On  the  Ikirts  of  the  blaft,  the  tuneful  voices  rife. 

"  On 

MORNI. 
Take  the  fword  of  rcfounding  Strumon  :  I  look  on  thy  war,  my  fon  ;  I  look,  a 
dim  meteor,  from  my  cloud:  blue-fliielded  G;iul,  deRrov  !" 

*  Clatho  was  the  dauc;hter  of  Cathulb,  kinj;  of  Iniflorc.  Fingal,  in  one  of  his 
expeditions  to  that  ifland,  fell  in  love  with  Clatho,  and  took  her  to  wife,  after  the 
death  of  Ros-crana,  the  dauj^hter  of  Cormac,  king  of  Ireland. 

Clatho  was  the  mother  of  Ryno,  Fillan,  and  Bofmina,  mentioned  in  the  battle 
cf  Lora.  FiHan  is  often  called  the  fon  of  Clatho,  to  diftirignifli  him  from  thofe 
fons  which  Fingal  had  by  Ros-crana. 

+  Ullin  being  fent  to  Morven  with  the  body  of  Ofcar,  OfT.an  attends  his  father, 
m  quality  of  chief  bard. 


286  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

"  On  Crona,"  faid  the  bards,  "  there  burfls  a  ftream 
by  night.  It  fwells  in  its  own  dark  courfe,  till  morning's 
early  beam.  Then  comes  it  white  from  the  hill,  with  the 
rocks  and  their  hundred  groves.  Far  be  my  fleps  from 
Crona.  Death  is  tumbling  there.  Be  ye  a  ftream  from 
Mora,  fons  of  cloudy  Morven  ! 

"  Who  rifes,  ft-om  his  car,  on  Clutha  ?  The  hills  are 
troubled  before  the  king  !  The  dark  woods  echo  around, 
and  lighten  at  his  ileel.  See  him,  amidft  the  foe,  like 
Colgach's*  fportful  ghoft  ;  when  he  fcatters  the  clouds, 
and  rides  the  eddying  winds !  It  is  Morni  |  of  bounding 
fleeds !    Be  like  thy  father,  O  Gaul ! 

"  Selma  is  opened  wide.  Bards  take  the  trembling 
harps.  Ten  youths  bear  the  oak  of  the  feaft.  A  diilant 
fun-beam  marks  the  hill.  The  dulky  waves  of  the  blaft 
fly  over  the  grafs.  Why  art  thou  filent,  O  Selma  ?  The 
king  returns  with  all  his  fame.  Did  not  the  battle  roar ; 
yet  peaceful  is  his  brow  ?  It  roared,  and  Fingal  over-" 
came.     Be  Hke  thy  father,  O  Fillan  !" 

They  move  beneath  the  fong.  High  wave  their  arms  ; , 
as  rufliy  fields,  beneath  autumnal  winds.  On  Mora  ftands 
the  king  in  arms.  Mifl  flies  round  his  buckler  abroad  ; 
as,  aloft,  it  hung  on  a  bough,  on  Cormul's  mofiy  rock. 
In  filence  I  flood  by  Fingal,  and  turned  my  eyes  on 
Cromla's  |j  wood  ;  left  I  fhould  behold  the  hoft,  and  rufh 
amid  my  lv\"elling  foul.    My  foot  is  forward  on  the  heath. 

I  glitter. 

*  There  are  fome  traditions,  but,  I  believe,  of  late  invention,  that  this  Colgach 
v.as  the  fame  with  the  Galj:acus  of  Tacitas.  He  was  the  anceftor  of  Gaul,  the  fon 
of  Morni,  and  appears,  fiom  fome,  really  ancient,  traditions,  to  have  been  king, 
or  Verqobret,  of  the  Caledonians;  and  hence  proceeded  the  pretenfions  of  the  fa- 
mily of  Morni  to  the  throne,  which  created  a  good  deal  of  diflurbance,  both  to 
Comhal  and  his  fon  Finr^al.  The  firfl  was  killed  in  battle  by  that  tribe ;  and  it  was 
alter Fin<jal  was  grown  up,  tha'  they  were  reduced  to  obedience.  Colgach  fignifies* 
JiiTcely-tooking ;  which  is  a  very  proper  name  for  a  wairior,  and  is  probably  the  ori- 
gin of  Galgacus,  though  1  believe  it  a  matter  of  mere  conjefture,  that  the  Colgach 
here  mentioned  was  the  fame  with  that  hero.  I  cannot  help  obferving,  that  the 
fong  of  the  bards  is  conducted  with  propriety.  Gaul,  whofe  experience  might 
have  rendered  his  conduft  cautious  in  war,  has  the  exampl'  of  his  father,  juft  ruih- 
ing  to  battle,  fet  before  his  eyes.  Filiari,  on  the  other  hand,  whofe  youth  might 
make  him  impetuous  and  unguarded  in  attion,  is  put  in  mind  of  the  fedate  and 
ferene  behaviour  of  Fingal  upon  like  occafions. 

+  The  expedition  of  Morni  to  Clutha,  alluded  to  here,  is  handed  down  in  tra- 
dition. 

il  The  mountain  Cromla  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  fcene  of  ihis  poem  j 
which  was  nearly  the  fame  with  that  of  Fingal. 


Book  III.        An   EPIC   POEM.  287 

I  glittered,  tall,  In  fleel ;  like  the  falling  fliream  of  Tromo, 
which  nightly  winds  bind  over  with  ice.  The  boy  fees  it, 
on  high,  gleaming  to  the  early  beam  :  toward  it  he  turns 
his  ear,  and  wonders  why  it  is  fo  filent  ! 

Nor  bent  over  a  llream  is  Cathmor,  like  a  youth  in  a 
peaceful  field.  Wide  he  drew  forward  the  war,  a  dark 
and  troubled  wave.  But,  when  he  beheld  Fingal  on  Mo- 
ra, his  generous  pride  arofe :  "  Shall  the  chief  of  Atha 
fight,  and  no  king  in  the  field  ? — Foldath,  lead  my  people 
forth.     Thou  art  a  beam  of  fire !" 

Forth  iffues  Foldath  of  Moma,  like  a  cloud,  the  robe 
of  ghoils.  He  drew  his  fword,  a  flame,  from  his  fide* 
He  bade  the  battle  move.  The  tribes,  like  ridgy  waves, 
dark  pour  their  fi:rength  around.  Haughty  is  his  ftride 
before  them.  His  red  eye  rolls  in  wrath.  He  calls  Cormui 
chief  of  Dunratho*,  and  his  words  were  heard. 

"  CoRMUL,  thou  beholdefl  that  path.  It  winds  green  be- 
hind the  foe.  Place  thy  people  there,  left  Selma  fhould  ef- 
cape  from  my  fword. — Bards  of  green-valleyed  Erin,  let  no 
voice  of  yours  arife.  The  fons  of  Morven  muft  fall  with- 
out fong.  They  are  the  foes  of  Cairbar.  Hereafter  fhall 
the  traveller  meet  their  dark,  thick  mift  on  Lena,  where 
it  wanders,  with  their  ghofts,  befide  the  reedy  lake.  Never 
(hall  they  rife,  without  fong,  to  the  dwelling  of  winds." 

CoRMUL  darkened,  as  he  went.  Behind  him  rulhed 
his  tribe.  They  funk  beyond  the  rock.  Gaul  fpoke  to 
Fillan  of  Selma  ;  as  his  eye  purfued  the  courfe  of  the 
dark-eyed  chief  of  Dunratho.  "  Thou  beholdeft  the  fteps 
of  Cormui  !  Let  thine  arm  be  ftrong  !  When  he  is  low, 
fon  of  Fingal,  remember  Gaul  in  war.  Here  I  fall  forward 
into  battle,  amid  the  ridge  of  ihields." 

The  fign  of  death  afcends  ;  the  dreadful  found  of 
Morni's  fhieid  !  Gaul  pours  his  voice  between.  Fingal 
rifes  on  Mora.  He  faw  them,  from  wing  to  wing,  bend- 
ing- 

*  Dun-ratho,  a  hill  with  a  plain  on  its  top.     Corm-uil,  Hue  eye.     Foldath  dif- 

i latches,  here,  Cormui  to  lie  in  ambufh  behind  the  army  oF  the  Caledonians.  This 
peech  fuits  with  the  chavatler  of  Foldath,  which  is,  throughout,  h;niCThty,  and 
prcfumptuous.  Towards  the  latter  end  of  this  fpeech,  we  find  the  opinion  of  the 
times,  concerning  the  unhappincfs  of  the  fouls  of  thofe  who  were  buried  without 
the  funeral  long.  This  doftrine  was  inculcated  by  the  bards,  to  make  their  order 
refpedable  and  neceffary. 


288  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

ing  at  once  in  (Irife.  Gleaming,  on  his  .  own  dark  hill, 
flood  Cathmcr  of  flreamy  Atha.  The  kings  were  like 
two  fpirits  of  heaven,  ftanding  each  on  his  gloomy  cloud ; 
when  they  pour  abroad  the  winds,  and  lift  the  roaring 
feas.  The  blue-tumbling  of  waves  is  before  them,  mark- 
ed with  the  paths  of  whales :  they  themfelves  are  calm 
and  bright  :  the  gale  lifts  flowly  their  locks  of  mifl ! 

What  beam  of  light  hangs  high  in  air  ?  What  beam, 
but  Morni's  dreadful  fword  !  Death  is  ftrewed  on  thy 
paths,  O  Gaul  !  Thou  folded  them  together  in  thy  rage. 
Like  a  young  oak,  falls  Tur-lathon*,  with  his  branches 
round  him.  His  high-boiomed  fpoufe  ftretches  her  white 
arms,  in  dreams,  to  the  returning  chief,  as  flie  fleeps  by 
gurgling  Moruth,  in  her  difordered  locks.  It  is  his  ghoft, 
Oichoma.  The  chief  is  lowly  laid.  Hearken  not  to  the 
winds  for  Turlathon's  echoing  fhield.  It  is  pierced,  by 
his  ftreams.    Its  found  is  pall  away. 

Nor  peaceful  is  the  hand  of  Foldath.  He  winds  his 
courfe  in  blood.  Connal  met  him  in  fight.  They  mixed 
their  clanging  fteel.  Why  fhould  mine  eyes  behold  them ! 
Connal,  thy  locks  are  grey !  Thou  wert  the  friend  of 
ftrangers,  at  the  mofs-covered  rock  of  Dun-lora.  When 
the  fkles  were  rolled  together,  then  thy  feaft  was  fpread. 
The  ftranger  heard  the  winds  without,  and  rejoiced  at 
thy  burning  oak.  Why,  fon  of  Duth-caron,  art  thou  laid 
in  blood  !  The  blafted  tree  bends  above  thee  :  thy  fliield 
lies  broken  near.  Thy  blood  mixes  with  the  dream  ;  thou 
breaker  of  the  Ihields  I 

OssiAN  took  the  fpear,  in  his  wrath.  But  Gaul  rufhed 
forward  on  Foldath.  The  feeble  pafs  by  his  fide  :  his 
rage  is  turned  on  Moma's  chief.  N9W  they  had  raifed 
their  deathful  fpears  :  unfeen  an  arrow  came.  It  pierced 
the  hand  of  Gaul.  His  (leel  fell  founding  to  earth.  Young 
Fiilan  camef,  with  Cormul's  fhield.  He  ilretched  it  large 
before  the  chief,     Foldath  fent  his   fhouts   abroad,  and 

kindled 

"  Tur-laihon,  iroa el  trunk  of  a  tree.  Moriuh,  great  Jlream.  Olchaoiiia,  mild 
i.iaid.     Biin-lora,  the  hilL  of  the  noify  Jlream.     Dudi-caron,  dark-broiun  vmn. 

I  iilkn  had  been  difpatched  by  Gaul  to  oppofc  Cormul,  who  had  been  fent  by 
roi.J.uh  to  i!i:  ill  .iviibuOi  behind  the  C-tlcdonian  army.  It  appears  that  Fillan  had 
killed  Cormul,  othcrwife  he  could  not  be  fuppofcd  to  have  poirefTed  himfelf  of 
trie  fticld  of  that  chief. 


Book  III.        An  EPIC   POEM.  289 

kindled  all  the  field  ;  as  a  blaft  that  lifts  the  wide-winged 
flame,  over  Lumon's  echoing  groves*. 

"  Son  of  blue-eyed  Clatho,"  faid  Gaul,  "  O  Fiilan, 
(  thou  art  a  beam  from  heaven  ;  that,  coming  on  the  trou- 
'  bled  deep,  binds  up  the  tempeil's  wing.  Cormul  is  fallen 
before  thee.  Early  art  thou  in  the  fame  of  thy  fathers. 
I  Rufh  not  too  far,  my  hero.  I  cannot  lift  the  fpear  to  aid. 
!  I  ftand  harmlefs  in  battle.  But  my  voice  fhall  be  poured 
!  abroad.  The  fons  of  Selma  lliall  hear,  and  remember  my 
!  former  deeds." 

His  terrible  voice  rofe  on  the  wind.  The  hoft  bends 
forward  in  fight.  Often  had  they  heard  him,  at  Strumon, 
when  he  called  them  to  the  chace  of  the  hinds.  He  ftands 
,  tall,  amid  the  vv^ar,  as  an  oak  in  the  ikirts  of  a  ftorm, 
}  which  now  is  clothed  on  high  in  mail  ;  then  lliews  its 
broad,  waving  head.  The  mufmg  hunter  lifts  his  eye, 
from  his  own  rufliy  field  ! 

My  foul  purfues  thee,  O  Fiilan,  through  the  path  of 
|.  thy  fame.  Thou  rolledft  the  foe  before  thee.  Now  Fol- 
dath,  perhaps,  may  fly  :  but  night  comes  down  with  its 
clouds.  Cathmor's  horn  is  heard  on  high.  The  fons  of 
Sclma  hear  the  voice  of  Fingal,  from  Mora's  gathered 
mift.  The  bards  pour  their  fong,  like  dew,  on  the  re- 
turning war. 

"  Who  comes  from  Strumon,"  they  faid,  "  amid  her 
wandering  locks  ?  She  is  mournful  in  her  fteps,  and  lifts 
her  blue  eyes  toward  Erin.  Why  art  thou  fad,  Evir- 
choma  |  ?  Who  is  like  thy  chief  in  renown  ?  He  descend- 
ed dreadful  to  battle ;  he  returns,  like  a  light  from  a 
cloud.  He  raifed  the  fword  in  wrath  :  they  fhrunk  be- 
fore blue-lhielded  Gaul  ! 

"  Joy,  like  the  ruftling  gale,  comes  on  the  foul  of  the 
king.  He  remembers  the  battles  of  old  ;  the  days,  v/here- 
in  his  fathers  fought.  The  days  of  old  return  on  Fingal's 
mind,  as  he  beholds  the  renown  of  his  fon.  As  the  fun 
rejoices,  from  his  cloud,  over  the  tree  his  beams  have 
O  o  raifed, 

*  Lumon,  bending  hill;  a  mountain  in  Inis-huna,  or  that  part  of  South-Britain 
Swhich  is  over-againft  the  Irifii  coaft. 

t  Evir-choama,  mild  and  Jlaldy  maid,  the  wife  of  Gaul.  She  was  the  daugh* 
tcr  of  Cafdu-conglafs,  chief  of  I-dronlo,  one  of  the  Hebrides. 


290 


T    E    M    O    R    A 


ralfed,  as  it  fliakes  its  lonely  head  on  the  heath  ;  fo  joy- 
ful is  the  king  over  Fillan  ! 

"  As  the  rolling  of  thunder  on  hills,  when  Lara's  fields 
ar  J  Hill  and  dark,  fuch  are  the  fteps  of  Selma,  pleafant  and 
dreadful  to  the  ear.  They  return  with  their  found,  like 
eagles  to  their  dark-browed  rock,  after  the  prey  is  torn 
on  the  field,  the  dun  fons  of  the  bounding  hind.  Your 
fathers  rejoice  from  their  clouds,  fons  of  dreamy  Selma  !" 

Such  was  the  nightly  voice  of  bards,  on  Mora  of  the 
hinds.  A  .flame  role,  from  an  hundred  oaks,  which  winds 
had  torn  from  Cormul's  ileep.  The  feafl  is  fpread  in  the 
midft  ;  around  fat  the  gleaming  chiefs.  Fingal  is  there 
in  his  flrength.  The  eagle-wing*  of  his  helmet  founds. 
The  ruicling  blafts  of  the  weft,  unequal,  rufn  thro'  night. 
Long  looks  the  king  in  filence  round :  at  length,  his  words 
are  heard. 

''  My  foul  feels  a  want  in  our  joy.  I  behold  a  breach 
among  my  friends.  The  head  of  one  tree  is  low.  The 
fquaily  wind  pours  in  on  Selma.  Where  is  the  chief  of 
Dun-lora  ?  Ought  Comial  to  be  forgot  at  the  feaft  ? 
When  did  he  forget  the  ftranger,  in  the  midft  of  his 
echoing  hall  ?  Ye  are  filent  in  my  prefence  !  Connal  is, 
then,  no  more.  Joy  meet  thee,  O  vv^arrior,  like  a  ft  ream 
of  light.  Swift  be  thy  courfe  to  thy  fathers,  along  the 
roaring  winds.  Offian,  thy  foul  is  fire :  kindle  the  me- 
mory of  the  king.  Awake  the  battles  of  Connal,  when 
firft  he  Ihone  in  war.  The  locks  of  Connal  were  grey. 
His  days  of  youth  f  were  mixed  with  mine.  In  one  day 
Duth-caron  firft  ftrung  our  bows,  againft  the  roes  of  Dun- 
lora." 

"  Many,"  I  faid,  "  are  our  paths  to  battle,  in  green- 
vallied  Erin.  Often  did  our  fails  arife,  over  the  blue- 
tumbling 

*  The  kings  of  Ciledonia  and  Ireland  had  a  plume  of  eagle's  feathers,  by  way 
of  ornament,  in  tluir  helmets.  It  was  from  this  diftinguifiied  mark  that  Offian 
knew  Cathmor,  in  the  fecond  book. 

t  After  the  death  of  Comhal,  and  dufing  the  ufurpation  of  the  tribe  of  Morni, 
Fingal  was  educated  in  private  by  Duth-caron.  It  was  then  he  contrafted  that  in- 
timacy with  Connal  ihe  Ion  of  Duth-caron,  which  occalions  his  regretting  fo  much 
his  fall.  When  Fingal  was  grown  np,  he  foon  reduced  the  tribe  of  Morni ;  and, 
ES  it  appears  from  the  fubfequent  epil'od^,  fent  Duth-carou  and  his  fon  Connal  to 
th  aidofCormac,  the  fon  of  Conar,  king  of  Ireland,  who  was  driven  to  (be  lafi 
ex.remity,  by  the  infurrcclions  of  the  Fir-bolg.  This  epifode  throws  farther  light 
on  the  contefis  between  the  Cacl  and  Fir-bolg. 


Book  III.        An  EPIC    POEM.  291 

tumbling  waves  ;  when  we  came,  in  other  days,  to  aid 
the  nice  of  Conar.  The  ftrife  roared  once  in  Amecma, 
:\^  the  foam-covered  ftreams  of  Duth-ula*.  Wiih  Cormac 
defcended  to  battle  Duth-caron  from  woody  S  hna.  Nor 
dcfcended  Duth-caron  alone  ;  his  fon  was  by  his  fide,  the 
long-haired  youth  of  Connal  lifting  the  iirfl  of  his  fpears. 
'lliou  didft  command  them,  O  Fingal,  to  aid  the  king  of 
Erin. 

■  "  Like  the  burfting  ftrength  of  ocean,  the  fons  of  Bolga 
rufhed  to  war.  Colc-ulhi-j-  was  before  them,  the  chi^ef  of 
blue-flreaming  Atha.  The  battle  was  mixed  on  the  plain. 
Cormac  II  fhone  in  his  own  Ifrife,  bright  as  the  forms  of 
his  fathers.  But,  far  above  the  reft,  Duth-caron  hewed 
down  the  foe.  Nor  flept  the  arm  of  Connal,  by  his  fa- 
ther's fide.  CoIc-uUa  prevailed  on  the  plain  :  like  fcat- 
tered  mift,  fled  the  people  of  Cormac  §. 

"  Then  rofe  the  fword  of  Duth-caron,  and  the  fteel  of 

broad-fliielded  Connal.    They  fliaded  their  flying  friends, 

like  two  rocks  with  their  heads  of  pine.     Night   came 

down  on  Duth-ula  :  filent  ftrode  the  chiefs  over  the  field. 

A  mountain-ftream   roared  acrofs   the  path,   nor  could 

Duth-caron  bound  over  its  courfe.    "  Why  ftands  my  fa- 

1  ther  ?"  faid  Connal.    "  I  hear  the  rufliing  foe." 

I       "  Fly,  Connal,"  he  faid.     "  Thy  father's  ftrength  be- 

j  '     gins 

*  Duth-uhi,  a  river  in  Connaught ;  it  figriilii5,  dark-rujldns,  water. 

i-  Colc-uUa,  j9';7« /iJcw  in  rcadinifs;  he  was  the  brother  of  Borbar-duthul,  the  fa- 
tlur  of  Cairbar  and  Cathmor,  who,  after  the  death  of  Ccnnac,  the  fon  of  Artlxj, 
fucceflivcly  nioiuited  the  Infh  throne. 

II  Cormac,  the  Ion  of  Conar,  the  fecond  king  of  Ireland,  of  the  race  of  the  Ca- 
ledonians. Tlii<;  infurreciion  of  the  Fir- bolg  happened  tov.ards  the  latter  end  of 
the  long  reign  of  Cormnc.  He  never  poifeffed  the  Irifh  tluone  pcaceabi;,'.  The 
party  of  the  family  of  Atha  had  made  feveral  attempts  to  overturn  the  fucceffion  in 
the  race  of  Conar,  before  they  eifeited  it,  in  the  minority  of  Cormac,  the  fon  of 
Artho.  Ireland,  from  the  mod  ancient  accounts  concerning  it,  fecms  to  have  been 
always  fo  dillurbed  bv  doineflic  commotions,  that  it  is  diiricult  to  Giy,  whether  it 
ever  was,  for  any  length  of  time,  fubjeftto  one  monarch.  It  is  certain,  that  every 
province,  if  not  every  fmuU  diHri^^,  had  its  own  king.  One  of  th^^fe  petty  princes 
affumcd,  at  times,  the  title  of  king  of  Iraland,  and,  on  account  of  his  fupcrior  force, 
or  in  cafes  «f  public  danger,  was  acknowledged  by  the  red  as  fuch  ;  but  the  fuc- 
ccllion  from  father  to  fon,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  eflabliflicd.  It  was  the 
divifions  aniongft  themfelves,  avifing  from  the  bad  conOitution  of  their  govern- 
ment, that,  at  lail,  fubjecied  the  Irifii  to  a  foreign  yoke. 

%  The  inhabitants  of  Ullin  or  Ulfler,  who  were  of  the  race  of  the  Caledonians, 
fceiji,  alone,  to  have  been  the  firm  friends  to  the  fucceffion  in  the  family  of  Conar. 
The  Fir-bolg  were  onlv  fubjeft  to  them  by  c^nfiraint,  and  embraced  every  oppor- 
taiiity  to  thiow  off  their  voke. 


292  T    E    M    O    R    A : 

gins  to  fail.  I  come  wounded  from  battle.  Here  let  me 
reft  in  night."  "  But  thou  flialt  not  remain  alone,"  faid 
Connal's  burfting  figh.  "  Pvly  lliield  is  an  eagle's  wing, 
to  cover  the  king  of  Dun-lora."  He  bends  dark  above 
his  father.    The  mighty  Duth-caron  dies. 

"  Day  rofe,  and  night  returned.  No  lonely  bard  ap- 
peared, deep-mufmg  on  the  heath  :  and  could  Connal 
leave  the  tomb  of  his  father,  till  he  fhould  receive  his 
fame  ?  He  bent  the  bow  againft  the  roes  of  Duth-ula. 
He  fpread  the  lonely  feaft.  Seven  nights  he  laid  his  head 
on  the  tomb,  and  faw  his  father  in  his  dreams.  He  faw 
him  rolled,  dark,  in  a  blaft,  like  the  vapour  of  reedy 
Lego.  At  length  the  fteps  of  Colgan  *  came,  the  bard  of 
high  Temora.  Duth-caron  received  his  fame,  and  bright- 
ened, as  he  rofe  on  the  wind." 

"  Pleasant 

*  Colgan,  tlie  fon  of  Catlimul,  was  the  principal  bard  of  Cormac,  king  of  lie- 
land.  The  following  dialogue,  on  the  loves  of  Fingal  and  Ros-crana,  may  be  af- 
cribed  to  him. 

ROS-CRANA. 

BY  night,  came  a  dream  to  Ros-crana  !  I  feel  my  beating  foiil.  No  vifion  of 
the  forms  of  the  dead,  came  to  the  blue  eyes  of  Erin.  But,  riling  from  the 
wave  of  the  north,  I  beheld  him  bric,htin  his  locks.  1  beheld  the  fon  of  the  king. 
My  beating  foul  is  high.  1  laid  my  head  down  in  night;  again  afcended  the  form. 
Why  delayed  thou  thy  coming,  young  rider  of  (lormy  waves! 

But,  there,  far-diftant,  becomes;  where  feas  roll  their  green  ridges  in  mill! 
Young  dweller  of  my  foul ;  why  doft  thou  delay — 
FINGAL. 
It  was  the  foft  voice  of  Moi-lena !  The  pleafant  breeze  of  the  valley  of  roes! 
But  why  dofl  thou  hide  thee  in  fhades  ?  Young  love  of  heroes,  rife.  Are  not  thy 
l^eps  covered  wi'.h  light  ?  In  thy  groves  thou  appeared,  Ros-crana,  like  the  fun  in 
the  gathering  of  clouds.     Why  doft  thou  hide  thee  in  fiiades  ?  Young  love  of  he- 

'°'''  ''^'-  ROS-CRANA. 

My  fluttering  foul  is  high !  Let  me  turn  from  the  fleps  of  the  king.  He  has 
lieard  my  iecret  voice,  and  fhall  ray  blue  eyes  roll,  in  his  prefence  ?  Roe  of  the 
hill  of  mofs,  toward  thy  dwelling  I  move.  Meet  me,  ye  breezes  of  Mora,  as  I 
move  through  the  valley  of  winds.  But  why  fliould  he  afcend  his  ocean?  Son  of 
heroes,  my  foal  is  thine  !  My  fteps  fliall  not  move  to  the  defart :  the  light  of  Ros- 
crana  is  here.  FINGAL. 

It  was  the  light  tread  of  a  ghoft,  the  fair  dweller  of  eddying  winds.     Why  de- 
ceived thou  me,  with  thy  voice?  Here  let  me  reft  in  Ihades.    Shouldft  thou  ftretcb 
thy  white  arm,  from  thy  grove,  thou  fun-beam  of  Cormac  of  Erin ! 
ROS-CRANA. 

He  is  gone!  and  my  blue-eyes  are  dim;  faint  rolling,  in  all  my  tears.  But, 
there,  I  behold  him,  alone  ;  king  of  Selma,  my  foul  is  thine.  Ah  me  I  wha\; 
elanglng  of  armour !  Cok-ulla  of  Atha  is  near  ! 


Book  III.        An   EPIC   POEM.  293 

"  Pleasant  to  the  ear,"  faid  Fingal,  "  is  the  praife 
of  the  kings  of  men  ;  when  their  bows  are  ftrong  in  bat- 
tle ;  when  they  foften  at  the  fight  of  the  fad.  Thus  let 
my  name  be  renowned,  when  bards  ihall  lighten  my  rifmg 
foul.  Carril,  fon  of  Kinfena !  take  the  bards,  and  raife 
a  tomb.  To-night  let  Connal  dwell  within  his  narrow 
hoiife.  Let  not  the  foul  of  the  valiant  wander  on  the 
winds.  Faint  glimmers  the  moon  on  Moi-lena,  through 
the  broad-headed  groves  of  the  hill !  Raife  Itones,  beneath 
its  beam,  to  all  the  fallen  in  war.  Though  no  chiefs  were 
they,  yet  their  hands  were  ftrong  in  fight.  They  were  my 
rock  in  danger  :  the  mountain,  from  which  I  fpread  my 
eagle-wings.  Thence  am  I  renowned.  Carril,  forget 
not  the  low  !" 

Loud,  at  once,  from  the  hundred  bards,  rofe  the  fong 
of  the  tomb.  Carril  ftrode  before  them :  they  are  the 
murmur  of  ftreams  behind  his  fteps.  Silence  dv/ells  in  the 
vales  of  Moi-lena,  where  each,  with  its  own  dark  rill,  is 
winding  between  the  hills.  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  bards, 
leiTening,  as  they  moved  along.  I  leaned  forward  on  my 
fhield,  and  felt  the  kindling  of  my  foul.  Half-formed, 
the  words  of  my  fong  burft  forth  upon  the  wind.  So  hears 
a  tree,  on  the  vale,  the  voice  of  fpring  around.  It  pours 
its  green  leaves  to  the  fun.  It  {hakes  its  lonely  head.  The 
hum  of  the  mountain-bee  is  near  it :  the  hunter  fees  it, 
with  joy,  from  the  blalled  heath. 

Young  Fillan,  at  a  diftance  ftood.  His  helmet  lay  glit- 
tering on  the  ground.  His  dark  hair  is  loofe  to  the  blaft. 
A  beam  of  light  is  Clatho's  fon  !  He  heard  the  words  of 
the  king,  with  joy.    He  leaned  forward  on  his  fpear. 

"  My  fon,"  faid  car-borne  Fingal,  "  I  faw  thy  deeds, 
and  my  foul  was  glad.  The  fame  of  our  fathers,  I  faid, 
burfts  ft-om  its  gathering  cloud.  Thou  art  brave,  fon  of 
Clatho ;  but  headlong,  in  the  flrife.  So  did  not  Fingal 
advance,  though  he  never  feared  a  foe.  Let  thy  people  be 
a  ridge  behind.  I'hey  are  thy  ftrcngth  in  the  field.  Then 
flialt  thou  be  long  renowned,  and  behold  the  tombs  of 
the  old. — The  memory  of  the  pad  returns,  my  deeds  in 
other  years ;  when  firfl:  I  defcended  from  ocean  on  the 
green-valleved  ifle." 

We 


294  T    E    M    O    R    A. 

We  bend  towards  the  voice  of  the  king.  The  moon 
looks  abroad  from  her  cloud.  The  grey-lkirted  mifl  is 
near  ;  the  dwelling  of  the  ghofts  ! 


TEMORA 


T       E       M       O       R       A 

A  N 

EPIC         POEM. 
BOOK    IV. 


ARGUMENT. 

THE  fccond  night  continues.  Fingal  relates,  at  the  feaft,  his  own  firft  expedition 
into  Ireland,  and  his  marriage  with  Ros-crana,  the  daughter  of  Cormac,  king  of 
that  Ifland.  The  Irifh  chiefs  conveile  in  the  prefence  of  Cathmor.  The  fitua- 
tion  of  the  king  delcribcd.  The  ftory  of  Sul-malla,  the  daughter  of  Conmor, 
king  of  Inis-huiia,  who,  in  the  difguife  of  a  young  warrior,  hadfollowed  Cath- 
mor to  the  war.  The  fullcn  behaviour  of  Foldath,  who  had  commanded  in  the 
battle  of  the  preceding  day,  renews  the  difference  between  him  and  Malthos ; 
but  Cathmor,  interpofing,  ends  it.  The  chiefs  feaft,  and  hear  the  fong  of  Fonar 
the  bard.  Cathmor  returns  to  reft,  at  a  diftance  from  the  army.  The  ghofi  of 
his  brother  Calrbar  appears  to  him  in  a  dream ;  and  obfcurely  foretels  the  iflue 
of  the  war.  The  foliloquy  of  the  king.  He  difcovers  Sul-malla.  Morning 
comes.     Her  foliloquy  clofes  the  book. 

*  "  T3ENEATH  an  oak,"  faid  the  the  king,  «  I  fat  on 
JlJ  Selma's  ftreamy  rock,  when  Connal  rofe,  from 
the  fea,  with  the  broken  fpear  of  Duth-caron.  Far-dif- 
tant  flood  the  youth.  He  turned  away  his  eyes.  He  re- 
membered the  fleps  of  his  father,  on  his  own  green  hills. 
I  darkened  in  my  place.  Dufky  thoughts  flew  over  my 
foul.  The  kings  of  Erin  rofe  before  me.  I  half-unlheath- 
ed  the  fword.  Slowly  approached  the  chiefs.  They  lifted 
up  their  filent  eyes.  Like  a  ridge  of  clouds,  they  wait  for 
the  burfling  forth  of  my  voice.  My  voice  was,  to  them, 
a  wind  from  heaven,  to  roll  the  mifl  away. 

"  I  BADE 

*  This  epifode  has  an  immediate  connexion  with  the  ftory  of  Connal  and  Duth- 
earon,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  third  book.  Fing,al,  fitting  beneath  an  oak,  near 
the  palace  of  Selma,  difcovers  Connal  juft  landing  from  Ireland.  The  danger 
which  threatened  Cormac  king  of  Ireland  induces  him  to  fail  immediately  to  that 
ifland.  The  ftory  is  introduced,  by  the  king,  as  a  pattern  for  the  future  behaviour 
of  Fiilan,  whofe  raflinefs  in  the  precedisg  batch  is  reprimanded. 


296  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

"  I  BADE  my  white  fails  to  rife,  before  the  roar  of  Co- 
na's  wind.  Three  hundred  youths  looked,  from  their 
waves,  on  Fingal's  boHy  fhield.  High  on  the  maft  it 
hung,  and  marked  the  dark-blue  fea.  But  when  night 
came  down,  I  flruck,  at  times,  the  warning  bofs:  I  flruck, 
and  looked  on  high,  for  fiery-haired  Ul-erin  *.  Nor  ab- 
fent  was  the  liar  of  heaven.  It  travelled  red  between  the 
clouds.  I  purfued  the  lovely  beam,  on  the  faint-gleaming 
deep.  With  morning,  Erin  rofe  in  mift.  We  came  into 
the  bay  of  Moi-lena,  where  its  blue  waters  tumbled,  in 
the  bofom  of  echoing  woods.  Here  Cormac,  in  his  fe- 
cret  hall,  avoids  the  ilrength  of  Colc-ulla.  Nor  he  alone 
avoids  the  foe.  The  blue-eye  of  Ros-crana  is  there  :  Ros- 
crana  f ,  white-handed  maid,  the  daughter  of  the  king  ! 

"  Grey,  on  his  pointlefs  fpear,  came  forth  the  aged 
(leps  of  Cormac.  He  fmiled,  from  his  waving  locks  ;  but 
grief  was  in  his  foul.  He  faw  us  few  before  him,  and  hh 
figh  arofe.  "  I  fee  the  arms  of  Trenmor,"  he  faid;  "  and 
thefe  are  the  fleps  of  the  king  !  Fingal !  thou  art  a  beam 
of  light  to  Cormac's  darkened  foul.  Early  is  thy  fame, 
my  Ion :  but  llrong  are  the  foes  of  Erin.  They  are  like 
the  roar  of  flreams  in  the  land,  fon  of  car-borne  Com- 
hal!"  "  Yet  they  may  be  rolled  ||  away,"  I  faid,  in  my 
rifing  foul.  "  We  are  not  of  the  race  of  the  feeble,  kini; 
of  blue-fhielded  hods  !  Why  fliould  fear  come  amongll 
us,  like  a  ghoft  of  night?  The  foul  of  the  valiant  grows, 
when  foes  increafe  in  the  field.  Roll  no  darknefs,  king 
of  Erin,  on  the  young  in  war  !'* 

"  The  burfting  tears  of  the  king  came  down.  He  feiz- 
ed  my  hand  in  filence.  "  Race  of  the  daring  Trenmor !" 
at  length  he  faid,  "  I  roll  no  cloud  before  thee.  Thou 
burnel'c  in  the  fire  of  thy  fathers.    I  behold  thy  fame.    It 

marks 

*  Ul-crin,  the  guide  to  Ireland,  a  Oar  known  by  that  name  in  the  days  of  Fingal, 
and  very  ufcful  to  thole  who  failed,  by  nit^ht,  from  the  Hebrides,  or  Caledonia,  ta 
the  coail  of  Ulfter. 

t  Ros-crana,  the  beam  of  the  rifing  fun;  fhe  was  the  mother  of  Offian.     The 
Iiifh  balds  relate  ftranoe  fittions  concerninf^  this  princefs.    Their  fiories,  however, 
conccrninc^  Fingal,  if  they  moan  him  by  Fion  Mac-Camnal,  are  fo  inconiiflent  and    j 
notor'ouny  fabulous,  that  they  do  not  deferve  to  be  mentioned  ;   for  they  evidently 
bear,  along  with  them,  the  marks  of   late  invention. 

jl  Cormac  had  faid  that  the  foes  were  like  the  roar  of  Jlreams,  and  Fingal  conti- 
nues the  metaphor.  The  f;  c  -ch  of  the  young  hero  is  fpiritcd,  and  confiftent  with 
that  fedate  inircpiuity,  whicli  cmincrttly  diflinguifhes  his  charafler  throughout. 


Book  IV.        An   EPIC   POEM.  ^icj-] 

marks  thy  courfe  in  battle,  like  a  ftream  of  light.  But 
wait  the  coming  of  Cairbar*:  my  fon  muft  join  thy  fvvord.' 
He  calls  the  fons  of  Erin,  from  all  their  dillant  llreams.'* 

"  We  came  to  the  hall  of  the  king,  where  it  rofe  in 
the  midft  of  rocks,  on  whofe  dark  fides,  were  the  marks 
of  fhreams  of  old.  Broad  oaks  bend  around  with  their 
mofs.  The  thick  birch  is  waving  near.  Half-hid,  in  her 
iliady  grove,  Ros-crana  raifes  the  fong.  Her  white  hands 
move  on  the  harp.  I  beheld  her  blue-rolling  eyes.  She 
was  like  a  fpirit  f  of  heaven  half-folded  In  the  flvirt  of  a 
cloud  1 

"  Three  days  we  feaft  at  Mol-lena.  She  rifes  bright 
in  my  troubled  foul.  Cormac  beheld  me  dark.  He  gave" 
the  white-bofomed  maid.  She  comes,  with  bending  eye, 
amid  the  wandering  of  her  heavy  locks.  She  came  ! — 
Straight  the  battle  roared.  Colc-ulla  appeared  :  I  took 
my  fpear.  My  fword  rofe,  with  my  people,  agalnft  the 
ridgy  foe.  Alnecma  fled.  Colc-ulla  fell.  Fingal  return- 
ed with  fame. 

P  p  "  Re- 

*  Cairbar,  the  fon  of  Cormac,  was  afterwards  kinj;  of  Ireland.  His  reign  was 
fliort.  He  was  fucceedecl  bv  his  fon  Artho,  the  father  of  that  Cormac  who  was 
murdered  by  Cairbar  the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul.  Cairbar,  the  fon  of  Cormac,  long 
after  his  fon  Artho  was  grown  to  man's  eftate,  had,  by  his  wife  Beltanno,  another 
fon,  whofe  name  was  Ferad-artho.  He  was  the  only  one  remaining  of  the  race  of 
Conar  the  firft  king  of  Ireland,  when  Fingal's  expedition  againft  Cairbar  the  Ion  o£ 
Borbar-duthul  happened.     See  more  of  Ferard-artho  in  the  eighth  book. 

t  The  attitude  of  Ros-crana  is  illuftrated  by  this  fimile ;  for  the  ideas  of  thofc 
limes,  concerning  the  fpirits  of  the  deceafed,  were  not  fo  gloomy  and  difagreeable, 
as  thofe  of  lucceeding  ages.  The  fpirits  of  women,  it  was  fnppofed,  letaJned  thac 
beauty,  which  they  poffelfed  while  living,  and  tranfported  themfclves,  from  place 
to  place,  with  that  gliding  motion,  which  Homer  alcribes  to  the  gods.  The  de- 
fcriptions  which  poets,  lels  ancient  than  Offian,  have  left  us  of  thole  beautiful  fi- 
gures, that  appeared  fometimes  on  the  hills,  are  elegant  and  pitturefque.  They 
compare  them  to  the  rain-bow  on  Jlreams;  or,  the  gliding  of  fun-beams  on  the  hilh. 

A  chief,  who  lived  three  centuries  ago,  returning  from  the  war,  undeillood  that 
his  wife  or  miflrefs  was  dead.  A  bard  introduces  him  fpeaking  the  f6llowin,";  foli- 
loquy,  when  he  came  within  fight  of  the  place,  where  he  had  left  her,  at  his  de- 
parture. , 

"  My  foul  darkens  in  forrow.  I  behold  not  the  fmoke  of  my  hall.  No  grey 
dog  bounds  at  my  flreams.     Silence  dwells  in  the  valley  of  trees. 

"  Is  that  a  rain-bow  on  Crunath  ?  It  flies ;  and  the  fkv  is  dark.  Atviin,  thou 
moveft,  bright,  on  the  heath,  thou  fun-beam  clothed  in  a  fhower  !  Hali !  it  is  (he, 
my  love  ;  her  gliding  courfe  on  the  bofom  of  winds !" 

In  fuccecding  times  the  beauty  of  Ros-crana  pafl'ed  into  a  proveib;  and  the  high-- 
cft  compliment,  that  could  be  paid  to  a  woman,  was  to  compare  her  pcilbn  wiih^ 
lilt  daughta-  of  Cormac. 

'S  tu  fein  an  Ros-crana. 
Siol  Chormacc  na  n'ioma  Ian. 


2o8  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

"  Renowned  is  he,  O  Fillan,  who  fights,  in  the  ftrength 
of  his  hoft.  The  bard  purfues  his  fteps,  through  the  land 
of  the  foe.  But  he  who  fights  alone,  few  are  his  deeds 
to  other  times  !  He  fliines,  to-day,  a  mighty  light  ;  to- 
morrow, he  is  low.  One  fong  contains  his  fame :  his 
name  is  on  one  dark  field.  He  is  forgot  ;  but  where  his 
tomb  fends  forth  the  tufted  grafs." 

Such  were  the  words  of  Fingal,  on  Mora  of  the  roes. 
Three  bards,  fiom  the  rock  of  Cormul,  pour  down  the 
pleafmg  fong.  Sleep  defcends,  in  the  found,  on  the  broad- 
fkirted  hoft.  Carril  returned,  with  the  bards,  from  the 
tomb  of  Dun-lora's  chief.  The  voice  of  morning  fhall 
not  come,  to  the  dufky  bed  of  Duth-caron.  No  more 
flialt  thou  hear  the  tread  of  roes,  around  thy  narrow  houfe  ! 

As  roll  the  troubled  clouds,  round  a  meteor  of  night, 
when  they  brighten  their  fides,  with  its  light,  along  the 
heaving  fea ;  fo  gathers  Erin,  around  the  gleaming  form 
(  f  Cathmor.  He,  tall  in  the  midft,  carelefs  lifts,  at  times, 
his  fpear  ;  as  fwells  or  falls  the  found  of  Fonar's  diftant 
harp.  *Near  him  leaned,  againft  a  rock,  Sul-mallaf  of 
blue  eyes,  the  white-bofomed  daughter  of  Conmor,  king 
of  Inis-huna.  To  his  aid  came  blue-lhielded  Cathmor, 
and  rolled  his  foes  away.  Sul-malla  beheld  him  ftately  in 
the  hall  of  feaits.  Nor  carelefs  rolled  the  eyes  of  Cath- 
mor on  the  Ions-haired  maid  !  rp 

°  lni£ 

*  111  order  to  illuftrate  this  pafTage,  I  fliall  give,  hpre,  the  hiftory  on  which  it  is 
founded,  as  I  have  gathered  it  from  tradition.  The  nation  of  the  Fir-bolg  who 
inhabited  the  fouth  of  Ireland,  being  originally  defcended  from  the  Belgze,  who 
pod'effed  the  fouth  and  fouth-weft  coaft  of  Britain,  kept  up,  for  many  ages,  an  ami- 
cable roriefpondence  with  their  mother-country}  and  fent  aid  to  the  Britifh  Bclga-, 
when  t'icy  were  prtifed  by  the  Romans  or  other  new-comers  from  the  continent. 
Con-nioi-,  king  of  Inis-huna,  (that  part  of  South-Britain  which  is  over  againll  the 
Irifli  codOl  being  attacked,  by  what  enemy  is  not  mentioned,  fent  for  aid  to  Cair- 
bar,  lord  of  Atha,  the  moil  potent  chief  of  the  Fir-bolg.  Cairbar  difpatchcd  his 
brother  Cathmor  to  the  afliftance  of  Con-mor.  Cathmor,  after  various  vicillitudes 
of  fortune,  put  an  end  to  the  war,  by  the  total  defeat  of  the  enemies  of  Inis-huna, 
:md  returned  in  triumph  to  the  refidence  of  Con-mor.  There,  at  a  feall,  Sul-malla, 
the  daughter  of  Con-mor,  fell  del'perately  in  love  with  Cathmor,  who,  before  her 
puOioii  was  difcloled.  was  recalled  to  Ireland  by  his  brother  Cairbar,  upon  the 
news  of  the  intended  expedition  of  Fingal  to  re-ellabli(h  the  family  of  Conar  on 
the  Ifiih  th.'one.  The  wind  being  contrary,  Cathmor  remained,  for  three  days,  in 
a  neii^hbouring  bay,  during  which  time  Sul-malla  difguifed  herfelf  in  the  habit  of 
a  young  w^arrior,  and  came' to  offer  him  her  fervice,  in  the  war.  Cathmor  accept- 
ed of  the  propofal,  failed  for  Ireland,  and  arrived  in  UHfer  a  few  days  before  th« 
death  of  Caiibar. 

*  S-A-md.\Vi,Jlczijly-r oiling  eyes.  Caon-mor,  vnld  and  tall.   Inis-huna,  green  ijlar.d 


Book  IV.        An   E  P I C    P  O  E  M.  299 

The  third  day  arofe,  when  FIthil  *  came,  from  Erin  of 
the  ftreams.  He  told  of  the  Hfting  up  of  the  fhieldj  in 
Sehna  :  he  told  of  the  danger  of  Cairbar.  Cathmor  raifed 
the  fail  at  Cluba :  but  the  winds  were  in  other  lands. 
Three  days  he  remained  on  the  coaft,  and  turned  his  eyes 
on  Conmor's  halls.  He  remembered  the  daughter  of 
ftrangers,  and  his  figh  arofe.  Now,  when  the  winds 
awaked  the  wave,  from  the  hill  came  a  youth  in  arms  ; 
to  lift  the  fword  with  Cathmor,  in  his  echoing  fields.  It 
was  the  white-armed  Sul-malla.  Secret  flie  dwelt  beneai.h 
her  helmet.  Her  fleps  were  in  the  path  of  the  king  :  on 
him  her  blue  eyes  rolled  with  joy,  when  he  lay  by  his  roar- 
ing ftreams !  But  Cathmor  thought,  that,  on  Lumon,  Ihe 
Hill  purfued  the  rocs.  He  thought  that,  fair  on  a  rock, 
llie  ftretched  her  white  hand  to  the  wind  ;  to  feel  its  courfe 
from  Erin,  the  green  dwelling  of  her  love.  He  had  pro- 
mifed  to  return,  with  his  vv^hite-bofomed  fails.  The  maid 
is  near  thee,  O  Cathmor !  leaning  on  her  rock. 

The  tall  forms  of  the  chiefs  iland  around  ;  all  but  dark- 
browed  Foldath  |{.  He  leaned  againft  a  diilant  tree,  rolled 
into  his  haughty  foul.  His  buihy  hair  whiftles  in  wind. 
At  times,  burlts  the  hum  of  a  fong.    He  ftruck  the  tree, 

i  ^^ 

I  *  Y'ahW,  an  vifoior  iard.  It  mnv  either  be  taken  here  for  the  proper  name  of 
i  a  man,  or  in  the  literal  fenfe,  as  the  bards  were  the  heralds  and  medcngers  of  thole 
I  times.  Cathmor,  it  is  probable,  was  abfcnt,  \vhen  the  rebellion  of  his  brodacr 
i  Cairbar,  and  the  affaflination  of  Cormac,  km:;  of  Ireland,  happened.  Cathmor 
and  his  followers  had  only  arrived,  from  Inis-huna,  three  days  before  the  death  of 
Cairbar,  \shich  fufTicieiitly  clears  his  charafter  from  any  imputation  of  being  con- 
I   cerned  in  the  confpiracy,  with  his  brother. 

I        +  The  ceremony  which  was  ufcd  by  Fingal,  when  he  prepared  for  an  expedition, 

:   is  related  thus  in  tradition.     A  bard,  at  midnight,  went  to  the  hall,  where  the 

tribes  fealled  upon  folemn  occafions,  raifed  the  war  Jong,  and  thrice  called  the  fpl- 

rits  of  their  deceafcd  anceftors  to  come,  en  their  clouds,  to  behold  the  afciiqns  of 

!    their  children.     He  then  fixed  ihtj/neld  of  Trenmor  on  a  tree,  on  the  rock  of  oc!- 

ma,  ftrikin,^  it,  at  times,   with  the  blunt  end  of  a  ("pear,  and  £nging  the  war-ion^^ 

.    between.     Thus  he  did,  for  three  fucceflive  nights,  and,  in  the  mean  time,  mel-  ' 

fengers  were  difpatched  to  call  together  the  tribes  ;  or,  to  ufe  an  ancient  expreffion, 

to  call  them  from  all  their  prcams.      This  phrafe  alludes  to  the  fituation  of  the  rt:(i- 

dcnces  of  the  clans,  which  were  generally  fixed  in  valleys,  where  the  torienft  of 

the  neighbouring  mountains  were  collefted  into  one  body,  and  h%cd.xnc  larg:  Jircaim 

or  rivers.     The  lifting  up  of  the  fliield,  was  the  phrafe  for  beginning  a  wai, 

II  The  furly  attitude  of  Foldath  is  a  proper  preamble  to  his  after-behavicur. 
Chaffed  with  the  difappointment  of  the  vittory  which  he  promifed  himlelf,  he  be- 
comes pafTionatc  and  over-bearing.  The  quarrel  which  fucceeds  between  him  and 
Malthos,  is  introduced,  to  raife  the  charafler  of  Cathmor,  whole  fupcrior  worth 
ftines  forth,  in  his  manly  manner  of  ending  the  difference  between  the  chief?. 


300  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

at  length,  in  wrath  ;  and  ruflied  before  the  king.  Cahii 
and  ftately,  to  the  beam  of  the  oak,  arofe  the  form  of 
young  Hidalla.  His  hair  falls  round  his  blufhing  cheek, 
in  wreaths  of  waving  light.  Soft  was  his  voice  in  Clon-ra  *, 
in  the  valley  of  his  fathers.  Soft  was  his  voice,  when  he 
touched  the  harp  in  the  hall,  near  his  roaring  ftreams  ! 

"  King  of  Erin,"  faid  Hidalla,  "  now  is  the  time  to 
ieaft.  Bid  the  voice  of  bards  arife.  Bid  them  roll  the 
nigkt  away.  The  foul  returns,  from  fong,  more  terrible 
to  war.  Darknefs  fettles  on  Erin.  From  hill  to  hill  bend 
the  ikirted  clouds.  Far  and  grey,  on  the  heath,  the  dread- 
ful flrides  of  ghofts  are  feen  :  the  ghofts  of  thofe  who 
i'ell,  bend  forward  to  their  fong.  Bid,  O  Cathmor,  the 
harps  to  rife,  to  brighten  the  dead,  on  their  wandering 
blafls." 

"  Be  all  the  dead  forgot,"  faid  Foldath's  burfting  wrath. 
"  Did  not  I  fail  in  the  field  ?  Shall  I  then  hear  the  fong  ? 
Yet  was  not  my  courfe  harmlefs  in  war.  Blood  was  a 
ftream  around  my  fteps.  But  the  feeble  were  behind  me. 
The  foe  has  efcaped  from  my  fword.  In  Clonra's  vale 
touch  thou  the  harp.  Let  Dura  anfwer  to  the  voice  of 
Hidalla.  Let  fome  maid  look,  from  the  wood,  on  thy 
long,  yellow  locks.  Fly  from  Lubar's  echoing  plain. 
This  is  the  field  of  heroes  !" 

"  King  of  Erinf,"  Malthos  faid,  "  it  is  thine  to  lead 
in  war.  Thou  art  a  fire  to  our  eyes,  on  the  dark-brown 
field.  Like  a  blaft  thou  haft  pad  over  ho  ft  s.  Thou  haft 
laid  them  low  in  blood.  But  who  has  heard  thy  words, 
returning  from  the  field  ?  The  wrathful  delight  in  death  : 
their  remembrance  refts  on  the  wounds  of  their  fpear. 
Strife  is  folded  in  their  thoughts  :  their  words  are  ever 
heard.  Thy  courfe,  chief  of  Moma,  was  like  a  troubled 
ftream.  The  dead  were  rolled  on  thy  path  :  but  others 
alfo  lift  the  fpear.  We  were  not  feeble  behind  thee  ;  but 
•the  foe  was  flrong." 

Cathmor 

*  C!aon-rath,  winding  field.  The  th  are  feldom  pronounced  audibly  in  the  Ga- 
liC  l.:n"u :i„^e. 

t  1  his  fpeech  of  Malthos  is,  throughout,  a  fevere  reprimand  to  the  bluflering 
Lcluvioui  ot  Foldath. 


Book  IV.        An   EPIC    POEM.  301 

Cathmor  beheld  the  rifing  rage,  and  bending  for- 
ward, of  either  chief;  for,  half-unflieathed,  they  held  their 
fwords,  and  rolled  their  fdent  eyes.  Now  would  they  have 
mixed  in  horrid  fray,  had  not  the  wrath  of  Cathmor  burn- 
ed. He  drew  his  fword  :  it  gleamed,  through  night,  to 
the  high-flaming  oak  !  "  Sons  of  pride  !"  faid  the  king, 
"  allay  your  fwelling  fouls.  Retire  in  night.  Why  fliould 
my  rage  arife  ?  Should  I  contend  with  both  in  arms  ?  It 
is  no  time  for  ftrife  !  Retire,  ye  clouds  at  my  fead.  A- 
wake  my  foul  no  more." 

They  funk  from  the  king  on  either  fide  ;  like  *  two 
columns  of  morning  mifl,  when  the  fun  rifes  between 
them,  on  his  glittering  rocks.  Dark  is  their  rolling  on 
either  fide  ;  each  toward  its  reedy  pool. 

Silent  fat  the  chiefs  at  the  fealt.  They  look,  at  times, 
on  Atha's  king,  where  he  ftrode,  on  his  rock,  amid  his 
fettling  foul.  The  hofl  lie  along  the  field.  Sleep  defcends 
on  Moi-lena.  The  voice  of  Fonar  afcends  alone,  beneath 
his  diftant  tree.  It  afcends  in  the  praife  of  Cathmor,  fon 
of  Larthonf  of  Lumon.  But  Cathmor  did  not  hear  his 
praife.  He  lay  at  the  roar  of  a  flream.  The  rufcling  breeze 
of  night  flew  over  his  whiftling  locks. 

His  brother  came  to  his  dreams,  half-feen  from  his 
low'hung  cloud.    Joy  rofe  darkly  in  his  face.     He  had 

heard 

*  This  comparlfon  is  favourable  to  the  faperiority  of  Cathmor  over  his  two 
^  ;;iefs.  I  (hall  illuftrate  this  paffa,a;e  with  another  from  a  fragment  of  an  ancient 
■-ocm,  julf  now  in  my  hands.  "  As  the  fun  is  above  the  vapours,  which  his  beam.s 
have  raifed;  fo  is  the  foul  of  the  king  above  the  fons  of  fear.  .They  roll  dark  be- 
low him ;  he  rejoices  in  the  robe  of  his  beami.  But  when  feeble  deeds  wander  on 
the  foul  of  the  kinj;,  he  is  a  darkened  fun  rolled  along  the  (ky  :  the  valley  is  fad 
below  :  flowers  wither  beneath  the  drops  of  the  ni^j^ht." 

+  Lear-thon,  y?-(2  luavc,  the  name  of  the  chief  of  that  colony  of  the  Fir-bolg, 
which  firft  migrated,  into  Ireland.  Larthon's  hrft  fettlement  in  that  country  is  re- 
lated in  the  feventh  book.  He  was  the  anceftor  of  Cathmor;  and  is  here  called 
Larthon  of  Lumon,  from  a  high  hill  of  that  name  in  Inis-huna,  the  ancienr  feat  oi 
the  Fir-bolg.  The  character  of  Cathmor  is  prcferved.  He  had  mentioned,  in  the 
firft  book,  tbe  averfion  ot  that  chief  to  praife,  and  we  find  him  here  lying  at  the 
fide  of  a  dream,  that  the  noife  of  it  might  drown  ilvz  voice  of  Fonar,  who,  accord- 
ing to  the  cuftom  of  the  tunes,  fung  his  eulogium  in  his  evening  Jong.  Tiiough 
other  chiefs,  as  well  as  Cathmor,  might  be  averfe  to  hear  their  own  praife,  we  find 
it  the  univerfal  policy  of  the  times,  to  allow  the  bards  to  be  as  extravagant  as  they 
plcaled  m  their  encomiums  on  the  leaders  of  armies,  in  the  prcfence  of  their  peo- 
ple. Tlie  vulgar,  who  had  no  great  ability  to  judge  for  themfelves,  received  the 
,cbara£lers  of  their  priuces,  entirely  upon  the  faith  of  their  bards. 


302  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

heard  the  fong  of  Carrll*.  A  blafl:  fuftained  his  dark- 
fkirted  cloud  ;  which  he  feized,  in  the  bofom  of  night, 
as  he  rofe,  with  his  fame,  towards  his  airy  hall.  Half- 
mixed  with  the  noife  of  the  fhream,  he  poured  his  feeble 
words. 

"  Joy  meet  the  foul  of  Cathmor.  His  voice  was  heard 
on  Moi-lena.  The  bard  gave  his  fong  to  Cairbar.  He  tra- 
vels on  the  wind.  My  form  is  in  my  father's  hall,  like  the 
gliding  of  a  terrible  light,  which  darts  acrofs  the  defart, 
in  a  (lormy  night.  No  bard  fliall  be  wanting  at  thy  tomb, 
when  thou  art  lowly  laid.  The  fons  of  fong  love  the  va- 
liant. Cathmor,  thy  name  is  a  pleafant  gale. — The  mourn- 
ful founds  arife  !  On  Lubar's  field  there  is  a  voice  ! 
Louder  flill,  ye  ft-iadowy  ghofts !  The  dead  were  full  of 
fame.  Shrilly  fwells  the  feeble  found !  The  rougher  bkft 
alone  is  heard  !  Ah,  foon  is  Cathmor  low  !"  Rolled  into 
himfelf,  he  flew,  wide  on  the  bofom  of  winds.  The  old 
oak  felt  his  departure,  and  fliook  its  whiflling  head. 
Cathmor  flarts  from  relt.  He  takes  his  deathful  fpear. 
He  lifts  his  eyes  around.    He  fees  but  dark-flvirted  night. 

"  It  I  was  the  voice  of  the  king,"  he  faid.  "  But  now 
his  form  is  gone.  Unmarked  is  your  path  in  the  air,  ye 
children  of  the  night.  Often,  like  a  refleded  beam,  are 
jQ  feen  in  the  defart  wild :  but  ye  retire  in  your  blafts, 
before  our  ileps  approach.  Go  then,  ye  feeble  race  ! 
Knowledge  with  you  there  is  none  1  Your  joys  are  weak, 
and  like  the  dreams  of  our  reft,  or  the  light-winged 
thought,  that  flies  acrofs  the  foul.  Shall  Cathmor  foon 
be   low  ?    darkly  laid  in   his  narrow  houfe  ?    where  no 

morning 

*  Cariil,  the  fon  of  Kinfena,  by  the  orders  of  OITian,  fung  the  funeral  elegy  at 
the  tomb  of  Cairbar.  See  the  fecond  book,  towards  the  end.  In  all  thefe  poeni:;, 
the  vifits  of  ghofls,  to  their  living;  friends,  are  fliort,  and  their  lanj^uage  obfcurc, 
both  which  circumftances  tend  to  throw  a  foleinn  gloom  on  thefe  fupernatural 
fcencs.  Towards  the  latter  end  of  the  fpeech  of  the  ghoft  of  Cairbar,  he  foretels 
tlie  dentil  «»f  Cathmor,  by  enumerating  thofe  fignals  which,  according  to  the  opi- 
nion of  the  times,  preceded  the  death  of  a  perfon  renowned.  It  was  thought  that 
the  ghoCs  of  deceafed  bards  fung,  for  three  nights  preceding  the  death  (near  the 
place  where  his  tomb  was  to  be  raifed)  round  an  unfubftantial  Kgurc  which  repre- 
fcnted  the  body  of  the  perfon  who  was  to  die. 

+  The  foliloquy  of  Cathmor  fuits  the  magnanimity  of  his  charaBer.  Though 
fiaojgercd  at  firR  with  the  prcdiftion  of  Cairbar's  ghoft,  he  foon  comforted  himlelf 
•with  the  agreeable  ptofpefl  of  his  future  reriown ;  and,  like  Achilles,  prefers  a 
fhort  and  glorious  hfe,  to  an  obfcure  length  of  years  in  retirement  and  eafe. 


Book  IV.        An   EPIC    POEM.  303 

morning  comes,  with  her  half-opened  eyes  ?  Away,  thou 
fliade !  to  fight  is  mine !  All  further  thought,  away !  I 
rufli  forth,  on  eagle-wings,  to  feize  my  beam  of  fame.  In 
the  lonely  vale  of  llreams,  abides  the  narrow  *  foul.  Years 
roll  on,  feafons  return,  but  he  is  ftill  unknown.  In  a  blaft 
comes  cloudy  death,  and  lays  his  grey  head  low.  His 
ghofl  is  folded  in  the  vapour  of  the  fenny  field.  Its  courfe 
is  never  on  hills,  nor  moffy  vales  of  wind.  So  fhall  not 
Cathmor  depart.  No  boy  in  the  field  was  he,  who  only 
marks  the  bed  of  roes,  upon  the  echoing  hills.  My  iilliing 
forth  was  with  kings  :  my  joy,  in  dreadful  plains  ;  where 
broken  hofts  are  rolled  away,  like  feas  before  the  wind.'* 

So  fpoke  the  king  of  Alnecma,  brightening  in  his  fifmg 
foul.  Valour,  like  a  pleafant  flame,  is  gleaming  within 
his  breafl.  Stately  is  his  flride  on  the  heath !  The  beam 
of  eaft  is  poured  around.  He  faw  his  grey  hofl  on  the 
field,  wide-fpreading  their  ridges  in  light.  He  rejoiced, 
like  a  fpirit  of  heaven,  whofe  fleps  come  forth  on  the  feas, 
when  he  beholds  them  peaceful  around,  and  all  the  winds 
are  laid  :  but  foon  he  awakes  the  waves,  and  rolls  them 
large  to  fome  echoing  fhore. 

On  the  rufhy  bank  of  a  ftream,  flept  the  daughter  of 
Inis-huna.  The  helmet  had  fallen  from  her  head.  Her 
dreams  were  in  the  lands  of  her  fothcrs.  There,  morning 
is  on  the  field.  Grey  flreams  leap  down  from  the  rocks. 
The  breezes,  in  Ihadowy  weaves,  fly  over  the  rufliy  fields. 

There, 

*  An  indolent  and  unwarlike  life  was  held  in  extreme  contempt.  Whatever  a 
philofopher  may  fay,  in  praife  of  quiet  and  retirement,  I  am  far  from  thinkin,^, 
but  they  weaken  and  debafe  the  human  mind.  When  the  faculties  of  ihe~foul  are 
not  exerted,  they  lofe  their  vigour,  and  low  and  circumfcribed  notions  take  the 
place  of  noble  and  enlarged  ideas.  Atiion,  on  the  contrary,  and  the  viciflitudes 
of  fortune  which  attend  it,  call  forth,  by  turns,  all  the  powers  of  the  mmd,  and, 
by  exercifing,  ftrengthen  them.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  great  and  opulent  dates, 
when  property  and  indolence  are  fecured  to  individuals,  we  fcldom  meet  with  that 
flrength  of  mind,  which  is  fo  common  in  a  nation,  not  iar  advanced  in  c;vilization- 
It  is  a  curious,  but  jutl  obfervation,  that  great  kingdoms  feldom  produce  great  cha- 
rafters,  which  mull  be  attributed  altogether  to  that  indolence  and  diifipation,  whicii 
are  the  infeparable  companions  of  too  much  property  and  fccurlty.  Rome,  it  is 
certain,  had  more  real  great  men  within  it,  when  its  power  was  conlined  wuhiu 
the  narrow  bounds  of  Latium,  than  when  its  domi.iion  extended  over  all  the  hnowii  . 
woild;  and  one  petty  Hate  of  the  Saxon  heptarchy  had,  perhaps,  as  much  .(:emiinc 
fpirit  in  it,  as  the  two  Britifli  kingdoms  united.  As  a  (late  they  are  much  more 
powerful  than  their  anccRors,  but  they  would  lofe  by  comparing  individ;'.nls  witlr 
ibciu. 


304  T    E    M    O    R    A  : 

There,  is  the  found  that  prepares  for  the  chace.  There,, 
the  moving  of  warriors  from  the  hall.  But  tall,  above  the 
reft,  is  feen  the  hero  of  ftreamy  Atha.  He  bends  his  eye 
of  love  on  Sul-malla,  from  his  ftately  fteps.  She  turns, 
with  pride,  her  face  away,  and,  carelefs,  bends  the  bow. 

Such  were  the  dreams  of  the  maid,  when  Cathmor  of 
Atha  came.  He  faw  her  fair  face  before  him,  in  the  midfl 
of  her  wandering  locks.  He  knew  the  maid  of  Lumon. 
What  fhould  Cathmor  do  ?  His  fighs  arife.  His  tears 
come  down.  But  ftraight  he  turns  away.  "  This  is  no 
time,  king  of  Atha,  to  awake  thy  fecret  foul.  The  battle 
is  rolled  before  thee,  like  a  troubled  ftream." 

He  ftruck  that  warning  bofs  * ,  wherein  dwelt  the  voice 
of  war.  Erin  rofe  around  him,  like  the  found  of  eagles-- 
wings.  Sul-malla  ftarted  from  fleep,  in  her  difordered 
locks.  She  feized  the  helmet  from  earth.  She  trembled, 
in  her  place.  "  Why  fliould  they  know,  in  Erin,  of  the 
daughter  of  Inis-huna  ?"  She  remembered  the  race  of 
king?.  The  pride  of  her  foul  arofe  !  Her  fteps  are  be- 
hind a  rock,  by  the  blue-winding  ftream  j-  of  a  valej 
where  dwelt  the  dark-brown  hind,  ere  yet  the  war  arofe.- 
Thither  came  the  voice  of  Cathmor,  at  times,  to  Sul- 
maila's  ear.  Her  foul  is  darkly  fad.  She  pours  her  words' 
on  wind. 

"  The  dreams  of  Inis-huna  departed.  They  are  dif- 
perfed  from  my  foul.  I  hear  not  the  chace  in  my  land* 
I  am  concealed  in  the  fkirt  of  war.  I  look  forth  from  my 
cloud  :  no  beam  appears  to  light  my  path.  I  behold  my 
warrior  low  ;  for  the  broad-lhielded  king  is  near,  he  that 
overcomes  in  danger,  Fingal  from  Selma  of  fpears !  Spirit 
of  departed  Conmor  !  are  thy  fteps  on  the  bofom  of 
winds  ?  Cornell  thou,  at  times,  to  other  lands,  father  of 
fad  Sul-malla  ?  Thou  doft  come !  I  have  heard  thy  voice 
at  night ;  while  yet  I  rofe  on  the  wave  to  Erin  of  the 

ftreams. 

*  In  order  to  underfljrid  thispaffage,  it  is  neceffary  to  look  to  the  defcrip'.ion  of 
Cathmoi's  ihield  in  the  li  venth  book.  This  fliitld  hi\fi  fcven  principal  bolTcs,  the 
{ound  of  each  of  which,  when  firuck  with  a  fpear,  conveyed  a  particular  order 
from  the  king  to  his  tubes.  The  found  of  one  of  them,  as  here,  was  the  fignal  for 
the  army  to  afTemblc. 

t  This  was  not  the  valley  oi'Lona  to  which  Sul-malla  afterwards- retired. 


Book  IV.        An  EPIC   POEM.  305 

ftreams.  The  ghofls  of  fathers,  they  fay  *,  call  away  the 
I  fouls  of  their  race,  while  they  behold  them  lonely  in  the 
I  midft;  of  woe.  Call  me,  my  father,  away  !  When  Cath- 
I  mor  is  low  on  earth,  then  llrall  Sul-malla  be  lonely  in  the 
'!  midft  of  woe  !" 

*  Con-mor,  the  father  of  Sul-malla,  was  killed  iti  that  war,  from  which  Cathmor 
delivered  Inis-Tiuna.  Lormar  his  Ton  fucceeded  Conmor.  It  was  the  opinion  of 
;|  the  times,  when  a  peiion  was  rcluccd  to  a  pitch  of  mifery,  which  could  admit  of 
[  no  alleviation,  that  the  ghoOs  of  his  anceflors  ra//ffi?//2'syo«/flawjy.  This  fuperna- 
t\  tural  kind  of  death  was  called  t/ie  voice  ej the  dead;  and  is  believed  by  the  fupeiftiti- 
\\   ous  vulgar  to  this  day. 

:        There  is  no  people  in  the  world,  perhaps,  who  give  more  tmiverfal  credit  to  ap- 
i    paiitions,  and  the  vifits  of  the  ghofls  of  the  dcccaXed  to  their  friends,  than  the  an- 
cient Scots.     This  is  to  be  attiibuted  as  much,  at  leaft,  to  the  fituation  (tf  the  coun- 
•  try  they  poffefs,  as  to  that  credulous  difpofition  which  diftinguifhes  an  uncnlii^hten- 
ed  people.     As  their  bwfinefs  was  feeding  of  cattle,  in  dark  and  extenlive  defarts, 
\   fo  their  journeys  lay  over  wide  and  unfrequented  heaths,  where,  often,  they  were 
\   obliged  to  fleep  in  the  open  air,  amidft  the  whiflling  of  winds,  and  roar  of  water- 
i   falls.    The  gloominefs  of  the  fcenei around  them  was  apt  to  beget  that  meiancholv 
j    difpofition  ef  mii>d,  which  mod  readily  receives  imprelTions  of  the  extraoidinary 
'    and  iupernatural  kind.     Falling  afleep  in  this  gloomy  mood,  and  their  dreams  be- 
ing dillurbed  by  the  noife  of  the  elements  around,   it  is  no  matter  o5  V/onder,  that 
they  thought  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  dead.     This  voice  of  the  dead,  however, 
was,  perhaps,  no  more  than  a  Ihriller  whittle  of  the  winds  m  an  old   tree,  or  in 
the  chinks  of  a  neighbouring  rock.    It  is  to  this  caufe  1  afcribe  thofe  many  and  im- 
probable »ales  of  ghofls,  which  we  meet  with  in  the  Highlands;  for,  in  other  re- 
ipefts,  we  do  not  find  thst  the  mlnbitants  aie  more  credulous  than  iheij  neighbours. 


<lq 


TEMORA: 


r       E       M       O       R       A: 

A  N 

E     PIC         P     O     E     M. 
BOOK    V. 


ARGUMENT. 


THE  poet,  after  a  fliort  addrefs  to  the  harp  of  Cona,  dcfcribes  the  arrangement  of 
both  armies  on  either  fide  of  the  river  Lubar.  Fingal  gives  the  command  to  Fil- 
lan;  but,  at  the  fame  time,  orders  Gaul,  the  fon  of  Morni,  who  had  been 
wounded  in  the  hand  in  the  preceding  battle,  to  afiift  him  with  his  counfel.  The 
army  of  the  Fir-bolg  is  commanded  by  Foldatb.  The  general  onfet  is  defcribed. 
The  great  actions  of  Fillan.  He  kills  Roihmar  and  Culmin.  But  when  Fillan 
conquers,  in  one  wing,  Foldath  preffes  hard  on  the  other.  He  wounds  Dernjid, 
the  fon  of  Duthno,  and  puts  the  whole  wing  to  flight.  Dermid  deliberates  with 
himfelf,  and,  at  laft,  refolves  to  put  a  flop  to  the  progrefs  of  Foldath,  by  eagag- 
ing  him  in  fingle  combat.  When  the  two  chiefs  were  approaching  towards  one 
another,  Fillan  came  fuddenly  to  the  relief  of  Dermid;  engaged  Foldaib,  and 
killed  him.  The  behaviour  of  Malthos  towards  the  fallen  Foldath.  Fillan  puts 
the  whole  army  of  the  Fir-bolg  to  flight.  The  book  clofes  with  an  addrefs  to 
Clatho,  the  motner  of  that  hero. 

THOU  dweller  between  the  fliields,  that  hang,  on 
high,  in  Offian's  hall !  Defcend  from  thy  place, 
O  harp,  and  let  me  hear  thy  voice  !  Son  of  Alpin,  ftrike 
the  firing.  Thou  muft  awake  the  foul  of  the  bard.  The 
murmur  of  Lora's*  ftream  has  rolled  the  tale  away.  I 
ftand  in  the  cloud  of  years.  Few  are  its  openings  toward 
the  paft  ;  and  when  the  vifion  comes,  it  is  but  dim  and 
dark.  I  hear  thee,  harp  of  Selma  !  My  foul  returns,  like 
a  breeze,  which  the  fun  brings  back  to  the  vale,  where 
dwelt  the  lazy  m.ift  ! 

Lubar 

*  Lora  is  often  mentioned ;  it  was  a  fmall  and  rapid  flream  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Selma.  There  is  no  veftige  of  this  name  now  remaining  ;  though  it  appears 
from  a  very  old  fong,  which  the.  tranflator  has  feen,  that  one  of  the  fmall  rivers  on 
the  north-well  coaft  was  called  Lora  fome  centuries  ago. 


T    E    M    O    R    A: 


308 

LuBAR  *  is  bright  before  me,  in  the  windings  of  its 
vale.  On  either  fide,  on  their  hills,  rife  the  tall  forms 
of  the  kings.  Their  people  are  poured  around  them, 
bending  forwnrd  to  their  words  :  as  if  their  fathers  fpoke, 
defcending  from  the  winds.  But  they  themfelves  are  like 
tv/o  rocks  in  the  midft;  each  with  its  dark  head  of  pines, 
when  they  are  feen  in  the  defart,  above  low-failing  mid. 
High  on  their  face  are  Itreams,  which  fpread  their  foam 
on  blafts  of  wind  ! 

Beneath  the  voice  of  Cathmor  pours  Erin,  like  the 
found  of  flame.  Wide  they  come  down  to  Lubar.  Before 
them  is  the  ftride  of  Foldath.  But  Cathmor  retires  to  his 
hill,  beneath  his  bending  oak.  The  tumbling  of  a  flream 
is  near  the  king.  He  lifts,  at  times,  his  gleaming  fpear. 
It  is  a  flame  to  his  people,  in  the  midft  of  war.  Near  him 
ftands  the  daughter  of  Con-mor,  leaning  on  a  rock.  She 
did  not  rejoice  at  the  ftrife.  Her  foul  delighted  not  in 
blood.  A  valley  f  fpreads  green  behind  the  hill,  with  its 
three  blue  dreams.  The  fun  is  there  in  filence.  The  dun 
mountain-roes  come  down.  On  thefe  are  turned  the  eyes 
of  Sul-malla,  in  her  thoughtful  mood. 

FiNGAL  beholds  Cathmor,  on  high,  the  fon  of  Borbar- 
duthul !  he  beholds  the  deep-rolling  of  Erin,  on  the  dark- 
ened plain.  He  ftrikes  that  warning  bofs,  which  bids  the 
people  to  obey ;  when  he  fends  his  chiefs  before  them,  to 
the  field  of  renown.  Wide  rife  their  fpears  to  the  fun. 
Their  echoing  Ihields  reply  around.    Fear,  like  a  vapour, 

winds 

*  From  fever^l  paffages  in  the  poem  we  mav  form  a  diftinfl  idaa  of  the  fcene  of 
the  aftion  of  Temora.  At  a  friiall  diftance  from  one  another  rofe  the  hills  of  Mo- 
ra and  Lora  ;  the  firft  pofTelTed  by  Frngal,  the  fecond  by  the  army  of  Cathmor. 
ThrouCjh  the  intermediate  plain  ran  tljc  fmall  river  Lubar,  on  the  banks  of  which 
all  the  battles  were  fought,  excepting  that  between  Cairbar  and  Ofcar,  related  in 
the  firft  book.  This  laft  mentioned  engagemeiU  happened  to  the  north  of  the  WU 
of  Mora,  of  which  Fingal  took  poffeffion,  after  the  army  of  Cairbar  fell  back  to  that 
of  Cathmor.  At  fome  diilancc,  but  within  fight  of  Mora,  towards  the  weft,  Lu- 
bar iffued  from  the  mountain  of  Cromiiiai,  and,  after  a  fhort  courfc  through  the 
plain  of  Moi-lena,  difcharged  itfelf  into  the  fea  near  the  field  of  battle.  Behind 
the  mountain  ot  Crommal  ran  the  fmall  ftream  of  Lavath,  on  the  banks  of  which 
Ferard-artho,  the  fon  of  Cairbre,  the  only  perfon  remaining  of  the  race  of  Conar, 
lived  concealed  in  a  cave,  during  the  ulurpation  of  Cairbar,  the  fon  of  Borbar- 
duthul. 

t  It  was  to  this  valley  Sul-malla  retired,  during  the  laft  and  decifive  battle  be- 
tween Fingal  and  Cathmor.  It  is  defcribed  in  the  feventh  book,  where  it  is  called 
the  vale  of  Lena,  and  the  refidence  of  a  Druid. 


Book  V.  An  EPIC   POEM.  309 

winds  not  among  the  hod :  for  he,  the  king,  is  near,  the 
ftrength  of  ftreamy  Sehiia.  Gladnefs  brightens  the  hero. 
We  hear  his  words  with  joy. 

"  Like  the  coming  forth  of  winds,  is  the  fomid  of  Sel- 
ma's  fons  !  They  are  mountain  waters,  deterr,dned  in  their 
coLirfe.  Hence  is  Fingal  renowned  :  hence  is  his  name  in 
other  lands.  He  was  not  a  lonely  beam  in  danger ;  for 
your  fteps  were  always  near !  But  never  was  Fingal  a 
dreadful  form,  in  your  prefence,  dariiened  into  wrath. 
My  voice  was  no  thunder  to  your  ears.  Mine  eyes  fent 
forth  no  death.  When  the  I  aughty  appeared,  I  beheld 
them  not.  They  were  forgot  at  my  feafts.  Like  mill  they 
melted  away. — A  young  beam  is  before  you  !  Few  are  his 
paths  to  war !  They  are  fviw,  but  he  is  valiant.  Defend 
my  dark-haired  fon.  Bring  Fillan  back  with  joy.  Here- 
after'he  may  Hand  alone.  His  form  is  like  his  fathers. 
His  foul  is  a  flame  of  their  fire.  Son  of  car-borne  Morni ! 
move  behind  the  youth.  Let  thy  voice  reach  his  ear, 
from  the  fkirts  of  war.  Not  unobferved  rolls  battle,  be- 
fore thee,  breaker  of  the  fhields !" 

The  king  ftrode,  at  once,  away  to  Cormul's  lofty  rock. 
Intermitting,  darts  the  light,  from  his  fliield,  as,  flow,  the 
king  of  heroes  moves.  Sidelong  rolls  his  eye  o'er  the 
heath,  as,  forming,  advance  the  lines.  Graceful,  fly  his 
half-grey  locks,  round  his  kingly  features,  now  lightened 
with  dreadful  joy.  Wholly  mighty  is  the  chief!  Behind 
him,  dark  and  flow,  I  moved.  Straight  came  forward  the 
ftrength  of  Gaul.  His  fliield  hung  loofe  on  its  thong.  He 
fpoke,  in  hafte,  to  Ofllan.  "  Bind  *,  fon  of  Fingal,  this 
{hield !  Bind  it  high  to  the  fide  of  Gaul.  The  foe  may 
behold  it,  and  think  I  lift  the  fpear.  If  I  fiiould  fall,  let 
my  tomb  be  hid  in  the  field  ;  for  fall  I  mufl:  without  fame. 
Mine  arm  cannot  lift  the  fteel.  Let  not  Evir-choma  hear 
it,  to  blufli  between  her  locks.  Fillan,  the  mighty  behold 
us !  Let  us  not  forget  the  flirife.  Why  fliould  they  come, 
from  their  hills,  to  aid  our  flying  field  ?" 

He  flirode  onward,  with  the  found  of  his  fliield.  My 
voice  purfued  him,  as  he  went.    "  Can  the  fon  of  Morni 

fall, 

^  It  is  neccfTary  to  remember,  that  Gaul  was  wounded  ;  v.-hich  occafions  his  re- 
-quiring  here  the  affiftancc  of  Offian  to  bind  his  (hield  on  his  fide. 


lere. 


310  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

fall,  without  his  fame,  in  Erin  ?  But  the  deeds  of  the 
mighty  are  forgot  by  themfelves.  They  rulh  carelefs 
over  the  fields  of  renown.  Their  words  are  never  heard!'' 
I  rejoiced  over  the  fteps  of  the  chief.  I  itrode  to  the  rock 
of  the  king,  where  he  fat,  in  his  wandering  locks,  amid 
the  mountain-wind ! 

In  two  dark  ridges  bend  the  hofts,  toward  each  oth- 
at  Lubar.  Here,  Foldath  rifes,  a  pillar  of  darkneis:  th 
brightens  the  youth  of  Fillan.  Each,  with  his  fpear  in 
the  flream,  fent  forth  the  voice  of  war.  Gcui  flruck  the 
fliield  of  Selma.  x\t  once  they  plunje  in  battle!  Steel 
pours  its  gleam  on  fleel :  like  the  fad  of  dreams  flione  the 
field,  when  they  mix  their  foam  together,  from  two 
dark-browed  rocks  !  Behold  he  comes,  the  fon  of  fame  ! 
He  lays  the  people  low  !  Death  fits  on  blafts  around  him  I 
Warriors  ftrew  thy  paths,  O  Fiilan'  ! 

RoTHMAR*,  the  ihield  of  warriors,  flood  between  two 
chlnky  rocks.  Two  oaks,  v/hich  winds  had  bent  from 
high,  fpread  their  branches  on  either  fide.  He  rolls  his 
darkening  eyes  on  Fillan,  and,  fdent,  fliades  his  friends. 
Fingal  faw  the  approaching  fight.  The  hero's  foul  arofe. 
But  as  the  flone  of  Lodaf  falls,  fhook,  at  once,  from  rock- 
ing Druman-ard,  when  fpirits  heave  the  earth  in  their 
wrath  ;  fo  fell  blue-ihielded  Rothmar. 

Near  are  the  fteps  of  Culmin.  The  youth  came,  burfl- 
ing  into  tears.  Wrathful,  he  cut  the  wind,  ere  yet  he 
mixed  his  flrokes  with  Fillan.  He  had  firlt  bent  the  bow 
wlth  Rothmar,  at  the  rock  of  his  own  blue  ftreams. 
There  they  had  marked  the  place  of  the  roe,  as  the  fun- 
beam 

*  Roth-mzT,  tie  found  of  t/iejca  before  a  Jiorm.    DramT^n-zri,  izg/i-ridge.    Cul-    I 
Tain,  Joft-fi aired.     Cul-allin,  btautijullochs.     Suuthz,  Jlreamy  river. 

+  By  the  ftone  of  Loda  is  meant  a  place  of  worfliip  among  the  Scandinavians. 
The  Caledonians,  in  their  many  expeditions  to^Orkney  and  Scandinavia,  becami; 
acquainted  with  fome  of  the  tiles  of  their  religion,  which  prevailed  in  thofe  coun- 
tries, and  the  ancient  poetry  frequently  alludes  to  them.  There  are  fome  ruins, 
and  circular  pales  of  ftone,  remainincr  ftill  in  Orkney,  and  the  iflands  of  Shetland, 
which  retain,  to  this  day,  the  name  of  Loda  or  Loden.  They  feem  to  have  differed 
materially,  in  their  conflruftion,  from  thofe  Druidical  monuments  which  remain 
in  Britam,  and  the  weftern  ifles.  The  places  of  worfliip  among  the  Scandinavians 
were  originally  rude  and  unadorned.  In  after  ages,  when  they  opened  a  commu- 
nication with  other  nations,  they  adopted  their  manners,  and  built  temples.  That 
at  Upfal,  in  Sweden,  was  amazingly  rich  and  magnificent.  Haiquin,  of  Norway, 
built  one,  near  Drontheim,  little  inferior  to  the  foimer;  and  it  went  always  un- 
der the  name  of  Loden.     Mallet,  introduQion  a  I'hijioire  de  Dannmarc. 


BookV.         An  epic    POEM.  311 

beam  flew  over  the  fern.  Why,  Ion  of  Cul-allin  !  why, 
Culmin,  doft  thou  rufli  on  that  beam*  of  light  ?  It  is  a 
fire  that  confumes.  Son  of  Cul-allin,  retire.  Your  fa- 
thers were  not  equal,  in  the  glittering  ftrife  of  the  field. 
The  mother  of  Culmin  remains  in  the  hall.  She  looks 
forth  on  blue-rolling  Strutha.  A  whirlXvind  rifes,  on  the 
ilream,  dark-eddying  round  the  ghoft  of  her  fon.  His 
dogs  f  are  howling  in  their  place.  His  fhield  is  bloody  in 
the  hall.  "  Art  thou  fallen,  my  fair-haired  youth,  in 
Erin's  difmal  war  ?" 

As  a  roe,  pierced  in  fecret,  lies  panting,  by  her  wonted 
flreams  :  the  hunter  furveys  her  feet  of  wind  :  he  remem- 
bers, her  (lately  bounding  before  ;  fo  lay  the  fon  of  Cul- 
allin,  beneath  the  eye  of  Fillan.  His  hair  is  rolled  in  a 
little  flream.  His  blood  wanders  on  his  fliield.  Still  his 
hand  holds  the  fword,  tfiat  failed  him  in  the  midft  of  dan- 
ger. "  Thou  art  fallen,"  faid  Fillan,  "  ere  yet  thy  fame 
was  heard.  Thy  father  fent  thee  to  war.  He  expeds  to 
hear  of  thy  deeds.  He  is  grey,  perhaps,  at  his  ftreams. 
His  eyes  are  toward  Moi-lena.  But  thou  fhalt  not  return, 
with  the  fpoil  of  the  fallen  foe  !" 

Fillan  pours  the  flight  of  Erin  before  him,  over  the 
refounding  heath.  But,  man  on  man,  fell  Morven  before 
the  dark-red  rage  of  Foldath  ;  for,  far  on  the  field,  he 
poured  the  roar  of  half  his  tribes.  Dermid  flands  before 
him  in  wrath.  The  fons  of  Selma  gathered  around.  But 
his  fhield  is  cleft  by  Foldath.  His  people  fly  over  the 
heath. 

Then  faid  the  foe,  in  his  pride,  "  They  have  fled  ! 

My 

*  The  poet,  metaphorically,  calls  Fillan  a  beam  of  light.  Cul-min,  mentioned 
here,  was  the  Ion  of  Clomnar,  chief  of  Strutha,  by  the  beautiful  Cul-allin.  She 
was  fo  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  her  perfon,  that  (he  is  introduced  frequently, 
in  the  ;imihes  and  allufions  of  ancient  poetry.  Mar  Chul-aluin  Strvth  nanjian;  Lovely 
as  Cul-ailin  of  Strutha  of  the  (lorms. 

+  D'\.s  were  thou;;kt  to  he  fetifible  of  the  death  of  their  mafter,  let  it  happen  at 
■  ;  ,reat  a  diflance.  It  was  alfo  the  opinion  of  the  times,  that  the  arms  which 
rs  left  at  aome  became  bloody,  when  they  themfelves  fell  in  hatuie.  It  was 
truTi  thofc  fious  that  Cul-alhn  is  fuppofed  to  underftand  that  her  fon  is  killed ;  in 
which  Ihe  is  conf.  med  by  the  appearance  of  his  ghoH.  Her  fadden  and  ihort  ex- 
da.r.ation  is  more  judicious  in  tlie  poet,  than  if  fne  had  extended  her  complaints  to 
a  ^reai.r  length.  1  he  attiiud ;  c^  the  fallen  youth,  and  Fillan's  reflexions  over 
hiin,  come  forcibly  back  vi\  the  mmd,  wh'.-n  we  confider,  that  the  fupoofed  fitlia- 
tuin  of  the  father  of  Cuhn;n,  wis  fo  fmuiar  to-  that  of  Firu a'' .  af^er  t^-  ••  -  ' '■  ■>:  ■« '■' 
I   A  himfelf. 


312  .    T    E    M    O    R    A  : 

My  fame  begins  !  Go, '  Malthos,  go  bid  Cathmor  guard 
rhe  dark-rolling  of  ocean  ;  that  Fingal  may  not  efcape 
from  my  fword.  He  muft  lie  on  earth.  Befide  fome  fen 
fliall  his  tomb  be  feen.  It  fliall  rife  without  a  fong.  His 
ghofl  fliall  hover,  in  mid,  over  the  reedy  pool." 

Malthos  heard,  with  darkening  doubt.  He  rolled  his 
filent  eyes.  He  knew  the  pride  of  Foldath.  He  looked 
up  to  Fingal,  on  his  hills  ;  then  darkly  turning,  in  doubt- 
ful mood,  he  plunged  his  fword  in  war. 

In  Clono's*  narrow  vale,  where  bend  two  trees  above 
the  ftream,  dark,  in  his  grief,  flood  Duthno's  filent  fon. 
The  blood  pours  from  the  fide  of  Dermid.  His  fliield  is 
broken  near.  His  fpear  leans  againft  a  flone.  Why,  Der- 
mid, why  fo  fad?  "  I  hear  the  roar  of  battle.  My  people  are 
alone.  My  fteps  are  flow  on  the  heath  ;  and  no  fliield  is 
mine.    Shall  he  then  prevail  ?  It  is,  theii,  after  Dermid  is 

low  ' 

*  This  valley  bad  its  name  from  Clono,  fon  of  Lethmal  of  Lora,  one  of  the 
ancoflors  of  Dermid,  the  fon  of  Duthno.  His  hiftory  is  thus  related  in  an  old 
pcem.  In  the  days  of  Conar,  the  fon  of  Trenmor,  the  firfl  king  of  Ireland,  Clo- 
no palTed  over  inio  that  kingdom,  from  Caledonia,  to  aid  Conar  againft  the  Fir- 
bolg.  Being  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  his  perfon,  he  foon  drew  the  attentioi! 
of  Sulmin,  the  young  wife  of  an  Irifh  chiej.  Slie  difclofcd  her  paffion,  which  \\3S 
not  properly  returned  bv  the  Caledonian.  The  lady  fickened  through  difappoint- 
ment,  and  her  love  for  Clono  came  to  the  ears  of  her  hufband.  Fired  with  jealou- 
fy,  he  vowed  revenge.  Clono,  to  avoid  his  rage,  departed  from  Temora,  in  or- 
der to  pals  over  into  Scotland  ;  and,  being  benighted  in  the  valley  mentioned  here, 
he  laid  him  down  to  fleep.  There  Lethmal  defcended  in  the  dreams  of  Qlonc^  and  told- 
him  that  danger  was  near, 

Ghoft  of  LETHMAL. 

"  Arife,  from  thy  bed  of  mofs ;  fon  of  low-laid  Lethmal,  arife.    The  found  of 
the  coming  of  foes,  defcends  along  die  wiad. 
CLONO. 

Whofe  voice  is  that,  like  many  ftreams,  in  the  feafon  of  my  reft  ? 
Ghoft  of  LETHMAL. 

Arife,  thou  dweller  of  the  foals  of  the  lovely;  fon  of  Lethmal,  arife. 
CLONO. 

How  dreary  is  the  night !  The  moon  is  darkened  in  the  Iky ;  red  are  the  paths  of 
ohofts,  along  its  fuUen  face  !  Green-flcirted  meteors  let  around.  Dull  is  the  loar- 
ino-  of  ftreams,  from  the  valley  of  dim  forms.  I  heaiithee,  fpirit  of  my  father,  on 
the  eddying  couife  of  the  wind.  I  hear  thee  :  but  thou  bendeft  not,  forward,  thy 
tall  form,  from  the  fkiris  of  night." 

As  Clono  prepared  to  depart",  the  hufliand  of  Sulmin  came  up,  with  his  numerous 
attendarls.  Clono  defended  himfei-^  but,  aiter  a  g'ilant  refiftance,  he  was  over- 
powered and  {lain.  He  was  buried  in  the  place  where  he  v  as  killed,  and  the  val- 
lex'  was  called  after  I  is  name.  Dermid,  in  his  requeft  to  Gaul  the  fon  of  Morni, 
which  imiriediately  follows  this  paragraph,  alludes  to  the  tomb  of  Clono,  and  his 
own  conuettion  'with  that  unfortunate  chief. 


BookV.        An   epic   POEM.  '313 

low  !  I  will  call  thee  forth,  O  Foldath,  and  meet  thee  yet 
in  fight." 

He  took  his  fpear,  with  dreadful  joy.  The  fon  of  Morni 
came.  *'  Stay,  fon  of  Duthno,  flay  thy  fpeed.  Thy  fteps 
are  marked  with  blood.  No  boffy  flileldis  thine.  Why 
fhouldil  thou  fall  unarmed  ?"  "  Son  of  Morni !  give  thou 
thy  fhield.  It  has  often  rolled  back  the  war.  I  ftall  flop 
the  chief,  in  his  courfe.  Son  of  Morni!  behold  that  flone  ! 
It  lifts  grey  its  head  through  grafs.  There,  dwells  a  chief 
of  the  race  of  Dermid.    Place  me  there  in  night." 

He  flowly  rofe  againfl  the  hill.  He  faw  the  troubled 
field  ;  the  gleaming  ridges  of  battle,  disjoined  and  bro- 
ken around.  As  diftant  fires  on  heath,  by  night,  now 
feem  as  loft  in  fmoke  ;  now  rearing  their  red  flreams  ,on 
the  hill,  as  blow  or  ceafe  the  winds  ;  fo  met  the  inter- 
mitting war  the  eye  of  broad-fhielded  Dermid.  Through 
the  hofl  are  the  flrides  of  Foldath,  like  fome  dark  fhip  on 
wintry  waves,  when  fhe  ifTues  from  between  two  ifles,  to 
fport  on  refounding  ocean  ! 

Dermid,  with  rage,  beholds  his  courfe.  He  flrives  to 
rufn  along.  But  he  fails,  amid  his  fleps ;  and  the  big 
tear  comes  down.  He  founds  his  father's  horn.  He 
thrice  ibikes  his  body  fliicld.  He  calls  thrice  the  name 
of  Foldath,  from  his  roaring  tribes.  Foldath,  with  joy, 
beholds  the  chief.  He  lifts  aloft  his  bloody  fpear.  As  a 
rock  is  marked  with  flreams,  that  fall,  troubled,  down  its 
fide  in  a  florm  ;  fo,  flreaked  with  wandering  blood,  is 
the  dark  chief  of  Moma  !  The  hofl,  on  either  fide,  with- 
draw from  the  contending  of  kings.  They  raife,  at  once, 
their  gleaming  points.  Rufhing  comes  Fillan  of  Selma. 
Three  paces  back  Foldath  withdraws,  dazzled  with  that 
beam  of  light,  which  came,  as  iffulng  from  a  cloud,  to 
fave  the  wounded  chief.  Growing  In  his  pride,  he  flands. 
He  calls  forth  all  his  fleel. 

As  meet  two  broad-winged  eagles,  in  their  founding 
flrife,  in  winds  ;  fo  rufh  the  two  chiefs,  on  Mol-lena,  into 
gloomy  fight.  By  turns  are  the  fleps  of  the  kings*  for- 
ward on  their  rocks  above  ;  for  now  the  dufky  war  feems 
to  defcend  on  their  fwords.  Cathmor  feels  the  joy  of 
R  r  warriors 

*  Fingal  and  Cathmor, 


314  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

warriors,  on  his  moify  hi!I  ;  their  joy  in  fecret,  when  dan- 
gers rile  to  match  their  fouls.  His  eye  is  not  turned  on 
Lubar,  but  on  Sehna's  dreadful  king.  He  beholds  him, 
on  Mora,  rifmg  in  his  arms. 

FoLDATH  *  falls  on  his  ihield.  The  fpear  of  Fillan 
pierced  the  king.  Nor  looks  the  youth  on  the  fallen, 
but  onv/ard  rolls  the  war.  The  hundred  voices  of  death 
arife.  ''  Stay,  fon  of  Fingal,  Ifay  thy  fpeed.  Beholdeft 
thou  not  that  gleaming  form,  a  dreadful  fign  of  death  ? 
Awaken  not  the  king  of  Erin.  Return,  fon  of  blue-eyed 
Ciatho." 

MALTHosf  beholds  Foldath  low.  He  darkly  ftands 
above  the  chief.  Hatred  is  rolled  from  his  foul.  He 
feems  a  rock  in  a  defart,  on  whofe  dark  fide  are  the  trick- 
ling of  waters  ;  v/hen  the  flow-failing  mifl:  has  left  it,  and 
all  its  trees  are  blafled  with  winds.  He  fpoke  to  the  dying 
hero,  about  the  narrow  houfe.  "  Whether  fliall  thy  grey 
{tone  rife  in  Uilin,  or  in  Moma's  ||  woody  land  ?  where 

the 

*  The  fail  of  Foldath,  if  we  may  believe  tradition,  was  prediSed  to  him,  before 
lie  had  left  his  own  country  to  join  Ciirbar,  in  his  defigns  on  the  Irifli  throne.  He 
■went  to  th.'  cave  of  Moma,  to  enquire  of  the  fpiriis  of  his  fathers,  concerning  the 
fuccefs  ot  the  e;.te:pri(e  o!  Cjirbar.  The  rcfponfes  of  oracles  are  always  attended 
with  obfcurity,  and  liable  to  a  double  mt-aniny  :  Foldath,  therefore,  put  a  favour- 
able interpretation  on  the  predittion,  and  purlued  his  adopted  plan  of  aggrandizing 
himfclf  with  the  fimilv  of  Aiha. 

FOLDAl  H,  addrejfivg  the /pints  of  his  fathers. 

"  Dark,  I  fland  in  your  prefence  ;  fathers  of  Foldath,  hear.  Shall  my  fteps  pafj 
over  Aiha,  to  Uilin  of  the  loes?" 

The  Arfwer. 

*'  Thy  fleps  fhall  pafs  over  Atha,  to  the  green  dwelling  of  kings.  There  fhall 
thy  flature  arife,  over  the  fallen,  like  a  pillar  of  thunder-clouds.  There,  terrible 
in  darknefs,  ftalt  thoa  Hand,  till  the  refleclcd  beam,  or  Cloncatk,  of  Moruth,  come; 
Mouth  of  many  f;rfaiTi<..   that  loais  in  diflant  lands." 

Clone  !th,  or  rfltckd  b'am,  fay  my  traditional  authors,  was  the  name  of  the 
fwoid  of  Fillan ;  lo  that  it  was,  in  the  latent  f^nification  of  the  word  Cloncatk,  that 
the  deception  lay.  My  principal  reafon  for  introducing  this  note,  is,  that  this  tra- 
dition lervesto  (hew,  that  the  rclioionof  the  Fir-bolg  differed  from  that  of  the  Ca- 
ledonians, as  we  never  find  the  latter  enquiring  of  the  fpirits  of  their  deceafed  an- 
cefors. 

f  The  charaflers  of  Foldath  and  Malthos  are  fufiained.  They  were  both  dark 
and  fu;!\',  but  each  in  a  diffeiem  way.  Foldath  was  impetuous  and  cruel.  Mal- 
thos flubborn  and  incedulous.  Thrir  attachment  to  the  family  of  Atha  was  equal; 
th'ir  bravery  in  battle  the  fame.  Foldath  was  vain  and  oftentatious :  Malthos  un- 
indulxent  but  generous.  His  behavioui  here,  towards  his  enemy  Foldath,  fhews, 
that  a  roo  1  heait  oftt^ii  lies  concealed  under  a  gloomy  and  fullen  character. 

11  Moma  was  the  name  of  a  count: y  in  the  fouth  of  Connaught,  once  famous  for 
being  the  refidence  of  an  Arch-Druid,     The  cave  of  Moma  was  thought  to  be  in- 

habited 


BookV.         An  epic    POEM.  315 

the  fun  looks,  in  fecret,  on  the  blue  ftreams  of  Dal-rutho*? 
There,  are  the  fteps  of  thy  daughter,  blue-eyed  Dardu- 
lena  !" 

"  Rememberest  thou  her,"  faid  Foldath,  "  becaufe 
no  fon  is  mine :  no  youth  to  roll  the  battle  before  him, 
in  revenge  of  me  !  Malthos,  I  am  revenged.  I  was  not 
peaceful  in  the  field.  Raife  the  tombs  of  thofe  I  have 
ilain,  around  my  narrow  houfe.  Often  lliall  I  forfake  the 
blad,  to  rejoice  above  their  graves  ;  when  I  behold  them 
fpread  around,  with  their  long-whiftling  grafs." 

His  foul  ruihed  to  the  vale  of  Moma,  to  Dardu-lena's 
dreams,  where  ihe  flept,  by  Dal-rutho's  ftream,  returning 
from  the  chace  of  the  hinds.  Her  bow  is  near  the  maid, 
unflrung.  The  breezes  fold  her  long  hair  on  her  breads. 
Clothed  in  the  beauty  of  youth,  the  love  of  heroes  lay. 
Dark-bending,  from  the  fkirts  of  the  wood,  her  v/ounded 
father  feemed  to  come.  He  appeared,  at  times  ;  then  hid 
himfelf  in  mill.  Burfting  into  tears,  fhe  rofe.  She  knew 
that  the  chief  v/as  lov/.  To  her  came  a  beam  from  his 
foul,  when  folded  in  its  florms.  Thou  wert  the  lafl  of  his 
race,  O  blue-eyed  Dardu-lena  ! 

Wide-spreading  over  echoing  Lubar,  the  flight  of 
Bolga  is  rolled  along.  Fillan  hangs  forward  on  their 
fteps.  He  (irews,  with  dead,  the  heath.  Fingal  rejoices 
over  his  fon.     Blue-fliielded  Cathmor  rofe  |. 

Son  of  Alpin,  bring  the  harp.     Give  Fillan's  praife  to 

the 

habiied  by  the  fplrits  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Fir-bolg,  and  their  pofterity  fent  to  enquire 
there,  as  to  an  oracle,  concernino  the  iffue  of  their  wars. 

*  Dal-ruath,  parched  or  Jandy  jidd.  The  etymology  of  Dardu-lena  is  uncertain. 
The  daughter  of  Foldath  was,  probably,  fo  called,  from  a  place  in  Ulfter,  where 
her  father  had  defeated  part  of  the  adherents  of  Artho,  king  of  Ireland.  Dar-du- 
Icna;  the  dark  weed  of  Mci-lcna.  As  Foldath  was  proud  and  oflentatious,  it  would 
appear,  that  he  transferred  the  name  of  a  place,  wheie  he  himfelf  had  been  vifto- 
rious,  to  his  daughter, 

+  "  The  fufpence,  in  which  the  mind  of  the  reader  is  left  here,  conveys  the  idea 
of  Fillan's  danger  more  forcibly  home,  than  any  defcription  that  could  be  intro- 
duced. There  is  a  fort  of  eloquence,  in  filence  with  propriety.  A  minute  detail 
of  the  circumflances  of  an  important  fcene  is  generally  cold  and  infipid.  The  hu- 
man mind,  free  and  fond  of  thinking  for  itfelf,  is  dif,-ufted  to  find  ever\'  thing  done 
by  the  poet,  li  is,  therefore,  his  bufinefs  only  to  mark  out  the  mod  (Iriking  out- 
lines, and  to  allow  the  imaginations  of  his  readers  to  finifh  the  fi^^ure  for  them- 
felves." 

The  book  ends  in  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day,  from  the  opening  of  the  poem. 


3i6  T    E    M    O    R    A. 

the  wind.  Raife  high  his  praife,  in  mine  ear,  while  yet 
he  fhines  in  war. 

Leave,  blue-eyed  Clatho,  leave  thy  hall !  Behold 
that  early  beam  of  thine  !  The  hoft  is  withered  in  its 
courfe.  No  further  look  :  it  is  dark.  Light-trembling 
from  the  harp,  ilrike,  virgins,  llrike  the  found.  No 
hunter  he  defcends,  from  the  dewy  haunt  of  the  bounding 
roe.  He  bends  not  his  bow  on  the  wind ;  nor  fends  his 
grey  arrow  abroad. 

Deep-folded  in  red  war  !  See  battle  roll  againU:  his 
fide.  Striding  amid  the  ridgy  ftrife,  he  pours  the  deaths 
of  thoufands  forth.  Fillan  is  like  a  fpirit  of  heaven,  that 
defcends  from  the  (kirt  of  winds.  The  troubled  ocean 
feels  his  fteps,  as  he  ftrides  from  wave  to  wave.  His  path 
kindles  behind  him.  Iflands  fhake  their  heads  on  the 
heaving  feas !    Leave,  blue-eyed  Clatho,  leave  thy  hall ! 


T  E  M  O  R  j^ 


T       E       M       O       R       A  : 

A  N 

EPIC        POEM. 
BOOK    VI. 


ARGUMENT. 


THIS  book  opens  with  a  fpeech  of  Fiiigal,  who  fees  Cathmor  defcending  to  the 
affiftance  of  his  flying  army.  The  king  difpatchcs  Oflian  to  the  rehef  of  Fillan. 
He  himfclf  retires  behind  the  rock  of  Cormul,  to  avoid  the  fight  of  the  engage- 
ment between  his  fon  and  Cathmor.  Oflian  advances.  The  defcent  of  Cath- 
mor defcribed.  He  rallies  the  the  army,  renews  the  battle,  and,  before  Offian 
could  arrive,  engages  Fiilaahimfelf.  Upon  the  approach  of  Offian,  the  com- 
bat between  the  two  heroes  ceafes,  Oflian  and  Cathmor  prepare  to  fight,  but 
night  coming  on,  prevents  them.     Oflian  returns  to  the  place  where  Cathmor 

-  and  Fillan  fought.  He  finds  Fillan  mortally  wounded,  aijd  leaning  aaainfi  a 
lock.  Their  difcouife.  Fillan  dies:  his  body  is  laid,  by  Oflian,  in  a  neighbour- 
ing cave.  The  Caledonian  army  return  to  Fingal.  He  queflions  them  about 
bis  fon,  and,  underftjnding  that  he  was  killed,  retires,  in  filence,  to  the  rock  of 
Cormul.  Upon  the  retreat  of  the  aimy  of  Fingal, 'the  Fir-bolg  advance.  Cath- 
mor finds  Bran,  one  of  the  dogs  of  Fingal,  lying  on  the  fliield  of  Fillan,  before 
the  entrance  of  the  cave,  where  the  body  of  that  hero  lay.  His  refleftions  there- 
upon. He  returns,  in  a  melancholy  mood,  to  his  army.  Malthos  endeavours 
to  comfort  him,  by  the  example  of  his  father  Borbar-duthul.  Cathmor  retires 
to  refl.  The  fong  of  Sul-malla  concludes  the  book,  which  ends  abjiut  the  mid- 
kile  of  the  third  night,  from  the  opening  of  the  poem. 

CATHMOR  rifes  on  his  hill !  Shall  Fingal  take 
the  fword  of  Luno  ?  But  what  fhould  become  of 
thy  fame,  fon  of  white-bofomed  Clatho  ?  Turn  not  thine 
eyes  from  Fingal,  fair  daughter  of  Iniftore.  I  fhall  not 
quench  thy  early  beam.  It  fhines  along  my  foul.  Rife, 
wood-fkirted  Mora,  rife  between  the  war  and  me !  Why 
fiiould  Fingal  behold  the  ftrife,  left  his  dark-haired  war- 
rior fliould  fall  !  Amidft  the  fong,  O  Carril,  pour  the  found 

^       of 

*  Fingal  fpeaks. 


318  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

of  the  trembling  harp  !  Here  are  the  voices  of  rocks  !  and 
there  the  bright  tumbling  of  waters.  Father  of  Ofcar, 
lift  the  fpear !  Defend  the  young  in  arms.  Conceal  thy 
fleps  from  Fillan.  He  muit  not  know  that  I  doubt  his 
ileel.  No  cloud  of  mine  fliall  rife,  my  fon,  upon  thy  foul 
of  fire  !" 

He  funk  behind  his  rock,  amid  the  found  of  CarriFs 
fong.  Brightening,  in  my  growing  foul,  I  took  the  fpear 
of  Temora*.  I  law,  along  Moi-!ena,  the  wild  tumbling 
of  battle  ;  the  (trife  of  death,  in  gleaming  rows,  disjoined 
and  broken  round.  Fillan  is  a  beam  of  fire.  From  wing 
to  wing  is  his  walleful  courfe.  The  ridges  of  war  melt 
before  him.    They  are  rolled,  in  fmoke,  from  the  fields  ! 

Now  is  the  coming  forth  of  Cathmor,  in  the  armour  of 
kings  !  Dark  waves  the  eagle's  wing,  above  his  helmet  of 
fire.  Unconcerned  are  his  fteps,  as  if  they  were  to  the 
chace  of  Erin.  He  raifes,  at  times,  his  terrible  voice» 
Erin,  abafhed,  gathers  round.  Their  fouls  return  back, 
like  a  dream.  They  wonder  at  the  fteps  of  their  fear.  He 
rofe,  like  the  beam  of  the  morning  on  a  haunted  heath  : 
the  traveller  looks  back,  with  bending  eye,  on  the  field  of 
dreadful  forms  !  Sudden,  from  the  rock  of  Moi-lena,  are 
Sul-malla*s  trembling  fleps.  An  oak  takes  the  fpear  from 
her  hand.  Half-bent,  flie  loofes  the  lance.  But  then  are 
her  eyes  on  the  king,  from  amid  her  wandering  locks  ! 
"  No  friendly  ilrife  is  before  thee  !  No  light  contending 
of  bows,  as  when  the  youth  of  Inis-huna  -{■  came  forth 
beneath  the  eye  of  Conmor  !'* 

As  the  rock  of  Runo,  which  takes  the  paffing  clouds 
as  they  fly,  feems  growing,  in  gathered  darknefs,  over 
the  ftreamy  heath  ;  fo  feems  the  chief  of  Atha  taller,  as 
gather  his  people  around.  As  different  blafts  fly  over  the 
lea,  each  behind  its  dark-blue  wave  ;  fo  Cathmor's  words, 
on  everv  fide,  pour  his  warriors  forth.    Nor  filent  on  his 

hill 

*  The /pear  of  Temora  was  that  which  Ofcai  had  received,  in  a  prefent,  from 
Cormac.  the  fon  of  Aitho.  king  of  Ireland  It  was  of  it  that  Cairbar  made  the 
jiretext  for  i^uarrel  in?  wiih  Ofcar,  at  the  feaft,  in  the  firft  book, 

+  Clu-ba,  winding  bay;  an  arm  of  the  fea  in  Inis-huna,  or  the  weflern  coaft  of 
.South-Britain.  It  was  in  this  bay  that  Cgthmor  was  wind-bound  when  Su!-ma!!a 
<"ame,  in  the  difguife  of  a  voun~  wairic,  to  accompany  him  in  his  voyage  to  Ire- 
land, Conmor.  the  father  ot  Su!-mnlla.  us  is  infmuated  at  the  clofc  of  the  fourti? 
book,  was  dead  before  the  departure  of  his  daughter. 


Book  VI.        An  EPIC   POEM. 


3^9 


hill  is  Fillan.  He  mixes  his  words  with  his  echoing  fhield. 
An  eagle  he  feemed,  with  founding  wings,  calling  the 
wind  to  kis  rock,  when  he  fees  the  coming  forth  of  the 
roes,  on  Lutha's*  rufliy  field  ! 

Now  they  bend  forward  in  battle.  Death's  hundred 
voices  arife.  The  kings,  on  either  fide,  were  like  fires  on 
the  fouls  of  the  hods.  OiTian  bounded  along.  High  rocks 
and  trees  rufh  tall  between  the  war  and  me.  But  I  hear 
the  noife  of  fteel,  between  my  clanging  arms.  Rifmg, 
gleaming,  on  the  hill,  I  behold  the  backward  (leps  of 
hoits  ;  their  backward  fteps,  on  either  fide,  and  wildly- 
looking  eyes.  The  chiefs  were  met  in  dreadful  fip^ht  ! 
the  two  blue-fhielded  kings  !  Tall  and  dark,  thro'  gleams 
of  fteel,  are  feen  the  ftriving  heroes  !  I  ruih.  My  fears 
for  Fillan  fly,  burning,  acrofs  my  foul. 

I  COME.  Nor  Cathmor  flies,  nor  yet  comes  on  :  he 
fidelong  fl:alks  along.  An  icy  rock,  cold,  tall  he  feems. 
I  call  forth  all  my  (leel.  Silent  awhile  we  ftride,  on  either 
fide  of  a  rufliing  dream  ;  then,  fudden  turning,  all  at 
once,  we  raife  our  pointed  fpears  !  We  raife  our  fpears, 
but  night  comes  down.  It  is  dark  and  filent  round  ;  but 
where  the  dillant  fteps  of  hods  are  founding  over  the  heath. 

I  COME  to  the  place  where  Fillan  fought.  Nor  voice, 
nor  found  is  there.  A  broken  helmet  lies  on  earth,  a 
buckler  cleft  in  twain.  "  Where,  Fillan,  where  art  thou, 
young  chief  of  echoing  Morven  ?"  He  hears  me,  leaning 
on  a  rock,  which  bends  its  grey  head  over  the  dream. 
He  hears  ;  but  fullen,  dark,  he  ftands.  At  length  I  faw 
the  hero  ! 

"  Why  ftanded  thou,  robed  in  darknefs,  fon  of  woody 
Selma  ?  Bright  is  thy  path,  my  brother,  in  this  dark- 
brown  field  !  Long  has  been  thy  drife  in  battle  !— r- 
Now  the  horn  of  Fingal  is  heard.  Afcend  to  the  cloud  of 
thy  father,  to  his  hill  of  feads.  In  the  evening  mid  he 
fits,  and  hears  the  found  of  Carril's  harp.  Carry  joy  to 
the  aged,  young  breaker  of  the  fliields !" 

"  Can  the  vanquiflied  carry  joy  ?    Oflian,  no  fhield  is 

mine  ! 

*  Lutha  was  the  name  oF  a  valley  in  Morven.  There  dwelt  Tofcar  the  fon  oT 
Conloch,  the  father  of  Malvina,  who,  upon  that  account,  is  often  called  t/i€  maid 
of  Lviha.     Lutha  fignifies  fwift  fircam. 


320  T    E    M    O    R    A  : 

mine  !   It  lies  broken  on  the  field.    The  eagle-wing  of  my 
helmet  is  torn.    It  is  when  foes  fly  before  them,  that  fa- 
thers delight  in  their  fons.    But  their  fighs  burfl  forth  ini 
fecret,  when    their   young  warriors   yield.     No:    Fillanj 
fliall  not  behold  the  king  !  Why  Ihould  the  hero  mourn  ?'* 

"  Son  of  blue-eyed  Clatho  !  O  Fillan,  awake  not  my 
foul  !  Wert  thou  not  a  burning  fire  before  him  ?  Shall  he 
not  rejoice  ?  Such  fame  belongs  not  to  Ofiian  ;  yet  is  the 
king  Hill  a  fun  to  me.  He  looks  on  my  fteps,  with  joy. 
Shadows  never  arife  on  his  face.  Afcend,  O  Fillan,  to 
Mora  !  His  feaft  is  fpread  in  the  folds  of  mill." 

"  OssiAN  !  give  me  that  broken  fliield  ;  thefe  feathers, 
that  are  rolled  in  the  wind.    Place  them  near  to  Fillan,  • 
that  lefs  of  his  fame  may  fall.      Offian,  I   begin  to   fail.  ^ 
Lay  me  in  that  hollow  rock.     Raife  no  ftone  above,  left 
one  fliould  afk  about  my  fame.     I  am  fallen  in  the  firft  of 
my  fields,  without  renown.     Let  thy  voice  alone  fend  joy 
to  my  flying  foul.     Why  flrould  the  bard  know  where  ~ 
dwells  the  lofl:  beam  of  Clatho  *  ?" 

"  Is 

*  A  dialogue  between  Clatho  the  mother,  and  Bofmina  the  filler,  of  Fillan. 

CLATHO. 

DAUGHTER  of  Fingal,  arife:  thou  lioht  between  thy  locks.  Lift  thy  fair 
licad  horn  reft,  foft-gliding  fun-beam  of  Selma  1  I  beheld  thy  arms,  on  thy 
breaft,  white-toiitid  amidtt  thy  wandering  locks;  when  the  ruftling  breeze  of  the 
morning  came  from  the  defart  of  ftreams.  Haft;  thou  feen  thy  fathers,  Bos-mina, 
defcending  in  thy  dreams?  Arif*^,  daughter  of  Clatho  ;  dv.'ells  there  aught  of  grief 
in  ihy  loul  ? 

BOS-MINA. 
A  thin  form  pafTed  before  me,  fading  as  it  flew  :  like  the  darkening  wave  of  a 
breeze,  along  a  field  of  grafs.     Defcend,  from  thy  wall,  O  harp,  and  call  back  the 
loul  of  Bos-mina  ;   it  has  rolled  away,  like  a  ftream.     I  hear  thy  pleafsnt  found.    I 
hear  thee,   O  harp,  and  my  voice  Ihall  life. 

How  often  fliall  ye  rufii  to  war,  ye  dwellers  of  my  foul?  Your  paths  are  diftant, 
kings  of  men,  in  Erin  of  blue  ftreams.  Lift  thy  wing,  thou  fouthern  breeze,  from 
Clono's  darkening  heath  :  fpread  the  falls  of  Fingal  towards  the  bays  of  his  land. 
.  But  who  is  that,  in  his  ftrength,  darkening  in  the  prefcnce  of  war  ?  His  arm 
ftretches  to  the  foe,  like  the  beam  of  the  fickly  fun ;  when  his  fide  is  crufled  with 
darknefs,  and  he  rolls  his  difmal  courfe  through  the  fky.  Who  is  it,  but  the  fa- 
ther of  Bos-mina  ?  Shall  he  return  till  danger  is  paft  ! 

Fillan,  thou  art  a  beam  by  his  fide;  beautiful,  but  terrible,  is  thy  light.  Thy 
fword  is  before  thee,  a  blue  fire  of  night.  When  flialt  thou  reiurn  to  thy  roes; 
to  the  ftreams  of  thy  rufliy  fields?  When  fhall  1  behold  thee  from  Mora,  while 
winds  flrew  my  long  locks  on  their  blafts!  But  ftiall  a  young  eagle  return  from 
ths  field  v/herc  the  heroes  fall  1 

CLATHO. 


Book  VI.        An   EPIC    POEM.  321 

"  Is  thy  fpirit  on  the  eddying  winds,  O  Fillan,  young 
breaker  of  fliields  !  Joy  purfue  my  hero,  through  his 
folded  clouds.  The  forms  of  thy  fathers,  O  Fillan,  bend 
i  to  receive  their  fon.  I  behold  the  fpreading  of  their  fiie 
f!  on  Mora  ;  the  blue-rolling  of  their  mifty  wreaths.  Joy 
meet  thee,  my  brother  ! — But  we  are  dark  and  fad  !  I  be- 
hold the  foe  round  the  aged.  I  behold  the  wafting  away 
of  his  fame.  Thou  art  left  alone  in  the  field,  O  grey- 
haired  king  of  Selma  !" 

I  LAID  him  in  the  hollow  rock,  at  the  roar  of  the  nightly 
,  ftream.     One  red  ftar  looked  in  on  the  hero.    Winds  lift, 
;i  at  times,   his  locks.    I  liften.    No  found  is  heard.    The 
I  warrior  llept  ! — As  lightning  on  a  cloud,  a  thought  came 
rufhing  along  my  foul.     My  eyes  roll   in  fire :  my  ftride 
I  was  in  the  clang  of  fteel.     "  I  will  find  thee,  king  of  Erin  1 
in  the  gathering  of  thy  thoufands,  find  thee.    Why  fhould. 
that  cloud  efcape,  that  quenched  our  early  beam  ?  Kindle 
your  meteors  on  your  hills,  my  fathers.    Light  my  daring 
fteps.    I  Y/ill  confume  in  wrath*. — But   fliould  not  I  re- 
turn !  The  king  is  without  a  fon,  grey-haired  among  his 
foes  !    His  arm  is  not  as   in  the  days  of  old  :  his   fame 
grows  dim  in  Erin.    Let  me  not  behold  him  laid  low  in 
his  latter  field. — But  can  I  return  to  the  king?    Will  he 
not  afk  about  his  fon  ?  "  Thou  oughteft  to  defend  young 
S  s  Fillan.". 

CLATHO. 
Soft,  as  the  fong  of  Loda,  is  the  voice  of  Sehna's  raaid.  Pleafant  to  the  ear  cr 
Clatho  is  the  name  of  the  breaker  of  Ihields.  Behold,  the  king  comes  from  ocean  : 
the  (liicld  of  Morven  is  borne  by  bards.  The  foe  has  fled  before  him,  like  the  de- 
paifiire  of  mifl.  1  hear  not  the  founding  wings  of  my  eagle ;  the  rufhing  forth  o£ 
the  fon  of  Cluiho.     Thou  art  dark,  O  Fing  .1 ;  fliall  the  warrior  never  return  ?  *  * 

*  Here  the  fentence  is  defignedly  left  unfiniflied.  The  fenfe  is,  that  he  was  re- 
folved,  like  a  deftroying  fire,  to  confume  Cathmor,  who  had  killed  his  biother. 
In  the  midd  of  this  rcfolution,  the  fituation  of  Fingal  fuggefls  itfelf  to  him,  in  a  ve- 
ry ftrong  light.  He  lefolves  to  return  to  affill  (he  king  in  profccuting  the  war.  But 
then  his  Inatne  for  net  defending  his  brother,  recuu  to  him.  He  is  determined 
again  to  go  and  find  out  Cathmor.  We  may  conGder  him,  as  in  the  aft  of  advanc- 
ing towards  the  enemy,  when  the  horn  of  Fingal  founded  on  Mora,  and  called 
back  his  people  to  his  prefcncc.  This  foHloquy  ij  natural :  the  refokitions  which 
fo  feiJdenly  follow  one  another,  are  expreHive  of  a  mind  extremely  agitaied  wiiU 
forroivf  and  conlcious  fliame  :  yet  the  behaviour  of  Oflian,  in  his  execution  of  the 
commands  of  Fingal,  ic  fo  irreprehenfihle,  that  it  is  not  eafy  to  determine  where 
he  failed  in  his  duty.  The  truth  is,  that  when  men  fail  in  defigns  which  they  ar- 
dently wifh  to  accompliflT,  tjicy  naturally  blame  ihcmfclves,  ?is  the  chief  caufc  of 
their  dil.ippoiiitment. 


322  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

Fillan.**  Offian  v/ill  meet  the  foe.  Green  Erin,  thy 
founding  tread  is  pleafant  to  my  ear.  I  rufh  on  thy  ridgy 
noft,  to  Ihun  the  eyes  of  Fingal. — I  hear  the  voice  of  the 
king,  on  Mora's  mifly  top  !  He  calls  his  two  fons  !  I 
come,  my  father,  in  my  grief.  I  come,  like  an  eagle, 
which  the  flame  of  night  met  in  the  defart,  and  fpoiled 
of  half  his  wings  !" 

Distant*,  round  the  king,  on  Mora,  the  broken 
ridges  of  Morven  are  rolled.  They  turned  their  eyes  : 
each  darkly  bends,  on  his  own  aflien  fpear.  Silent  flood 
the  king  in  the  midft.  Thought  on  thought  rolled  over 
his  foul ;  as  waves  on  a  fecret  mountain-lake,  each  with 
its  back  of  foam.  He  looked  :  no  fon  appeared,  with  his 
long-beaming  fpear.  The  fighs  rofe,  crowding,  from  his 
foul ;  but  he  concealed  his  grief.  At  length  I  flood  be- 
neath an  oak.  No  voice  of  mine  was  heard.  What  could 
I  fay  to  Fingal  in  his  hour  of  woe  ?  His  words  rofe,  at 
length,  in  the  midft  :  the  people  fliruuk  backward,  as  he 
fpoke  |. 

"  Where 

*  "  Thisfcene,"  fays  un  ingenious  writer,  and  a  good  judge,  "  is  folemn.  The 
poet  always  places  his  chief  character  amidft  objefts  which  favour  the  fublime.  The 
face  of  the  country,  the  night,  the  broken  remains  of  a  defeated  army,  and,  above 
all,  the  attitude  and  filence  of  Fingal  himfeif,  are  circumliances  calculated  lo  im- 
prefs  an  awful  idea  on  the  mind.  Ollian  is  mcR  fuccefsful  in  his  night-de- 
(criptions.  Dark  images  fuited  the  melancholy  temper  of  his  mind.  His  poem* 
were  all  compofed  after  the  active  part  of  his  life  was  over,  when  he  was  blind, 
and  had  furvived  all  the  companions  of  his  youth:  we  therefore  find  a  veil  of  me- 
lancholy thrown  over  the  whole." 

+  I  owe  the  firft  paragraph  of  the  folloM'ing  note  to  the  fame  pen. 

The  abafhed  behaviour  of  the  army  of  Fingal  proceeds  rather  from  fhame  than 
fear.  The  king  v;as  not  of  a  tyrannical  dilpofition  :  He,  as  he  profeffes  himfclf  in 
the  fifth  book,  never  was  a  dreadful  form,  in  their  prefence,  darkevedinlo  wrath.  His 
voice  was  no  thunder  to  their  ears  :  his  eyes  fent  forth  no  death.  The  firft  ages  of  fo- 
t;iety  are  not  the  times  of  arbitrary  power.  As  the  wants  of  mankind  are  few,  they 
retain  their  independence.  It  is  an  advanced  ftate  of  civilization  that  moulds  the 
mind  to  that  fubmiflion  to  government,  of  which  ambitious  magiftrates  take  advan- 
tage, and  raife  themfelves  into  abfolute  power. 

It  is  a  vulgar  error,  that  the  common  Highlanders  lived  in  abjeft  flavery  under 
their  chiefs.  Their  high  ideas  of,  and  attachment  to,  the  heads  of  their  families, 
probably,  led  the  unintelligent  into  this  m.iftake.  When  the  honour  of  the  tribe 
was  concerned,  the  commands  of  the  chief  were  obeyed,  without  reftriftion  :  but, 
if  individuals  were  oppreflTed,  they  threw  themfelves  into  the  armsof  a  neighbouring 
clan,  affumed  a  new  name,  and  were  encouraged  and  protected.  The  fear  of  this 
defertion,  no  doubt,  made  the  chiefs  cautious  in  their  government.  As  their  con- 
fequence,  in  the  eyes  of  others,  was  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  their  people, 
they  took  care  to  avoid  every  thing  that  tended  to  dimiaifti  it, 


Book  VI.        An   EPIC    POEM.  323 

"  Where  Is  the  fon  of  Selma,  he  who  led  in  war?  I 
behold  not  his  fteps,  raiiong  my  people,  returning  from 
the  field.  Fell  the  young  bounding  roe,  who  was  fo  (lately 
on  my  hills  ?  He  fell ;  for  ye  are  filent.  The  faield  of 
war  is  cleft  in  twain. — Let  his  armour  be  near  to  Fingal  j 
and  the  fword  of  dark-brown  Luno.  I  am  waked  on  my 
hills  :  with  morning  I  defcend  to  war." 

High*  on  Cormul's  rock,  an  oak  is  flaming  to  the 
wind  :  the  grey  fkirts  of  mift  are  fettled  around.  Thither 
ftrode  the  king  in  his  wrath.  Diftant  from  the  hod  he 
always  lay,  when  battle  burnt  within  his  foul.  On  two 
fpears  hung  his  fhield  on  high  ;  the  gleaming  fign  of 
death  :  that  fhield,  which  he  was  wont  to  flrike,  by  night, 
before  he  ruHied  to  war.  It  was  then  his  warriors  knew, 
when  the  king  was  to  lead  in  ftrife ;  for  never  was  this 
buckler  heard,  till  the  wrath  of  Fingal  arofe.  Unequal 
were  his  fteps  on  high,  as  he  Ihone  in  the  beam  of  the 
oak.  He  was  dreadful  as  the  form  of  the  fpirit  of  night ; 
v/hen  he  clothes,  on  hills,  his  wild  geftures  with  mift, 

and, 

It  was  but  very  lately  that  the  authority  of  the  laws  extended  to  the  Highlands. 
Before  that  lime  the  clans  were  governed,  in  civil  affairs,  not  by  the  verbal  com- 
mands of  the  chief,  but  by  what  they  called  Clechda,  or  the  traditional  precedents 
of  their  anceftors.  When  differences  happened  between  individuals,  fomc  of  the 
oldeft  men  in  the  tribe  were  chofen  umpires  between  the  parties,  to  decide  accord- 
ing to  the  Clechda,  The  chief  intcrpofed  his  authority,  and,  invariably,  enforced 
the  decifion.  In  their  wars,  which  were  frequent,  on  account  of  family-feuds,  the 
chief  was  lefs  referved  in  the  execution  of  his  authority  ;  and  even  then  he  ieleom 
'extended  it  to  the  taking  the  life  of  any  of  his  tribe.  No  crime  was  capital,  ex- 
cept murder;  and  that  was  very  unfrequent  in  the  Highlands.  No  corporal  punifh- 
ment,  of  any  kind,  was  inflitled.  The  memory  of  an  aifiont  of  this  fort  would  re- 
main, for  ages,  in  a  family,  and  they  would  feize  every  opportunity  to  be  revenged, 
unlefs  it  came  immediately  from  the  hands  of  the  chief  himfelf;  in  that  cafe  it  was 
taken,  rather  as  a  fatherly  correftion,  than  a  legal  punifliment  for  offences. 

*  This  rock  of  Cormul  is  often  mentioned  in  the  picceding  part  of  tke  poem. 
It  was  on  it  Fingal  and  Oflian  flood  to  view  the  battle.  The  cuftom  of  retiring 
from  the  army,  on  the  night  prior  to  their  engaging  in  battle,  was  univerfal  among 
the  kings  of  the  Caledonians.  Trenmor,  the  mofl  renowned  of  the  anceftors  of 
Jingal,  is  mentioned  as  the  firft  who  inftituted  this  cuftom.  Succeeding  bards  at- 
tributed it  to  a  hero  of  a  later  period.  In  an  old  poem,  which  begins  with  Mac- 
Arcath  na  ceudjiol,  this  cuftom  of  retiring  from  the  army,  before  an  engagement, 
is  numbered,  among  the  wife  infiitutions  of  Fergus,  ihe  fon  of  Arc  or  Arcath,  the 
firfl  king  of  Scots.  I  fhall  here  tranflate  the  paffage ;  in  fome  other  note  I  may 
probably  give  all  that  remains  of  the  poem.  Fergus  of  the  Inmdred  Jireams,  fon  of 
Arcetk  U'ho  fought  of  old:  thau  didjl  firf  retire  at  night;  wlitn  the  foe  rolled  before 
thee,  in  echoing  filds.  Nor  bending  in  ref  is  the  king  :  he  gathers  battles  in  his  fold. 
Fly,  fon  of  the  Jlranger;  with  morn  he  faall  rufh  abroad.  When,  or  by  whom,  this 
poem  was  written,  is  uncertain. 


324  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

and,  iiTuIng  forth  on  the  troubled  ocean,  mounts  the  car 
of  winds. 

Nor  fettled,  from  the  florm,  is  Erin's  fea  of  war  ! 
They  glitter,  beneath  the  moon,  and,  low-humming,  flill 
roll  on  the  field.  Alone  are  the  fleps  of  Cathmor,  before 
them,  on  the  heath.  He  hangs  forward,  with  all  his  arms, 
on  Morv'en's  flying  hoft.  Now  had  he  come  to  the  moffy 
cave,  where  Fiilan  lay  in  night.  One  tree  was  bent  above 
the  ftream,  which  glittered  over  the  rock.  There,  fhone 
to  the  moon  the  broken  fliield  of  Clatho's  fon  ;  and 
near  it,  on  grafs,  lay  hairy-footed  Bran  *.  He  had  miffed 
the  chief  on  Mora,  and  fearched  him  along  the  wind. 
He  thought  that  the  blue-eyed  hunter  flept ;  he  lay  upon 
his  fliieid.  No  blaft  came  over  the  heath,  unknown  to 
bounding  Bran. 

Cathmor  faw  the  white-breaded  dog  :  he  faw  the  bro- 
ken fliield.  Darknefs  is  blown  back  on  his  foul  ;  he  re- 
members the  falling  away  of  the  people.  "  They  come,  a 
ilream  ;  are  rolled  away  ;  another  race  fucceeds.  But 
fome  mark  the  fields,  as  they  pafs,  with  their  own  mighty 
names.  The  heaih,  through  dark-brown  years,  is  theirs : 
fome  blue  flream  winds  to  their  fame.  Of  thefe  be  the 
chief  of  Atha,  when  he  lays  him  down  on  earth.  Often 
may  the  voice  of  future  times  meet  Cathmor  in  the  air  ; 
when  he  flrides  from  wind  to  wind,  or  folds  himfelf  in 
the  wing  of  a  dorm." 

Gke£N  Erin  gathered  round  the  king,  to  hear  the  voice 

of 

*  I  remember  to  have  met  with  an  old  poem,  wherein  a  ftory  of  this  fort  is  very 
happily  introduced.  In  one  of  the  invafions  of  the  Danes,  Ullin-clundu,  a  confi- 
derable  chief,  on  the  weflern  coaft  of  Scotland,  was  killed  in  a  rencounter  with  a 
flying  party  of  the  tnt-my,  v  ho  had  landed,  at  no  great  diflance,  from  the  place  of 
his  refidcnce.  The  few  followers  who  attended  him  were  alfo  (lain.  The  young 
wife  of  Ullin-clundu,  who  had  not  heard  of  his  fall,  fearing  the  worft,  on  account 
of  his  long  delay,  alarmed  the  reW  of  his  tribe,  who  went  in  fearch  of  him  along 
the  fhoie.  They  did  not  find  him  ;  and  the  beautiful  widow  became  difconfolatc. 
At  length  be  was  difcovertd,  by  means  of  his  dog,  who  fat  on  a  lock  befide  the 
body,  for  lomc  days.  The  Jlanza  concerning  the  dog,  whofe  name  was  Du-chos, 
or  Blackfoot,  is  defcriptive. 

"  Dark-fidcd  Du-ihos  !  feet  of  wind  !  cold  is  thy  feat  on  rocks.  He  (the  dog) 
fees  the  roe  :  his  ears  are  high ;  and  half  he  bounds  away.  He  looks  around  ;  but 
Uliin  flceps;  he  droops  again  his  head.  The  winds  come  paft ;  dark  Du-chos 
thinks,  that  Uilin's  voice  is  there.  But  fiill  he  beholds  him  filent,  laid  amidft  the 
waving  heath.  Dark-fidcd  Du-chos,  his  voice  no  more  (hall  fend  thee  over  the 
heath," 


Book  VI.     ^   An  EPIC    POEM.  325 

j  of  his  power.    Their  joyful  faces  bend,  unequal,  forward, 

in  the  light  of  the  oak.    They  who  were  terrible  were 

I  removed  :   Lubar*  winds  again  in  their  hod.    Cathmor 

t  was  that  beam  from  heaven  which  Ihone  when  his  people 

'  were  dark.     He  was  honoured  in  the  midft.    Their  fouls 

rofe  with  ardour  around.    The  king  alone  no  gladnefs 

Ihewed  ;  no  ftranger  he  to  war  ! 

"  Why  is  the  king  fo  fad,"  faid  Malthos  eagle-eyed? 
"  Remains  there  a  foe  at  Lubar  ?  Lives  there  among 
them,  who  can  lift  the  fpear  ?  Not  fo  peaceful  was  thy 
father  Borbar-duthulf ,  king  of  fpears.  His  rage  was  a  fire 
that  always  burned :  his  joy  over  fallen  foes  whs  great. 
Three  days  feafled  the  grey-haired  hero,  when  he  heard 
that  Calmar  fell  :  Calmar,  who  aided  the  race  of  Ullin, 
from  Lara  of  the  ftreams.  Often  did  he  feel,  with  his 
hands,  the  fleel  which,  they  faid,  had  pierced  his  foe. 
He  felt  it,  with  his  hands,  for  Borbar-duthul's  eyes  had 
failed.  Yet  was  the  king  a  fun  to  his  friends  ;  a  gale  to 
lift  their  branches  round.  Joy  was  around  him  in  his 
halls  :  he  loved  the  fons  of  Bolga.  His  name  remains  in 
Atha,  like  the  awful  memory  of  ghofls,  whofe  prefence 
was  terrible,  but  they  blew  the  florm  away.     Now  let  the 

voices 

*  In  order  to  illudrate  this  palTage,  it  is  proper  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  fcenc 

I    of  the  two  preceding  battles.     Between  the  hills  of  Mora  and  Lona  lay  the   plain 

!    of  Moi-lena,  through  which  ran  the  river  Lubar.     The  firft  battle,  wherein  Gaul, 

the  fon  of  Mornl,  commanded  on  the  Caledonian  fide,  was- fought  on  the  banks  of 

Lubar.     As  there  was  little  advantage  obtained,  on  either  fide,  the  armies,  after 

the  battle,  retained  their  former  pofitions. 

;        In  the  fecond  battle,  wherein  Fillan  commanded,  the  Irifh,  after  the  fall  of 

'    Foldath,  were  driven  up  the  hill  of  Lona ;  but  upon  the  coming  of  Cathmor  to 

their  aid,  they  regained  their  former  lituation,  and  drove  back  the  Caledonians,  in 

their  turn  ;  fo  that  Lubar  winded  again  in  their  hojl. 

^  Borbar-duthul,  the  father  of  Cathmor,  was  the  brother  of  that  Colc-uUa,  who 
is  faid,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  book,  to  have  rebelled  againft  Cormac  king 
of  Ireland.  Borbar-duthul  feems  to  have  retained  all  the  prejudice  of  his  family 
,  againft  the  fuccefhon  of  the  polteiity  of  Couar,  on  the  Irifh  throne.  From  this 
fliort  epifode  we  learn  fome  fafts  which  tend  to  throw  light  on  tke  hiftory  of  the 
times.  It  appears,  that,  when  Swaran  invaded  Iieland,  he  was  only  oppofcd  by 
the  Cacl,  who  poffcfTed  Ulfler,  and  the  north  of  that  Ifland.  Calmar,  the  fon  of 
Matha,  whole  gallant  behaviour  and  death  are  related  in  the  third  book  of  Fingal, 
was  the  only  chief  of  the  race  of  the  Fii-bolg,  that  joined  the  Cael,  or  Irilh  Cale- 
donians, during  the  invafion  of  Swaian.  The  indecent  joy,  which  Borbar-duthul 
expreffed,  upon  the  death  of  Calmar,  is  well  fuiced  with  that  fpirit  of  revenge, 
which  fubfifted,  univerfally,  in  every  country  where  the  feudal  fyflem  was  efla- 
biiflied.  It  would  appear  that  fome  perfon  had  carried  to  Borbar-duthul  that  wea- 
i    pon,  with  which,  it  was  pretended,  Calmar  had  been  killed. 


325 


T    E    M    O    R    A: 


voices*  of  Erin  raife  the  foul  of  the  king  ;  he  that  fhonc 
when  war  was  dark,  and  laid  the  mighty  low.     Fonar,  | 
from  that  grey-browed  rock,  pour  the  tale  of  other  times :  ' 
pour  it  on  wide-lkirted  Erin,  as  it  fettles  round.'* 

"  To  me,"  faid  Cathmor,  "  no  fong  Ihall  rife ;  nor 
Fonar  fit  on  the  rock  of  Lubar.  The  mighty  there  are 
laid  low.  Difturb  not  their  rulhing  ghofts.  Far,  Malthos,  ; 
far  remove  the  found  of  Erin's  fong.  I  rejoice  not  over 
the  foe,  when  he  ceafes  to  lift  the  fpear.  With  morning 
we  pour  our  flrength  abroad.  Fingal  is  wakened  on  his 
echoing  hill." 

Like  waves,  blown  back  by  fudden  winds,  Erin  retir- 
ed, at  the  voice  of  the  king.     Deep-rolled  into  the  field  , 
of  night,  they  fpread  their  humming  tribes.    Beneath  his 
own  tree,  at  intervals,  each  f  bard  fat  down  with  his  , 
harp.    They  raifed  the  fong,  and  touched  the  ftring,  each  ' 
to  the  chief  he  loved.     Before  a  burning  oak  Sul-malla 
touched,  at  times,  the  harp.    She  touched  the  harp,  and 
heard,   between,  the  breezes  in  her  hair.     In  darknefs  . 
near,  lay  the  king  of  Atha,  beneath  an  aged  tree.    The 
beam  of  the  oak  was  turned  from  him  ;  he  faw  the  maid, 
but  v/as  not  feen.     His  foul  poured  forth,  in  fecret,  when 

he  , 

*  The  voices  of  Erin,  a  poetical  exprelTion  for  the  bards  of  Ireland.  j 

+  Notonlv  the  kings,  but  every  petty  chief,  had  anciently  their  bards  attending     ' 
them,  in  the  field  ;  and  th  'ie  bards,  in  proportion  to  the  power  of  the  chiefs,  who    j 
retair.ed  them,  had  a  number  of  inferior  bards  in  their  train.     Upon  folemn  occa- 
fions,  all  the  bards,  in  the  army,  would  join  in  one  choius:  either  when  they  cele- 
brated their  viftories,  or  lainented  the  death  of  a  perfon,  worthy  and  renowned, 
{lain  in  the  war.    The  words  were  of  the  compofition  of  the  arch-bard,  retained  by    j 
the  king  himfelf,  who  generally  attained  to  that  high  office  on  account  of  hisfupe-    j 
rior  genius  for  poetry.     As  the  perfons  of  the  bards  were  facred,  and  the  emolu-  -  i 
ments  of  their  office  confiderable,  the  order,  in  fucceeding  tiines,  became  very  nu-    I 
merous  and  infolent.     It  would  appear,  th^t,  after  the  introduttion  of  Chriflianily,    ( 
fome  ferved  in  the  double  capacity  of  bards  and  clergymen.     It  was,  from  this  cir-    ■ 
rumftance,  thatthev  had  the  name  of  Chlere,  which  is,  probably,  derived  from  the     i 
Latin  Clsricus.     The  Chlere,  be  their  name  derived  from  what  it  will,  became,   at 
laft,  a  putjiic  nuifance  ;  for,  taking  advantage  of  their  facred  character,  they  went 
about,  in  great  bodies,  and  Hved,  at  difcretion,  in  the  houfes  of  the  chiefs;  till 
another  party,  of  the  fame  order,  drove  them'  away  by  mere  dint  of  fatire.     Som£ 
of  the  indelicate  difputes  of  thefe  worthy  poetical  combatants  are  handed  down,  by 
tradition,  and  (hew  how  much  the  bards,  at  laft,  abufed  the  privileges,  whic'h  the 
admiration  of  their  countrymen  had  conferred  on  the  order.     It  was  this  infolent 
behaviour  that  induced  the  chiefs  to  retrench  their  number,  and  to  take  away  thofe 
privileges  which  they  were  no  longer  worthy  to  enjoy.     Their  indolence,  and  dif- 
pofition  to  lampoon,  extingmfhed  all  the  poetical  fervour,  which  diftinguilhcd  their 
prtdeceilors,  and  makes  us  the  lefs  regret  the  extinftion  of  the  order. 


Book  VI.        An  EPIC   POEM.  327 

he  beheld  her  fearful  eye.  "  But  battle  is  before  thee,  fon 
of  Borbar-duthul." 

Amidst  the  harp,  at  mtervals,  flie  liflened  whether  the 
warrior  flept.  Her  foul  was  up  :  flie  longed,  in  fecret, 
to  pour  her  own  fad  fong.  The  field  is  filent.  On  their 
wings,  the  blafls  of  night  retire.  The  bards  had  ceafed  j 
and  meteors  came,  red-winding  with  their  ghofts.  The 
Iky  grew  dark  :  the  forms  of  the  dead  were  blended  with 
the  clouds.  But  heedlefs  bends  the  daughter  of  Conmor, 
over  the  decaying  flame.  Thou  wert  alone  in  her  foul, 
car-borne  chief  of  Atha.  She  raifed  the  voice  of  the  fong, 
and  touched  the  harp  between. 

"  Clungalo  *  came  ;  (he  miffed  the  maid.  Where 
art  thou,  beam  of  light  ?  Hunters,  from  the  moffy  rock, 
faw  ye  the  blue-eyed  fair  ?  Are  her  fteps  on  graffy  Lumon; 
near  the  bed  of  roes  ?  Ah  me  !  I  behold  her  bow  in  the 
hall.    Where  art  thou,  beam  of  light  ? 

"  Cease -j-,  love  of  Conmor,  ceafe  ;  I  hear  thee  not  on 
the  ridgy  heath.  My  eye  is  turned  to  the  king,  whofe 
path  is  terrible  in  war  ;  he  for  whom  my  foul  is  up,  in 
the  feafon  of  my  refl:.  Deep-bofomed  in  war  he  ftands  ; 
he  beholds  me  not  from  his  cloud.  Why,  fun  of  Sul- 
malla,  dofl  thou  not  look  forth  ?  I  dwell  in  darknefs  here  ; 
wide  over  me  flies  the  fliadowy  mifl; ;  filled  with  dew  are 
my  locks.  Look  thou  from  thy  cloud,  O  fun  of  Sul- 
malla's  foul  i"  ************* 

*  Clun-galo,  the  wife  of  Conmor,  king  of  Inis-huna,  and  the  mother  of  Sul- 
malla.  She  is  here  reprefented,  as  miffing  her  daughter,  after  (he  had  fled  with 
Cathmor. 

f  Sul-malla  replies  to  the  fappofed  queflions  of  her  mother.  Towards  the  mid- 
dle of  t'.is  paragraph  (he  calls  Cathmor  tht  fun  of  her  f ml,  and  continues  the  me- 
taphor throughout.  This  book  ends,  we  may  fuppofc,  about  the  middle  of  the 
third  night  from  the  opening  of  the  poem. 


TEMORA 


T       E       M       O       R       A  : 


A  N 

EPIC        POEM. 
BOOK    VII. 


ARGUMENT. 


THIS  book  begins,  about  the  middle  of  the  third  night  from  the  opening  of  the 
poem.  The  poet  defcribes  a  kind  of  mift,  which  lole,  by  night,  from  the  lake! 
of  Lego,  and  was  the  ufual  refidence  of  the  fouls  of  the  dead,  during  the  in- 
terval between  their  deceafe  and  the  funeral  fong.  The  appearance  of  the  ghoft 
of  Fillan  above  the  cave  where  his  body  lay.  His  voice  comes  to  Fingal,  on  the 
rock  of  Cormul.  The  king  firikes  the  fiiield  of  Trcnmor,  which  was  an  infal- 
lible fign  of  his  appearing  in  arms  hlmfclf.  The  extraordinary  effeft  of  the  found 
of  the  fhield.  Sul-malla,  flatting  from  fleep,  awakes  Cathmor.  Their  affeflirtg 
difcourfe.  She  infifts  with  him,  to  fue  for  peace  ;  he  refolves  to  continue  the 
war.  He  direfls  her  to  retire  to  the  neighbouring  valley  of  Lona,  which  was 
the  refidence  of  an  old  Druid,  until  the  battle  of  the  next  day  (hould  be  over. 
He  awakes  his  army  with  the  found  of  his  fhield.  The  fhield  defcribcd.  Fonar, 
the  bard,  at  the  defire_of  Cathmor,  relates  the  fiift  fcttlement  of  the  Fir-bolg  in 
Ireland,  under  their  leader  Larthon.  Morning  comes.  Sul-malla  retires  to  the 
valley  of  Lona.     A  Lyric  fong  concludes  the  book, 

FROM  the  wood-fklrted  lakes  of  Lego,  afcend,  at 
times,  grey-bofomed  mifts  ;  when  the  gates  of  the 
•weft;  are  clofed,  on  the  fun's  eagle-eye.  Wide,  over  Lara's 
ftream,  is  poured  the  vapour  dark  and  deep  :  the  moon, 
like  a  dim  lliield,  is  fwimming  through  its  folds.  With 
this,  clothe  the  fpirits  of  old  their  fudden  geftures  on  the 
wind,  when  they  fl:ride,  from  blafl:  to  blaft,  along  the 
duiky  night.  Often,  blended  with  the  gale,  to  fome  war- 
rior's grave*  they  roll  the  mift,  a  grey  dwelling  to  his 
ghoft,  until  the  fongs  arife* 

T  t  A  SOUND- 

*  As  the  mift,  which  rofe  from  the  lake  of  Lego,  occafioncd  difeafes  and  death, 
the  bards  feigned  that  it  was  the  refidence  oi  the  ghofls  of  the  dcceafed,  during  the 
interval  between  their  death,  and  the  pronouncing  of  ih;  funeral  tlegy  over  theif 

tombs; 


330  T    E    M    O    R    A : 

A  SOUND  came  from  the  defart :  it  was  Conar,  king  of 
Inis-fail.  He  poured  his  mift  on  the  grave  of  Fillan,  at 
blue-winding  Lubar.  Dark  and  mournful  fat  the  ghoft, 
in  his  grey  ridge  of  fmoke.  The  blaft,  at  times,  rolled 
him  together  ;  but  the  form  returned  again.  It  returned, 
with  bending  eyes,  and  dark-winding  locks  of  mift. 

It  was  *  dark.  The  fleeping  hoft  were  ftill,  in  the 
fkirts  of  night.  The  flame  decayed,  on  the  hill  of  Fingal. 
The  king  lay  lonely  on  his  fliield  :  his  eyes  were  half- 
clofed  in  fleep.  The  voice  of  Fillan  came.  "  Sleeps  the 
hufband  of  Clatho  ?  Dwells  the  father  of  the  fallen  in  reft  ? 
Am  I  forgot  in  the  folds  of  darknefs  ;  lonely  in  the  fea- 
fon  of  night  ?'* 

"  Why  doft  thou  mix,"  faid  the  king,  "  with  the 
dreams  of  thy  father  ?  Can  I  forget  thee,  my  fon,  or  thy 
path  of  fire  in  the  field  ?  Not  fuch  come  the  deeds  of  the 
valiant  on  the  foul  of  Fingal.  They  are  not  there  a  beam 
of  lightning,  which  is  feen,  and  is  then  no  more.  I  re- 
member thee,  O  Fillan,  and  my  wrath  begins  to  rife.'* 

The  king  took  his  deathful  fpear,  and  ftruck  the  deeply- 
founding  fhield  ;  his  fnield,  that  hung  high,  in  night,  the 
difmal  fign  of  war  !  Gholts  fled  on  every  fide,  and  rolled 
their  gathered  forms  on  the  wind.  Thrice,  from  the 
winding  vale,  arofe  the  voice  of  deaths.  The  harps f  of 
the  bards,  untouched,  found  mournful  over  the  hill. 

He 

tombs;  for  it  was  not  allowable,  without  that  ceremony  wa3  petformed,  for  the 
fpirits  of  the  dead  to  mix  with  their  ancellors,  in  their  airy  halls.  It  was  the  bufi- 
nel's  of  the  fpirit  of  the  neareft  relation  to  the  deceafed,  to  take  the  mill  of  Lego, 
and  pour  it  over  the  grave.  We  find  here  Conar,  the  fon  of  Trenmor,  the  firft 
kina,  of  Ireland,  performing  this  office  for  Fillan,  as  it  was  in  the^aufe  of  the  family 
of  Conar,  that  that  hero  was  killed. 

*  1'he  following  is  the  lingular  fentiment  of  a  frigid  bard; 

"  More  pleafing  to  me  is  the  night  of  Cona,  dark-ftreaming  from  Oflian's  harp; 
more  pleafant  it  is  to  me,  than  a  whitc-bofomed  dweller  between  my  armsj  than  t 
fair-handed  daughter  of  heroes,  in  the  hour  of  reft." 

Tho'  tradition  is  not  very  fatisfafiory  concerning  the  hiftory  of  this  poet,  it  has 
taken  care  to  inform  us,  that  he  was  very  old  when  he  wrote  the  diftich,  a  circuin- 
Ifancc,  which  we  might  have  fuppofed,  without  the  aid  of  tradition," 

+  It  was  the  opinion  of  ancient  times,  that,  on  the  right  preceding  the  death  of 
a  pei  fon  worthy  and  renowned,  the  harps  of  thofe  bards,  who  were  retained  by  his 
family,  emitted  melancholy  founds.  This  was  attributed  to  the  light  touch  of 
ghojls;  who  were  fuppofed  to  have  a  fore-knowledge  of  events.  The  fame  opi- 
nion prevailed  long  in  the  north,  and  the  particular  found  was  called,  the  warning 
voice  of  the  dead.     The  vtice  of  death,  meniioned  la  the  precetling  fentence,  was  of 

a  dif. 


Book  VII.        An   EPIC   POEM.  331 

He  ftruck  again  the  (hield ;  battles  rofe  in  the  dreams 
of  his  hoft.  The  wide-tumbling  ftrife  is  gleaming  over 
their  fouls.  Blue-fliielded  kings  defcend  to  war.  Back- 
ward-looking armies  fly ;  and  mighty  deeds  are  half-hid, 
in  the  bright  gleams  of  Heel. 

But  when  the  third  found  arofe,  deer  ftarted  from  the 
clefts  of  their  rocks.  The  fcreams  of  fowl  are  heard,  in 
the  defart,  as  each  flew,  frighted,  on  his  blaft.  The  Tons 
of  Selma  half-rofe,  and  half-aflTumed  their  fpears.  But 
filence  rolled  back  on  the  hoil ;  they  knew  the  fliield  .of 
the  king.  Sleep  returned  to  their  eyes  j  the  held  was  dark 
and  ftill. 

No  ileep  was  thine  in  darknefs,  blue-eyed  daughter  of 
Conmor  !  Sul-malla  heard  the  dreadful  fnield,  and  rofe, 
amid  the  night.  Her  flieps  are  towards  the  king  of  x^tha. 
"  Can  danger  fhake  his  daring  foul  !"  In  doubt,  flie 
{lands,  with  bending  eyes.    Heaven  burns  with  all  its  ftars. 

Again  the  fliield  refounds !  She  ruflied.  She  flopt. 
Her  voice  half-rofe.  It  failed.  She  faw  him,  amidd  his 
arms,  that  gleamed  to  heaven's  fire.  She  faw  him  dim  in 
his  locks,  that  rofe  to  nightly  wind.  Away,  for  fear,  flie 
turned  her  fleps.  "  Why  fhould  the  king  of  Erin  awake? 
Thou  art  not  a  dream  to  his  reil,  daughter  of  Inis-huna." 

More  dreadful  rings  the  fliield.  Sul-malla  ftarts.  Her 
helmet  falls.  Loud-echoes  Lubar's  rock,  as  over  it  roils 
the  Heel.  Burfting  from  the  dreams  of  night,  Cathmor 
half-rofe,  beneath  his  tree.  He  faw  the  form  of  the  maid 
above  him,  on  the  rock.  A  red  flar,  with  twinkling  beam, 
looked  through  her  floating  hair. 

"  Who  comes  through  night  to  Cathmor,  in  the  feafon 
of  his  dreams  ?  Bring'ft;  thou  ought  of  war  ?  Who  art 
thou,  fon  of  night  ?  Stand'ft  thou  before  me,  a  form  of 
the  times  of  old  ?  A  voice  from  the  fold  of  a  cloud,  to 
warn  m§  of  the  danger  of  Erin  ?'* 

"  Nor  lonely  fcoat  am  I,  nor  voice  from  folded  cloud," 
flie  faid  ;  "  but  I  warn  thee  of  the  danger  of  Erin.    Dofl: 

thou 

a  different  kind.     Each  perfon  was  fuppofed  to  have  an  attendant  fpirit,  who  af- 
fumed  his  form  and  voice,  on  the  r.ight  preceding  his  death,  and  appe.ired,  to  fome, 
■  in  the  attitude,  in  which  the  perfon  was  to  die.    The  voices  of  death  were  the  fore- 
boding fhrieks  of  thofe  fpirits. 


332  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

thou  hear  that  found  ?  It  is  not  the  feeble,  king  of  Atha, 
that  rolls  his  figns  on  night." 

"  Let  the  warrior  roll  his  figns,"  he  replied :  "  to 
Cathmor  they  are  the  founds  of  harps.  My  joy  is  great, 
voice  of  night,  and  burns  over  all  my  thoughts.  This  is 
the  mulic  of  kings,  on  lonely  hills,  by  night  j  when  they 
light  their  daring  fouls,  the  fons  of  mighty  deeds  !  The 
feeble  dwell  alone,  In  the  valley  of  the  breeze  ;  where 
mills  lift  their  niorning  Ikirts,  from  the  blue-winding 
flreams." 

"  Not  feeble,  king  of  men,  were  they,  the  fathers  of 
my  race.  They  dwelt  in  the  folds  of  battle,  in  their  dif- 
tant  lands.  Yet  delights  not  my  foul  in  the  figns  of  death! 
He  *  who  never  yields  comes  forth  :  O  fend  the  bard  of 
peace  !" 

LiKK  a  dropping  rock.  In  the  defart,  flood  Cathmor  in 
his  tears.  Her  voice  came,  a  breeze,  on  his  foul,  and 
waked  the  memory  of  her  land  ;  where  flie  dwelt  by  her 
peaceful  itrcams,  before  he  came  to  the  war  of  Conmor. 

'-  Daughter  of  flrangers,"  he  faid  ;  (fhe  trembling 
turned  away)  "  long  have  I  marked  thee  in  thy  fteel, 
young  pine  of  Inis-huna.  But  my  foul,  I  faid.  Is  folded 
in  a  llorm.  Why  fliould  that  beam  arife,  till  my  fleps  re- 
turn in  peace  ?  Have  I  been  pale  in  thy  prefence,  as  thou 
bidfl  me  to  fear  the  king  ?  The  time  of  danger,  O  maid, 
is  the  feafon  of  my  foul;  for  then  it  fwells  a  mighty  flream, 
and  rolls  me  on  the  foe. 

"  Beneath  the  mofs-covered  rock  of  Lona,  near  his 
own  loud  flream ;  grey  in  his  locks  of  age,  dwells  Clon- 
mal  f  king  of  harps.  Above  him  Is  his  echoing  tree,  and 
the  dun-bounding  of  roes.  The  nolfe  of  our  ftrife  reaches 
his  ear,  as  he  bends  in  the  thoughts  of  years.    There  let 

thy 

*  Fingal  is  faid  to  have  never  been  overcome  in  battle.  From  this  proceeded 
that  title  of  honour  which  is  always  beRowed  on  him  in  tradition,  Ficn  gal  na  huai\ 
Fingal  cf  viclories.  In  a  poem,  jufl;  now  in  my  hands,  which  celebrates  fome  of 
the  gr^at  afiions  of  Arthur,  the  famous  Britifli  hero,  that  appellation  is  often  be- 
Hov.ed  on  him.  The  poem,  from  the  phraieology,  appears  to  be  ancient;  and  is, 
{>erhaps,  though  that  is  not  iiientioned,  a  tranfjation  from  the  Welfh  language. 

+  Claon-mal,  croohd.  eye  broru.  From  the  retired  life  of  this  perfon,  is  infinua- 
icd,  that  he  was  of  the  order  of  the  Druids;  which  fuppofition  is  not,  at  all,  inva- 
lidated by  the  appellation  of '';»?j  (/ /kr/'J,  here  bcftowed  on  himi  for  all  agree 
th:ii  the  bards  were  of  the  number  of  the  Druids  originally. 


Book  VII.        An  EPIC   POEM.  333 

thy  refl:  be,  Sul-malla,  until  our  battle  ceafe :  until  I  re- 
turn, in  my  arms,  from  the  fkirts  of  the  evening  mift, 
that  rifes,  on  Lona,  round  the  dwelling  of  my  love." 

A  LIGHT  fell  on  the  foul  of  the  maid  ;  it  rofe  kindled 
before  the  king.  She  turned  her  face  to  Cathrnor,  from 
amidll  her  waving  locks.  "  Sooner  fliall  the  eagle  of  hea- 
ven be  torn  from  the  flream  of  his  roaring  wind,  when 
he  fees  the  dun  prey  before  him,  the  young  fons  of  the 
bounding  roe,  than  thou,  O  Cathrnor,  be  turned  from 
the  (Irife  of  renown.  Soon  may  I  fee  thee,  warrior,  from 
the  (kirts  of  the  evening  mift,  when  it  is  rolled  around 
me,  on  Lona  of  the  ftreams.  While  yet  thou  art  diilant 
far,  ftrike,  Cathmor,  ftrike  the  fliield,  that  joy  may  return 
to  my  darkened  foul,  as  I  lean  on  the  moffy  rock.  But  if 
thou  Ihouldft  fall,  I  am  in  the  land  of  llrangers :  O  fend 
thy  voice,  from  thy  cloud,  to  the  maid  of  Inis-huna." 

"  Young  branch  of  green-headed  Lumon,  why  doft 
thou  fhake  in  the  ftorm?  Often  has  Cathmor  returned, 
from  darkly-rolling  wars.  The  darts  of  death  are  but  hail 
to  me  :  they  have  often  rattled  along  my  fhield.  I  have 
rifen  brightened  from  battle,  like  a  meteor  from  a  ftormy 
cloud.  Return  not,  fair  beam,  from  thy  vale,  when  the 
roar  of  battle  grows.  Then  might  the  foe  efcape,  as 
from  my  fathers  of  old. 

"They  told  to  Son-mor*,  of  Clunarf,  who  was  flain 
by  Cormac  in  fight.  Three  days  darkened  Son-mor,  over 
his  brother's  fall.  His  fpoufe  beheld  the  filent  king,  and 
forefaw  his  fteps  to  war.  She  prepared  the  bov/,  in  iecret, 
to  attend  her  blue-fliielded  hero.  To  her  dwelt  darkneis 
at  Atha,  when  he  was  not  there.  From  their  hundred 
ftreams,  by  night,  poured  down  the  fons  of  Alnecma. 
They  had  heard  the  fliield  of  the  king,  and  their  rage  arofe. 
In  clanging  arms,  they  moved  along,  towards  Ullin  of  the 
groves.  Son-mor  ftruck  his  fliield,  at  times,  the  leader  of 
the  war. 

"Far 

*  Son-mor,  tall  handfcme  man.  He  was  the  father  of  Borbar-dutliul,  chief  of 
^tha,  and  grandfailier  to  Cathmor  himfelf. 

+  Cluan-cr,  man  of  the  Jie Id.  This  cliief  was  killed  in  battle  by  Cormac  Mac- 
Conar,  kinj  of  Ireland,  the  father  of  Ros-crana,  the  firft  wife  of  Fingal.  The  fto- 
V  is  alluded  to  in  fomc  ancient  poems. 


334  T    E    M    O    R    A : 

*'  Far  behind  followed  Sul-allin*,  over  the  flreamy 
hills.  She  was  a  light  on  the  mountain,  when  they  croiTed 
the  vale  below.  Her  fteps  were  (lately  on  the  vale,  when 
they  rofe  on  the  mofly  hill.  She  feared  to  approach  the 
king,  who  left  her  in  echoing  Atha.  But  when  the  roar  of 
battle  rofe  :  when  hoft  was  rolled  on  hod  :  when  Son-mor 
burnt,  like  the  fire  of  heaven  in  clouds  ;  with  her  fpread- 
ing  hair  came  Sul-allin,  for  {he  trembled  for  her  king. 
He  ftopt  the  rufhing  flrife,  to  fave  the  love  of  heroes. 
The  foe  fled  by  night  :  Clunar  flept  without  his  blood  ; 
the  blood  v/hich  ought  to  be  poured  upon  the  warrior's 
tomb. 

"  Nor  rofe  the  rage  of  Son-mor;  but  his  days  were 
filent  and  dark.  Sul-allin  wandered,  by  her  grey  ftreams, 
with  her  tearful  eyes.  Often  did  fhe  look  on  the  hero,  when 
he  was  folded  in  his  thoughts.  But  fhe  fhrunk  from  his 
eyes,  and  turned  her  lone  fteps  away.  Battles  rofe,  like  a 
tempeft,  and  drove  the  mid  from  his  foul.  He  beheld, 
with  joy,  her  fteps  in  the  hall,  and  the  white-riling  of  her 
hands  on  the  harp." 

-j-  In  his  arms  ftrode  the  chief  of  Atha,  to  where  his 
fliield  hung,  high,  in  night ;  high  on  a  moify  bough,  over 
Lubar's  ftreamy  roar.  Seven  bolTes  rofe  on  the  fhield  ; 
the  feven  voices  of  the  king,  which  his  warriors  received, 
from  the  wind,  and  marked  over  all  their  tribes. 

On  each  bofs  is  placed  a  ftar  of  night :  Canmathon, 
with  beams  unfliorn ;  Col-derna,  rifmg  from  a  cloud  ; 
Uloicho,  robed  in  mift  ;  and  the  foft  beam  of  Cathlin, 
glittering  on  a  rock.  Smiling,  on  its  own  blue  wave, 
Reldurath  half-fmks  its  weftern  light.  The  red  eye  of 
Berthin  looks,  through  a  grove,  on  th«  hunter,  as  he  re- 
turns, by  night,  with  the  fpoils  of  the  bounding  roe. 
Wide,  in  the  midft,  arofe  the  cloudlefs  beams  of  Ton- 

thena, 

*  Suil-alluin,  kaiitifid;  the  wife  of  Son-mor. 

t  To  avoid  inuhiplying  notes,  1  fliall  give  here  the  fignification  of  the  names  of 
the  ftars,' engraved  on  the  fliicld.  Ccan-mathon,  head  of  t/ie  dear.  Col-dcim,  Jlant 
and  Jfiarp  beam.  Ul-oicho,  nder  of  night.  Cathlin,  beam  of  the  wave.  Reul- 
dursiih,  far  of  t/ie  ttvi/ig/it.  Berihin,  _^?y  of  the  hill.  Ton-thena,  7netcor  of  the 
waves.  Thefe  etymologies,  excepting  that  of  Cean-mathon.  are  pretty  exaft. 
Of  it  I  am  not  fo  certain  ;  for  it  is  not  very  probable,  that  the  Fir-bolg  had  diftin- 
guiflied  a  conlk'Ikuion,  fo  very  cai!y  as  the  days  of  Lirthon,  by  the  name  of  the 
bear. 


Book  VII.        An  EPIC   POEM.  335 

thena,  that  flar  which  looked,  by  night,  on  the  coiirfe  of 
the  fea-toHed  Larthon :  Larthon,  the  firfl  of  Bolga's  race 
who  travelled  on  the  winds  *.  White-bofomed  fpread 
the  fails  of  the  king,  towards  ftreamy  Inis-fail ;  dun 
night  was  rolled  before  him,  with  its  fkirts  of  mift.  Un- 
conftant  blew  the  winds,  and  rolled  him  from  wave  to 
wave.  Then  rofe  the  fiery-haired  Ton-thena,  and  fmiled 
from  her  parted  c^oud.  Larthonf  bleifed  the  well-known 
beam,  as  it  faint-gleamed  on  the  deep. 

Beneath  the  fpear  of  Cathmor,  rofe  that  voice  which 
awakes  the  bards.  They  came,  dark-winding,  from  every 
fide  ;  each  with  the  found  of  his  harp.  Before  them  re- 
joiced the  king,  as  the  traveller,  in  the  day  of  the  fun  ; 
when  he  hears,  far-rolling  around,  the  murmur  of  molTy 
ftreams  ;  dreams  that  burft,  in  the  defart,  from  the  rock 
of  roes. 

"  Why,"  faid  Fonar,  "  hear  we  the  voice  of  the  king, 
in  the  feafon  of  his  reft  ?  Were  the  dim  forms  of  thy  fa- 
thers benching  in  thy  dreams  ?  Perhaps  they  ftand  on  that 
cloud,  and  wait  for  Fonar's  fong  :  often  they  come  to  the 
fields  where  their  fons  are  to  lift  the  fpear.  Or  fliall  our 
voice  arife  for  him  who  lifts  the  fpear  no  m.ore  ;  he  that 
confumed  the  field,  from  Moma  of  the  groves  ?'* 

"  Not  forgot  is  that  cloud  in  war,  bard  of  other  times. 
High  (hall  his  tomb  rife,  on  Moi-lena,  the  dwelling  of  re- 
nown. 

*  To  travel  on  the  winds,  a  poetical  expreffion  for  failing. 

f  Larihoa  is  compounded  oi  Lear,  fea,  and  tkon,  wave.  This  name  was  given 
to  the  chief  of  the  firft  colony  of  the  Fir-bolg,  who  fettled  in  Ireland,  on  account 
of  his  knowledge  in  navigation.  A  part  of  an  old  poem  is  ftill  extant,  concerning 
this  hero.  It  abounds  with  thofe  romantic  fables  of  giants  and  magicians,  which 
diftinguifhed  the  compofitionsof  the  lefs  ancient  bards.  The  del'ciiptior.s,  contain- 
ed in  it,  aie  ingenious,  and  proportionable  to  the  magnitude  of  the  perlbns  intro- 
duced ;  but,  being  uimatural,  they  are  infipid  and  tedious.  Had  the  bard  kept 
within  the  bounds  of  probability,  his  genius  was  far  from  being  contemptible.  The 
exordium  of  his  poem  is  not  deilitute  of  merit ;  but  it  is  the  only  part  of  it,  that  I 
think  worthy  of  being  prefented  to  the  reader. 

"  Who  firft  fent  the  black  (hip,  through  ocean,  like  a  whale  through  the  buifting 
of  foam  ?  Look,  from  thy  darknefs,  on  Croaath,  Offian  of  the  harps  of  old  1  Send 
thy  light  on  the  blue-rolli.-ig  waters,  that  1  may  behold  the  kmg.  I  fee  him  dark 
in  his  own  fhcU  of  oak!  fea-tofled  Larthon,  thy  foul  is  ftrong.  It  is  cireicfs  as  the 
Wind  of  thy  fails ;  as  the  wave  that  rolls  by  thy  fide.  But  the  filent  gr.-en  iiie  is  be- 
fore thee,  with  its  fons,  who  are  tall  as  woody  Lumon;  Lumon  which  fer.ds,  front 
its  top,  a  thoufand  flrcains,  white-wandering  down  its  fides." 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  for  the  credit  of  this  bard,  to  tranflate  no  more  of  this  poem, 
for  the  continuation  of  his  dcfciiption  of  the  Iiilh  giants  betrays  his  want  of  judi;- 
ment. 


33^  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

iiown.  But,  now,  roll  back  my  foul  to  the  times  of  liiy 
fathers ;  to  the  years  when  firft  they  rofe  on  Inis-huna's 
waves.  Nor  alone  pleafant  to  Cathmor  is  the  remembrance 
of  wood-covered  Lumon  :  Lumon  of  the  flreams,  the 
dwelling  of  white-bofomed  maids.'* 

*"  Lumon  of  the  dreams,  thou  rifeft  on  Fonar's  foul ! 
Thy  fun  is  on  thy  fide,  on  the  rocks  of  thy  bending  trees. 
The  dun  roe  is  feen  from  thy  furze  :  the  deer  lifts  his 
branchy  head  ;  for  he  fees,  at  times,  the  houndj  on  the 
half-covered  heath.  Slow,  on  the  vale,  are  the  fleps  of 
maids,  the  white-armed  daughters  of  the  bow  :  they  lift 
their  blue  eyes  to  the  hill,  from  amidfl  their  wandering 
locks.  Not  there  is  the  ftride  of  Larthon,  chief  of  Inis- 
huna.  He  mounts  the  wave  on  his  own  dark  oak,  in  Clu- 
ba's  ridgy  bay  :  that  oak  which  he  cut  from  Lumon,  to 
bound  along  the  fea.  The  maids  turn  their  eyes  away, 
left  the  king  (hould  be  lowly-laid ;  for  never  had  they  feen 
a  fhip,  dark  rider  of  the  wave ! 

"  Now  he  dares  to  call  the  winds,  and  to  mix  with  the 
mift  of  ocean.  Blue  Inis-fail  rofe,  in  fmoke ;  but  dark- 
fkirted  night  came  down.  The  fons  of  Bolga  feared.  The 
fiery  haired  Ton-the'na  rofe.  Culbin's  bay  received  the 
fhip,  in  the  bofom  of  its  echoing  woods.  There,  iflued  a 
ftream,  from  Duthuma's  horrid  cave;  where  fpirits  gleam- 
ed, at  times,  with  their  half-finiflied  forms. 

"  Dreams  defcended  on  Larthon:  he  faw  feven  fpi- 
rits of  his  fathers.  He  heard  their  half-formed  words,  and 
dimly  beheld  the  times  to  come.  He  beheld  the  kings  of 
Atha,  the  fons  of  future  days.  They  led  their  hofts,  along' 
the  field,  like  ridges  of  mift,  which  winds  pour,  in  au- 
tumn, over  Atha  of  the  groves. 

"  Larthon  raifed  the  hall  of  Samla  f,  to  the  mufic 
of  the  harp.  He  went  forth  to  the  roes  of  Erin,  to  their 
wonted  ftreams.  Nor  did  he  forget  green-headed  Lumon : 
he  often  bounded  over  his  feas,  to  v/here  white-handed 

Flathal 

*  Lumon  -vas  a  hill,  in  Inis-huna,  near  the  refidence  of  Sul-malla.  This  epi* 
fode  has  an  immediate  connexion  with  what  is  faid  of  Larthon,  in  the  defcription 
of  Cathniot's  Ihicld. 

f  Samla,  apparitwns,  fo  called  from  the  vifion  of  Larthon,  concerning  his  pof* 
tcritv. 


Book  VII.        An  EPIC   POEM.  337 

Flathal  *  looked  from  the  hill  of  roes.  Lumon  of  thd 
foamy  ftreams,  thou  rifeft  on  Fonar's  foul  !'* 

Morning  pours  from  the  eaft.  The  mifty  heads  of 
the  mountains  rife.  Valleys  fhew,  on  every  fide,  the  grey- 
winding  of  their  dreams.  His  hod  heard  the  (hield  of 
Cathmor :  at  once  they  rofe  around  ;.  like  a  crowded  fea, 
when  firfl  it  feels  the  wings  of  the  wind.  The  waves 
know  not  whither  to  roll  ;  they  lift  their  troubled  heads. 

Sad  and  flow  retired  Sul-malla  to  Lona  of  the  flreams* 
She  went,  and  often  turned;  her  blue-eyes  rolled  in  tears* 
But  when  flie  came  to  the  rock,  that  darkly-covered  Lo-- 
na's  vale,  flie  looked,  from  her  burfling  foul,  on  the  kingj 
and  funk,  at  once,  behind. 

Son  of  Alpin,  ftrike  the  ftring.  Is  there  aught  of  joy 
in  the  harp  ?  Pour  it  then  on  the  foul  of  OfTian:  it  is  fold- 
ed in  mill.  I  hear  thee,  O  bard,  in  my  night.  But  ceafe 
the  lightly-trembling  found.  The  joy  of  grief  belongs  to 
OlTian,  amidil  his  dark-brown  years. 

Green  thorn  of  the  hill  of  ghofts,  that  Ihakeft  thy  head 
to  nightly  winds !  I  hear  no  found  in  thee ;  is  there  no 
fpirit's  windy  fl^:irt  now  ruflling  in  thy  leaves  ?  Often  are 
the  iteps  of  the  dead,  in  the  dark-eddying  blafts ;  when 
the  moon,  a  dun  flrield,  from  the  eaft,  is  rolled  along  the 
fky. 

Ullin,  Carril,  and  Ryno,  voices  of  the  days  of  old  ^ 
Let  me  hear  you,  while  yet  it  is  dark,  to  pleafe  and  awake 
my  foul.  I  hear  you  not,  ye  fons  of  fong.  In  what  hall 
of  the  clouds  is  your  reft  ?  Do  you  touch  the  fhadowy 
harp,  robed  with  morning  mift,  where  the  ruftling  fun 
comes  forth  from  his  green-headed  waves  ? 

+  Flathal,  heavenly,  exqiiifitdy  beautiful.     She  was  the  wife  of  Larthon. 


Uu  TEMORA: 


I 


T       E       M       O       R       A 

A  N 

EPIC         POEM. 
BOOK     VIII. . 


ARGUMENT. 

THE  fourth  morning,  from  the  opening  of  the  poem,  comes  on.  Fingal  fliU  con- 
tinuing in  the  place,  to  which  he  had  retired  on  the  preceding  night,  is  feen, 
at  intervals,  through  the  mifl,  which  covered  the  rock  of  Cormul.  The  defcent 
of  the  king  is  defcribed.  He  orders  Gaul,  Dermid,  and  Carril  the  bard,  to  go 
to  the  valley  of  Cluna,  and  conduft,  from  thence,  to  the  Caledonian  army,  Fe- 
rad-artho,  the  fon  of  Cairbre,  the  only  perfon  remaining  of  the  family  of  Conar, 
the  firft  king  of  Ireland.  The  king  takes  the  command  of  the  army,  and  pre- 
pares for  battle.  Marching  towards  the  enemy,  he  comes  to  the  cave  of  Lubar, 
where  the  body  of  Fillan  lay.  Upon  feeing  his  dog  Bran,  who  lay  at  the  en- 
trance of  the  cave,  his  grief  returns.  Cathmor  arranges  the  Irifh  army  in  order 
of  battle.  The  appearance  of  that  hero.  The  general  conflifl  is  defcribed.  The 
aflions  of  Fingal  and  Cathmor.  A  florm.  The  total  rout  of  the  Fir-bolg.  The 
two  kings  engage,  in  a  column  of  mift,  on  the  banks  of  Lubar.  Their  attitude 
and  conference  after  the  combat.  The  death  of  Cathmor.  Fingal  refigns  the 
fpear  of  Trenvior  to  Oflian.  The  ceremonies  obferved  on  that  occafion.  The 
fpirit  of  Cathmor,  in  the  mean  time,  appears  to  Sul-malla,  in  the  valley  of 
Lona.  Her  forrow.  Evening  comes  on.  A  feaft  is  prepared.  The  coming 
of  Ferad-artho  is  announced  by  the  fongs  of  an  hundred  bards.  The  poem  clof- 
cs  with  a  fpeech  of  Fingal. 

AS  when  the  wintry  winds  have  feized  the  waves  of 
the  mountain-lake,  have  feized  them,  in  ftormy 
night,  and  clothed  them  over  with  ice ;  white,  to  the 
hunter's  early  eye,  the  billows  feem  to  roll.  He  turns  his 
ear  to  the  found  of  each  unequal  ridge.  But  each  is  fi- 
lent,  gleaming,  ftrewn  with  bows  and  tufts  of  grafs,  which 
fhake  and  whiftle  to  the  wind,  over  their  grey  feats  of  froft. 
So  filent  fhone  to  the  morning  the  ridges  of  Morven's  hofl, 
as  each  warrior  looked  up  from  his  helmet,  towards  the;, 

hill. 


340 


T    E    M    O    R    A 


hill  of  the  king ;  the  cloud-covered  hill  of  Fingal,  where 
he  flrode,  in  the  folds  of  mift.  At  times  is  the  hero  feen, 
greatly  dim,  in  all  his  arms.  From  thought  to  thought 
rolled  the  war,  along  his  mighty  foul. 

Now  is  the  coming  forth  of  the  king.  Firfl  appeared 
the  fword  of  Luno  ;  the  fpear  half-iffuing  from  a  cloud, 
the  fhield  ilill  dim  in  mift.  But  when  the  ftride  of  the 
king  came  abroad,  with  all  his  grey,  dewy  locks  in  the 
v/ind  5  then  rofe  the  fliouts  of  his  hoft,  over  every  moving 
tribe.  They  gathered,  gleaming,  round,  with  all  their 
echoing  fhields.  So  rife  the  green  feas  round  a  fpirit, 
that  comes  down  from  the  fqually  wind.  The  traveller 
hears  the  found  afar,  and  lifts  his  head  over  the  rock.  He 
looks  on  the  troubled  bay,  and  thinks  he  dimly  fees  the 
form.  The  waves  fport,  unwieldy,  round,  with  all  their 
backs  of  foam. 

Far-distant  ftood  the  fon  of  Morni,  Duthno's  race, 
and  Cona's  bard.  "We  ftood  far-diftant;  each  beneath  his~ 
tree.  We  fhunned  the  eyes  of  the  king ;  we  had  not  con- 
quered in  the  field.  A  little  ftream  rolled  at  my  feet :  I 
touched  its  light  wave,  with  my  fpear :  I  touched  it  with 
my  fpear  ;  nor  there  was  the  foul  of  OfTian.  It  darkly  rofe, 
from  thought  to  thought,  and  fent  abroad  the  figh. 

"  Son  of  Morni,"  faid  the  king,  "  Dermid,  hunter  of 
roes!  why  are  ye  dark,  like  two  rocks,  each  with  its  trick- 
ling waters  ?  No  v/rath  gathers  on  Fingal's  foul,  againft 
the  chiefs  of  men.  Ye  are  my  ftrength  in  battle  j  the  kind^ 
ling  of  my  joy  in  peace.  My  early  voice  has  been  a  plea- 
fant  gale  to  your  ears,  when  Fillan  prepared  the  bow.  The 
fon  of  Fingal  is  not  here,  nor  yet  the  chace  of  the  bound- 
ing roes.  But  why  fhould  the  breakers  of  fliields  ftand, 
darkened,  far  away  ?" 

Tall,  they  ftrode  towards  the  king  ;  they  faw  him 
turned  to  Mora's  wind.  His  tears  came  down,  for  his 
blue-eyed  fon,  who  flept  in  the  cave  of  ftreams.  But  he 
brigluened  before  them,  and  fpoke  to  the  broad-fliielded 
kings. 

"  Crommal,  with  woody  rocks,  and  mifty  top,  the 
field  of  winds,  pours  forth,  to  the  fight,  blue  Lubar's  ' 
ilreamy  roar.    Behind  it  rolls  clear-winding  Lavath,  in 

the 


Book  VIII.        An  EPIC    POEM.  341 

the  ilill  vale  of  the  deer.  A  cave  is  dark  in  a  rock:  above 
it  llrong-winged  eagles  dwell ;  broad-headed  oal*L5,  before 
it,  found  in  China's  wind.  Within,  in  his  locks  of  youth, 
is  Ferad-artho*,  blue-eyed  king,  the  fon  of  broad-fhield- 
ed  Cairbar,  from  Ullin  of  the  roes.  He  liltens  to  the 
voice  of  Condan,  as,  grey,  he  bends  in  feeble  light.  He 
lillens,  for  his  foes  dwell  in  the  echoing  halls  of  Temora. 
He  comes,  at  times,  abroad,  in  the  fkirts  of  mill,  to  pierce, 
the  bounding  roes.  When  the  fun  looks  on  the  field,  nor 
by  the  rock,  nor  ftream,  is  he !  He  fhuns  the  race  of  Bol- 
ga,  who  dwell  in  his  father's  hall.  Tell  him,  that  Fingal 
lifts  the  fpear,  and  that  his  foes,  perhaps,  may  fail. 

"  Lift  up,  O  Gaul,  the  fliield  before  him.    Stretch, 
Dermid,   Temora's  fpear.     Be  thy  voice   in  his   ear,  O 

Carril, 

*  Ferad-artho  was  the  fon  of  Cairhar  Mac-Cormac,  kinj;  of  Ireland.  He  was  the 
iv  one  remaining  of  the  race  of  Conar,  the  Ton  of  Trcnmor,  the  firft  Irifh  mo- 
..,  according  to  Offian.  In  order  to  make  this  pafTage  tlioroughly  undtrfiood, 
.i_;y  i.ot  be  improper  to  recapitulate  fomc  part  of  what  has  been  faid  in  preced- 
ing notes.  Upon  the  death  of  Conar'the  fon  of  Trenmoi,  his  fon  Cormac  iuc- 
xeedcd  on  tl.e  Iriifi  throne.  Cormac  reigned  long.  His  children  were,  Cairbar, 
who  fucceeded  him,  and  Ros-crana,  the  firft  wife  of  Fingal.  C;iirbar,  long  before 
the  death  of  his  father  Cormac,  had  taken  to  wife  Bos-gala,  the  daughter  of  Colgar, 
one  of  the  moll  powerful  chiefs  in  Connaught,  and  had,  bv  her,  Artho,  afterwards 
king  of  Ireland.  Soon  after  Artho  arrived  at  man's  ellate,  his  mother  Bos-gala 
died,  and  Cairbar  married  Beltanno,  the  daughter  of  Conachar  of  Ullin,  who 
brought  him  a  fon,  whom  he  called  Ferad-artho,  i.  e.  a  man  in  the  place  of  Artho. 
The  occafion  of  the  name  was  this.  Artho,  when  his  brother  was  born,  was  abfent, 
on  an  expedition,  in  the  fouth  of  Ireland.  A  falfe  report  was  brought  to  his  fa- 
ther, that  he  was  killed.  Cairbar,  to  ufe  the  words  of  a  poem  on  the  fubjeft,  dark- 
nud  fo)  his  fair-haired  fon.  He  turned  to  the  young  beam  of  light.,  the  fm  if  Bel- 
tanno cf  Conachar.  Thou  fait  be  Ferad-artho,  he  faid,  a  fire  before  thy  race.  Cair- 
bar, foon  after,  died,  nor  did  Artho  long  furvive  him.  Artho  was  fucceeded,  in 
the  Irifh  throne,  by  his  fon  Cormac,  who,  in  iiis  minority,  was  murdered  by  Cair- 
bar, the  fon  of  Borbar-duthul.  Ferad-artho,  lays  tradition,  was  very  young,  when 
the  expedition  of  Fingal,  to  fettle  him  on  the  throne  of  Ireland,  happened.  Du- 
ring the  (horl  reign  of  young  Cormac,  Ferad-artho  lived  at  the  royal  refidence  of 
Temora.  Upon  the  murder  of  the  king,  Condan,  the  bard,  conveyed  Ferad-ar- 
tho, privately,  to  fhe  cave  of  Cluna,  behind  the  mountain  Crommal,  in  Uifter, 
where  they  both  lived  concealed,  during  the  ufurpation  of  the  family  of  Atha.  A 
late  bard  has  delivered  the  whole  hiftory,  in  a  poem  juft  now  in  my  pofTelTion.  It 
has  little  merit,  if  we  except  the  fcene  between  Ferad-artho,  and  the  meffengers 
of  Fingal,  upon  their  arrival,  in  the  vallev  of  Cluna.  After  hearing  of  the  great 
aFtions  of  Fingal,  the  young  prince  propofes  the  following  qucflions  concenmig 
him,  to  Gaul  and  Dermid.  "  Is  the  king  tall  as  the  rock  of  mv  cave?  Is  his  fpear 
a  fir  of  Cluna?  Is  he  a  rough-winged  blaft.  on  the  mountain,  which  takes  the  green 
oak  by  the  head,  and  tears  it  from  its  hill?  Glitters  Lubar  within  his  (Iiide,  when 
he  fends  his  (lately  fteps  along?  Nor  is  he  tall,  faid  Gaul,  as  that  rock  :  nor  glit- 
ter ftreams  within  his  ftride,  when  he  fends  his  ftately  fteps  along  ;  but  his  foul  is 
a  mighty  flood,  like  the  ftreii-th  of  UUin's  feas." 


342  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

Carril,  with  the  deeds  of  his  fathers.  Lead  him  to  green 
Moi-lena,  to  the  dufky  field  of  ghofls  ;  for  there,  I  fall 
forward,  in  battle,  in  the  folds  of  war.  Before  dun  night 
defcends,  come  to  high  Dunmora's  top.  Look,  from  the 
grey  fkirts  of  mill,  on  Lena  of  the  dreams.  If  there  my 
ftandard  fhall  float  on  wind,  over  Lubar's  gleaming  flream, 
then  has  not  Fingal  failed  in  the  laft  of  his  fields." 

Such  were  his  words  ;  nor  aught  replied  the  filent, 
flriding  kings.  They  looked,  fidelong,  on  Erin's  hod, 
and  darkened  as  they  went.  Never  before  had  they  left 
the  king,  in  the  midft  of  the  flormy  field.  Behind  them, 
touching  at  times  his  harp,  the  grey-haired  Carril  moved. 
He  forefaw  the  fall  of  the  people,  and  mournful  was  the 
found  !  It  was  like  a  breeze  that  comes,  by  fits,  over  Le- 
go's reedy  lake  ;  when  fleep  half-defcends  on  the  hunter.^ 
within  his  mofly  cave. 

"  Why  bends  the  bard  of  Cona,"  faid  Fingal,  "  over 
his  fecret  ftream  .?  Is  this  a  time  for  forrow,  father  of  low- 
laid  Ofcar  ?  Be  the  warriors  *  remembered  in  peace  j 
when  echoing  fhields  are  heard  no  more.  Bend,  then,  in 
grief,  over  the  flood,  where  blows  the  mountain-breeze. 
Let  them  pafs  on  thy  foul,  the  blue-eyed  dwellers  of  the 
tomb.  But  Erin  rolls  to  war  ;  wide-tumbling,  rough,  and 
dark.    Lift,  Ofllan,  lift  the  fliield.    I  am  alone,  my  fon  !" 

As  comes  the  fudden  voice  of  winds  to  the  becalmed 
fhip  of  Inis-huna,  and  drives    it    large,  along  the  deep, 

dark 

*  Malvina  is  fuppofed  to  fpeak  the  following  foliloquy. 

"  Malvina  is  like  the  bow  of  the  ftiower,  in  the  fecret  valley  of  fireams;  it  is 
bright,  but  the  drops  of  heaven  are  rolled  on  its  blended  light.  They  fay,  that  I 
am  fair  within  my  locks,  but  on  my  brightnefs  is  the  wandering  of  tears.  Dark- 
nefs  flies  over  my  foul,  as  the  dufky  wave  of  the  breeze,  along  the  grafs  of  Lutha. 
Yet  have  not  the  rocs  failed  me,  when  I  moved  between  the  hills.  Pleafant,  be- 
neath my  white  hand,  arole  the  found  of  harps.  What,  then,  daughter  of  Lutha, 
travels  over  thy  foul,  like  the  dreary  path  of  a  ghofl,  along  the  nightly  beam? 
Should  the  young  warrior  fall,  in  the  roar  of  his  troubled  fields !  Young  virgins  of 
Lutha  arife,  call  back  the  wandering  thoughts  of  Malvina.  Awake  the  voice  of 
the  harp,  along  my  echoing  vale.  Then  fhall  my  foul  come  forth,  like  a  light  from  ' 
the  gates  of  the  morn,  when  clouds  are  rolled  around  them,  with  their  broken  fides. 

"  Dweller  of  my  thoughts,  bv  night,  whofe  form  afcends  in  troubled  fields,  why 
doil  tliou  ilir  up  my  foul,  thou  far-diftant  fon  of  the  king?  Is  that  the  fhip  of  my 
love,  its  dark  courfe  through  the  ridges  of  ocean?  How  art  thou  fo  fudden,  Ofcar, 
from  the  heath  of  fliields  ?" 

The  roll  nf  tins  poem  confifts  of  a  dialogue  between  Ullin  and  Malvina,. where- 
in the  didrefs  of  tho  latter  is  carried  to  the  higheft  pitch. 


Book  VIII.        An   EPIC    POEM.  343 

'dark  rider  of  the  wave ;  fo  the  voice  of  Fingal  fent  Oflian, 
tall,  along  the  heath.  He  lifted  high  his  fliining  fliield, 
in  the  dulky  wing  of  war  ;  like  the  broad,  blank  moon, 
in  the  fkirt  of  a  cloud,  before  the  llorms  arife. 

Loud,  from  mofs-covered  Mora,  poured  down,  at  once, 
the  broad-winged  war.  Fingal  led  his  people  forth,  king 
of  Morven  of  ftreams.  On  high  fpreads  the  eagle's  wing. 
ij  His  grey  hair  is  poured  on  his  fhoulders  broad.  In  thun- 
!|  der  are  his  mighty  ft  rides.  He  often  ftood,  and  faw,  be- 
i'  hind,  the  wide-gleaming  rolling  of  armour.  A  rock  he 
j  feemed,  grey  over  with  ice,  whofe  woods  are  high  in  wind. 
'  Bright  ftreams  leap  from  its  head,  and  fpread  their  foam 
I    on  blafts. 

I  Now  he  came  to  Lubar's  cave,  where  Fillan  darkly 
flept.  Bran  ftill  lay  on  the  broken  fhield  :  the  eagle-wing 
is  ftrewed  by  the  winds.  Bright,  from  withered  furze, 
looked  forth  the  hero's  fpear.  Then  grief  ftirred  the  foul 
of  the  king,  like  whirlwinds  blackening  on  a  lake.  He 
turned  his  fudden  ftep,  and  leaned  on  his  bending  fpear. 

White-breasted  Bran  came  bounding  with  joy  to  the 
known  path  of  Fingal.  He  came,  and  looked  towards  the 
cave,  where  the  blue-eyed  hunter  lay  ;  for  he  was  wont 
to  ftride,  with  morning,  to  the  dewy  bed  of  the  roe.  It 
was  then  the  tears  of  the  king  came  down,  and  all  his  foul 
was  dark.  But,  as  the  rifing  wind  rolls  away  the  ftorm 
of  rain,  and  leaves  the  white  ftreams  to  the  fun,  and  high 
hills  with  their  heads  of  grafs  ;  fo  the  returning  war  bright^ 
ened  the  mind  of  Fingal.    He  bounded  *,  on  his  fpear, 

over 

*  The  Irifh  compofitions  concerning  Fingal  invariably  fpeak  of  him  as  a  oiaiu. 
Of  thefe  Hibernian  poems  there  are  no^  many  in  my  hands.  Fiom  the  la;;uuage, 
and  allufions  to  the  times  in  which  they  were  wiit,  I  fhould  fix  the  date  of  their 
compofition  in  the  fifteenth  and  fixteenth  centuries.  In  fomc  palfagcs,  the  poetry 
is  far  from  wanting  merit,  but  the  fable  is  unnatural,  and  the  whole  conduct  of  the 
pieces  injudicious.  I  (hall  give  one  inftance  of  the  exli.ivagaiit  fiftions  of  the  Irifn 
bards,  in  a  poem  which  they,  moft  unjuftly,  afcribe  to  Oflian.  The  llory  of  it  i» 
this:  Ireland  being  threatened  with  an  invaiion  from  foine  part  of  Scandinavia,  Fin- 
gal fent  Oflian,  Ofcar,  and  C^-olt,  to  watch  the  bay,  in  which,  it  was  cspecled, 
the  enemy  was  to  land.  Ofcar,  unluckily,  fell  aflcep,  before  the  Scandinavians 
appc.'.rcd  ;  and,  great  as  he  was,  fays  the  Irifli  bard,  he  had  one  bad  propeity,  that 
no  Icfs  could  waken  him,  before  his  time,  than  cutting  off  one  of  his  nng<:-rs,  or 
throwing  a  great  flone  againft  his  head ;  and  it  was  dangerous  to  come  near  him  on 
thofe  occanons,  till  he  had  recovered  himfelf,  and  was  fully  awake.  Ca-olt,  who 
Vas  employed  by  Oflian  to  waken  his  fon,  made  choice  of  throwing  the  .Hone  againll 


344 


T    E    M    O    R    A 


over  Lubar,  and  flruck  his  echoing  fhield.  His  ridgy 
hoft  bend  forward,  at  once,  with  all  their  pointed  fteel. 

Nor  Erin  heard,  with  fear,  the  found  :  wide,  they  came 
rolling  along.  Dark  Malthos,  in  the  wing  of  war,  looks- 
forward  from  fhaggy  brows.  Next  rofe  that  beam  of  light 
Hidalla  ;  then  the  fidelong-looking  gloom  of  Maronnan, 
Blue-fhielded  Clonar  lifts  the  fpear :  Cormar  ihakes  his 
bufhy  locks  on  the  wind.  Slowly,  from  behind  a  rock, 
rofe  the  bright  form  of  Atha.  Firft  appeared  his  two 
pointed  fpears,  then  the  half  of  his  burnilhed  fhield  ; 
like  the  rifmg  of  a  nightly  meteor,  over  the  vale  of  ghofts. 
But  when  he  llione  all  abroad,  the  hofts  plunged,  at  once, 
into  ftrife.  The  gleaming  waves  of  fleel  are  poured  on 
either  fide. 

As  meet  two  troubled  feas,  with  the  rolling  of  all  their 
waves,  when  they  feel  the  wings  of  contending  winds,  in 
the  rock-fided  firth  of  Lumon  :  along  the  echoing  hills  is 
the  dim  courfe  of  ghofts  :  from  the  blaft  fall  the  torn 
groves  on  the  deep,  amidft  the  foamy  path  of  whales  j  fo 
mixed  the  hofts  !  Now  Fingal,  now  Cathmor,  came  a- 
broad.  The  dark-tumbling  of  death  is  before  them  :  the 
gleam  of  broken  fteel  is  rolled  on  their  fteps,  as,  loud,  the 
high-bounding  kings  hewed  down  the  ridge  of  fhields. 

Maronnan  fell,  by  Fingal,  laid  large  acrofs  a  ftream. 

The  waters  gathered  by  his  fide,  and  leapt  grey  over  his 

bofly  fhield.    Clonar  is  pierced  by  Cathmor :  nor  yet  lay 

the  chief  on  earth.    An  oak  feized  his  hair  in  his  fall.   His 

helmet  rolled  on  the  ground.    By  its  thong,  hung  his 

broad  fhield  :  over  it  wandered  his  ftreaming  blood.    Tla- 

min'*^  fhall  weep,  in  the   hall,  and  ftrike  her  heaving 

breaft.  -.-r 

NoR 

(lis  head,  as  the  lead  dangerous  expedient.  Tlie  ftone,  rebounding  from  the  hero's 
head,  fliook,  as  it  rolled  along,  the  hill  for  three  miles  round.  Ofcar  rofe  in  rage, 
fought  bravely,  and,  fingly,  vanquidicd  a  wing  of  the  enemy's  army.  Thus  the 
bard  goes  on,  till  Fingal  put  an  end  to  the  war,  by  the  total  rout  of  the  Scandina- 
vians. Puerile,  and  even  defpicable,  as  thefe  fitlions  are,  yet  Keating  and  O'Fla- 
herty  have  no  better  authority  than  the  poems  which  contain  them,  for  all  that  they 
write  concerning  Fion  Mac-comnal,  and  the  pretended  militia  of  Ireland. 

*■  Tla-min,  mildiy-Joft.  The  loves  of  Clonar  and  Tlamin  were  rendered  famous 
in  the  norih,  by  a  fragment  of  a  lyric  poem.  It  is  a  dialogue  between  Clonar  and" 
'Inmin.     She  begins  with  a  ibliloquv,  which  he  overhears, 

TLAMIN. 


Book  VIII.       An  EPIC    POEM.  345 

Nor  did  Offian  forget  the  fpear,  in  the  wing  of  his 
war.  He  ftrewed  the  field  with  dead.  Young  liidalki 
came.  "  Soft  voice  of  dreamy  Clonra  !  why  dofl  thou 
lift  the  fleel  ?  O  that  we  met,  in  the  ftrife  of  fong,  in 
thy  own  rufliy  vale  \"  Malthos  beheld  him  low,  and 
darkened  as  he  rufhed  along.  On  either  fide  of  a  flream, 
we  bend  in  the  echoing  ftrife.  Heaven  comes  rolling 
down  :  around  burfls  the  voices  of  fqually  winds.  Hills 
are  clothed,  at  times,  in  fire.  Thunder  rolls  in  v/reaths 
of  mift.  In  darknefs  flirunk  the  foe  :  Morven's  wan iois 
ftood  aghaft.  Still  I  bent  over  the  ftream,  amidft  my 
whiftling  locks. 

Then  rofe  the  voice  of  Fingal,  and  the  found  of  the 
flying  foe.  I  faw  the  king,  at  times,  in  lightning,  darkly- 
ftriding  in  his  might.  I  ftruck  my  echoing  fhield,  and 
hung  forward  on  the  fteps  of  Alnecma :  the  foe  is  rolled 
before  me,  like  a  wreath  of  fmoke. 

The  fun  looked  forth  from  his  cloud.    The  hundred 

ftreams  of  Moi-lena  flione.     Slow  rofe  the  blue  columns 

of  mift,  againft  the  glittering  hill.    Where  are  the  migh- 

Xx  ty 

tLAMIN. 

"  Clonar,  fon  of  Conglas  of  I-mor,  young  hunter  of  dnn-fided  roes  J  where  art 
thou  laid,  amidll  rufhes,  beneath  the  paffing  wing  of  the  breeze  ?  i  behold  thee,- 
my  Jove,  in  the  plain  of  thy  own  dark  ftreams  !  The  clung  thorn  is  lolled  by  ths 
wind,  and  ruftlcs  along  his  fliield.  Bright  in  his  locks  he  lies:  the  thoughts  of  hi? 
dreams  fly,  darkening,  over  his  face.  Thou  thinkeft  of  the  battles  of  Offian,  young 
Ion  of  the  echoing  ifle ! 

"  Half-hid,  in  the  grove,  I  fit  down.     Fly  back,  ye  mifts  of  the   hill.     Why 
fnould  ye  hide  her  love  from  the  blue  eyes  of  Tlamin  of  harps  ? 
CLONAR. 

"  As  the  fpirit,  feen  in  a  dream,  flies  off  from  our  opening  eyes  :  we  think  we 
behold  his  bright  path  between  the  clofing  hills;  fo  fled  the  daughter  of  Clun- 
gal,  from  the  fight  of  Clonar  of  fiiields.  Arife,  from  the  gathering  of  trees;  hjue- 
cycd  Tlamin  arife. 

TLAMIN. 

"  I  turn  me  away  from  his  fteps.    Why  fiiould  he  know  of  my  love !  My  whits 
brcaft  is  heaving  over  fighs,  as  foam  on  the  dark  coUrfe  of  ftreams.    Eiit  he  paifes 
away,  in  his  arms  !  Son  of  Conglas,  my  foul  is  fad. 
CLONAR. 

"  It  was  the  fliield  of  Fingal!  the  voice  of  kings  from  Selma  of  harps!  My  patl? 
ss  towards  green  Erin.  Arife,  fair  light,  from  thy  Ih^des.  Come  to  the  field  ot 
my  loul;  there  is  the  fpreading  of  hofts.  Arife,  on  Clonar's  troubled  foul,  young, 
daughter  of  blue-ftiiclded  Clungal." 

Cluo;:;al  wns  the  chief  of  I-mor,  one  of  the  Hebrides, 


34^  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

ty  kings  ?  *  Nor  by  that  ftream,  nor  wood,  are  they  !  I 
hear  the  clang  of  arms  !  Their  llrife  is  in  the  bolom  of 
that  mid.  Such  is  the  contending  of  fpirits  in  a  nightly 
cloud,  when  they  drive  for  the  wintry  wings  of  winds, 
and  the  rolling  of  the  foam-covered  waves. 

I  RUSHED  along.  The  grey  mid  arofe.  Tall,  gleam- 
ing, they  dood  at  Lubar.  Cathmor  leaned  againd  a  rock. 
His  half-fallen  fliield  received  the  dream,  that  leapt  from 
the  mofs  above.  Towards  him  is  the  llride  of  Fingal :  he 
fav/  the  hero's  blood.  His  fword  fell  flowly  to  his  fide. 
He  fpoke,  midd  his  darkening  joy. 

*■'  Yields  the  race  of  Boibar-duthul  ?  or  dill  does  he 
lift  the  fpear  ?  Not  unheard  is  thy  name,  at  Atha,  in  the 
green  dwelling  of  drangers.  It  has  com.e,  like  the  breeze 
of  the  deiiirt,  to  the  ear  of  Fingal.  Come  to  my  hill  of 
feads  :  the  mighty  fail,  at  times.  No  fire  am  I  to  low- 
laid  foes  :  I  rejoice  not  over  the  fall  of  the  brave.  To 
dole  f  the  wound  is  mine.  I  have  known  the  herbs  of 
the  hills  :  I  feized  their  fair  heads,  on  high,  as  they  wav- 
ed by  their  fecret  dreams.  Thou  art  dark  and  filent,  king 
of  Atha  of  drangers  !'* 

"  By  Atha  of  the  dream,"  he  faid,  "  there  rifes  a  mof- 
fy  rock.  On  its  head  is  the  wandering  of  boughs,  within 
the  courfe  of  winds.  Dark,  in  its  face,  is  a  cave,  with  its 
own  loud  rill.  There  have  I  heard  the  tread  of  dran- 
gers, 

*  Fingal  and  Cathmor.  The  conduft  here  is  perhaps  proper.  The  numerous 
defcriptions  of  Jingle  combats  have  already  exhaufted  the  lubjeft.  Nothing  new, 
nor  adequate  to  our  high  idea  of  the  kings,  can  be  faid.  A  column  of  mifi  is  thrown 
ovrr  the  whole,  and  the  combai  is  left  to  the  imagination  of  the  reader.  Poets  have 
abuoft  univerfally  failed  in  their  defcriptions  of  this  fort.  Not  all  the  flrength  of 
Hiiiner  could  fullain,  with  dignity,  the  ■niinutia  of  a  tingle  combat.  The  throwing 
of  a  Ipear,  and  the  braying  of  a  Ihield,  as  fome  of  our  own  poets  moll  elegantly  ex- 
ptefs  it,  convey  no  mag..ilicent,  though  ihey  are  linking  ideas.  Our  imagination 
ilretches  beyond,  and  conrequtiitly  defpifes,  the  dcfcripiion.  It  were,  therefore, 
well,  for  fome  poets,  in  my  opuiion,  (thoagh  it  is,  perhaps,  fomewhat  fingular)  to 
have,  lomctimes,  thrown  miji  over  their  fingle  combats. 

f  Fuigal  is  very  much  celebrated,  in  tradition,  for  his  knowledge  in  the  virtues 
of  herbs.  The  Irifli  poems,  concerning  hyn,  often  reprefent  him,  curing  the 
vouiids  which  his  chiefs  received  in  battle.  They  fable  concerning  him,  that'  he 
was  in  polIcHion  of  a  cup,  containing  the  eflcnce  of  herbs,  which  inflantaneoufly 
healed  wounds.  The  knowledge  of  cuiing  the  wounded,  was,  till  of  late,  univer,- 
fal  among  the  Hiablandcrs.  We  hear  of  no  other  diforder,  which  requited  the 
(kill  of  ph)lic.  The"  wholefonienefs  of  the  climate,  and  an  active  life,  fpent  in 
hunting,  excluded  difeafes^ 


Book  VIII.        An   EPIC   POEM.  347 

gers*,  when  they  pnfled  to  my  hall  of  fliells.  Joy  rofe, 
like  a  flame,  on  my  foul  :  I  bleft  the  echoing  rock.  Here 
be  my  dwelling,  in  darknefs  ;  in  my  grafly  vale,  rrom 
this  1  ihall  mount  the  breeze,  that  purfues  the  thiillc'a 
beard  ;  or  look  down  on  blue-winding  Atha,  from  its 
wandering  mill:." 

"  Why  fpeaks  the  king  of  the  tomb  ?  Ouian  !  the 
warrior  has  failed !  Joy  meet  thy  foul,  like  a  {ircam, 
Cathmor,  friend  of  ftrangers  ! — My  fon,  I  hear  the  call 
of  years  ;  they  take  my  fpear  as  they  pafs  along.  Why 
does  not  Fingal,  they  feem  to  fay,  red  within  liis  hall  ? 
Doll  thou  always  delight  in  blood  ?  in  the  tears  of  the 
fad  ?  No  :  ye  dark-rolling  years,  Fingal  delights  not  in 
blood.  Tears  are  wintry  ftreams,  that  walle  away  my 
foul.  But,  when  I  lie  down  to  reft,  then  comes  the  migh- 
ty voice  of  war.  It  awakes  me  in  my  hall,  and  calls  forth 
all  my  fteel.  It  fhali  call  it  forth  no  more :  OiTian,  take 
thou  thy  father's  fpear.  Lift  it,  in  battle,  when  the  proud 
arife. 

"  My  fathers,  Ouian,  trace  my  fteps ;  my  deeds  are 
pleafant  to  their  eyes.  Wherever  I  come  forth  to  battle, 
on  my  field  are  their  columns  ,of  mift.  But  mine  arm 
refcued  the  feeble  ;  the  haughty  found  my  rage  was  fire. 
Never  over  the  fallen  did  mine  eye  rejoice.  For  thlsf,  my 
fathers  fliall  meet  me,  at  the  gates  of  their  airy  hails, 
tali,  with  robes  of  light,  with  mildly-kindled  eyes.    But, 

to 

*  Cathmor  reflcfls,  with  pleafurc,  even  in  !iis  Ind  moments,  on  the  rehct  he  had 
afforded  to  ftrangers.  The  very  tread  of  their  feet  was  pleafant  in  his  ear.  His 
hofpitahty  was  not  paffed  unnoticed  by  the  bards;  for,  with  them,  it  became  a  pro- 
verb, when  they  defcribedthc  hcfpitable  (iifpofition  of  a  hero,  that  he  wasiihe  Cath- 
WOT  of  Atha,  the  friend  of  Jhan gers.  It  will  feem  ftrange,  that,  in  all  the  Irifh 
poems,  there  is  no  mention  made  of  Cathmor.  This  muft  be  attributed  to  tie  re- 
volutions and  domcAic  coiifafions  which  happened  in  that  ifland,  and  utterly  cut  off 
all  the  real  traditions  concerning  !b  ancient  a  period.  All  tliat  we  have  rehted  of 
the  (late  of  Ireland  before  the  fifth  century  is  of  late  invention,  and  the  work  of  lU 
inforn^.cd  fenachics  and  injudicious  bards. 

+  The  Celtic  nations  had  fome  idea  of  rewards,  and  peihaps  of  punifnments, 
after  death.  Thofe  who  behaved,  in  life,  with,bravery  and  virtue,  were  received, 
with  joy,  to  the  airy  halls  of  their  fathers;  but  the  dark  in  foul,  to  ufe  the  exprcf- 
fion  of  the  poet,  were  fpurned  away  from  the  habitaticn  of  heroes,  to  wander  on  ell 
the  winds.  Another  opinion,  which  prevailed  in  thofe  times,  tended  not  a  \\•^\^ 
to  make  individuals  emulous  to  excel  one  another  in  martiil  atchievements.  It 
was  thought,  that,  in  the  hall  of  clouds,  every  one  had  a  feat,  raifed  above  others, 
:".  proportion  as  he  exccUed  thein,  in  vr.lo'jr,  when  he  lived. 


348 


T    E    M    O    R    A: 


to  the  proud  in  arms,  they  are  darkened  moons  In  hea- 
ven, which  fend  the  fire  of  night,  red-wandering  over 
their  face. 

'-  Father  of  heroes,  Trenmor,  dweller  of  eddying 
winds  !  I  give  thy  fpear  to  Offian  ;  let  thine  eye  rejoice. 
Thee  have  I  feen,  at  times,  bright  from  between  thy 
clouds  ;  fo  appear  to  my  fon,  when  he  is  to  lift  the  fpear : 
then  fliall  he  remember  thy  mighty  deeds,  though  thou 
art  now  but  a  blaft." 

He  gave  the  fpear  to  my  hand,  and  raifed,  at  once,  a 
ftone  on  high,  to  fpeak  to  future  times,  with  its  grey  head 
of  mofs.  Beneath  he  placed  a  fword  *  in  earth,  and  one 
bright  bofs  from  his  fhield.  Dark  in  thought,  a-while, 
he  bends  :  his  words,  at  length,  come  forth. 

"  When  thou,  O  ftone,  fhalt  moulder  down,  and  loffe 
thee,  in  the  mofs  of  years,  then  fhall  the  traveller  come, 
and,  whiflling,  pafs  away.  Thou  know'ft  not,  feeble  man, 
that  fame  once  fhone  on  Moi-lena.  Here  Fingal  refigned 
his  fpear,  after  the  lad  of  his  fields.  Pafs  away,  thou 
empty  fhade  ;  in  thy  voice  there  is  no  renown.  Thou 
dwellefl  by  fome  peaceful  flream  ;  yet  a  few  years,  and 
thou  art  gone.  No  one  remembers  thee,  thou  dweller  of 
thick  mifi  !  But  Fingal  fhall  be  clothed  with  fame,  a 
beam  of  light  to  other  times  ;  for  he  went  forth,  in  echo- 
ing fleel,  to  fave  the  weak  in  arms.'* 

Brightening  in  his  fame,  the  king  flrode  to  Lubar*s 
founding  oak,  where  it  bent,  from  its  rock,  over  the 
bright-tumbling  flream.  Beneath  it  is  a  narrow  plain, 
and  the  found  of  the  fount  of  the  rock.  Here  the  fland- 
ardf  of  Morven  poured  its  wreaths  on  the  wind,  to  mark 
the  way  of  Ferad-artho,  from  his  fecret  vale.  Bright,  from 
his  parted  weft,  the  fun  of  heaven  looked  abroad.  The 
hero  faw  his  people,  and  heard  their  fhouts  of  joy.     In 

broken 

*  There  are  Tome  ftones  fiill  to  be  feen  in  the  north,  which  were  erefled  as  me- 
inorials  of  fome  remarkable  tranfa£lions  between  the  ancient  chiefs.  There  are  ge- 
nerally found,  beneath  them,  fome  piece  of  arms,  and  a  bit  of  half-burnt  wood. 
The  caufe  of  placing  the  laR  there,  is  not  mentioned  in  tradition. 

+  The  erefliiig  of  his  ftandard  on  the  bank  of  Lubar,  was  the  fignal  which  Fingal, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  book,  promifed  to  give  to  the  chiefs,  who  went  to  conduft 
ferad-artho  to  the  army,  fliould  he  himfelf  prevail  in  battle.  This  flandard  here 
is  called  iha  fun-bean:.  Thj  rcafon  of  this  appellation,  I  gave  in  my  notes  on  th', 
poem  intitlcd  iingul. 


Book  VIII.       An   EPIC   POEM.  349 

broken  ridges  round,  they  glittered  to  the  beam.  The 
king  rejoiced  ;  as  a  hunter  in  his  own  green  vale,  when, 
after  the  florin  is  rolled  away,  he  fees  the  gleaming  fides 
of  the  rocks.  The  green  thorn  fliakes  its  head  in  their 
face  ;  from  their  top  look  forward  the  roes. 

*Grey,  at  his  mofly  cave,  is  bent  the  aged  form  of 
Clonmal.  The  eyes  of  the  bard  had  failed.  He  leaned 
forward  on  his  ftail".  Bright,  in  her  locks,  before  him, 
Sul-malla  liftened  to  the  tale ;  the  tale  of  the  kings  of 
Atha,  in  the  days  of  old.  The  noife  of  battle  had  ceafed 
in  his  ear  :  he  flopt,  and  raifed  the  fecret  figh.  The  fpi- 
rits  of  the  dead,  they  faid,  often  lightened  along  his  foul. 
He  faw  the  king  of  Atha  low,  beneath  his  bending  tree. 

"  Why  art  thou  dark  ?"  faid  the  maid.  "  The  flrife 
of  arms  is  pad.  Soonf  fhall  he  come  to  thy  cave,  over 
thy  winding  ftreams.  The  fun  .  looks  from  the  rocks  of 
th_e  weft.  The  mifts  of  the  lake  arife.  Grey,  they  fpread 
on  that  hill,  the  rufliy  dwelling  of  roes.  From  the  mift 
fhall  my  king  appear.  Behold,  he  comes  in  his  arms ! 
Come  to  the  cave  of  Clonmal,  O  my  beft  beloved  !" 

It  was  the  fpirit  of  Cathmor,  ftalking,  large,  a  gleam- 
ing form.  He  funk  by  the  hollow  ftream,  that  roared  be- 
tween the  hills.  **  It  was  but  the  hunter,"  fhe  faid,  "  who 
fearches  for  the  bed  of  the  roe.  His  fteps  are  not  forth  to 
war  y  his  fpoufe  expefl:s  him  with  night.  He  fliall,  whift- 
iing,  return,  with  the  fpoils  of  the  dark-brown  hinds." 
Her  eyes  were  turned  to  the  hill  ;  again  the  ftately  form. 
came  down.  She  rofe,  in  the  midft  of  joy.  He  retired 
again  in  mift.  Gradual  vanifh  his  limbs  of  fmoke,  and 
mix  with  the  mountain-wind.  Then  fhe  knew  that  he 
fell  !  "  King  of  Erin,  art  thou  low  !"  Let  Oflian  forget 
her  grief :  it  waftes  the  foul  of  age  [j. 

Evening 

*  The  fcene  is  changed  to  the  valley  of  Lona,  whither  Sul-malla  had  been  fent, 
by  Cathmor,  before  the  battle.  Clon-mal,  an  aged  bard,  or  rather  druid,  as  he 
fcems  here  to  be  cndujd  with  a  prefcience  of  events,  had  long  dwelt  there  in  a 
cave.     This  fcene  is  calculated  to  throw  a  melancholy  gloom  over  the  mind. 

t  Cathmor  had  promifed,  in  the  feventh  book,  to  come  to  the  cave  of  Clonmal, 
after  the  battle  was  over. 

|]  Tradition  relates,  that  Oflian,  the  next  dav  after  the  decifive  battle  between 
Fingal  and  Cathmor,  went  to  find  out  Sul-malia,  in  the  valley  of  Lona,  His  ad- 
drefi  to  her,  foUovrs : 

"  Awake, 


350  T    E    M    O    R    A: 

Evening  came  down  on  Mol-lena.  Grey  rolled  the 
ilreams  of  the  land.  Loud  came  forth  the  voice  of  Fingal ; 
the  beam  of  oaks  arofe.  The  people  gathered  round  with 
gladnefs ;  with  gladnefs  blended  wdth  fliades.  They  fide- 
iong  looked  to  the  king,  and .  beheld  his  unfinifhcd  joy. 
Pleafant,  from  the  way  of  the  defart,  the  voice  of  mufic 
came.  It  feemed,  at  firft,  the  noife  of  a  flream,  far-diftant, 
on  its  rocks.  Slow  it  rolled  along  the  hill,  like  the  ruffled 
wing  of  a  breeze,  when  it  takes  the  tufted  beard  of  the 
rocks,  in  the  ftill  feafon  of  night.  It  was  the  voice  of 
Condan,  mixed  with  Carrii's  trembling  harp.  They  came, 
with  blue-eyed  Ferad-artho,  to  Mora  of  the  ftreams. 

Sudden  burfls  the  fong  from  our  bards,  on  Lena  :  the 
hoft  ilruck  their  fliields  midfl  the  found.  Gladnefs  rofe 
brightening  on  the  king,  like  the  beam  of  a  cloudy  day, 
when  it  rifes,  on  the  green  hill,  before  the  roar  of  winds. 
He  ftruck  the  boffy  fiiield  of  kings  ;  at  once  they  ceafe 
around.  The  people  lean  forward,  from  their  fpears,  to- 
wards the  voice  of  their  land*. 

"  Sons 

"  Awake,  tliou  (lauj^hter  cf  Connior,  from  the  fern-fKirted  cavern  of  I.ona. 
Awake,  thou  fun-beam  in  flefarts;  warriors  one  day  mufl  fail.  1  hey  move  torth, 
like  terrible  lights;  but,  ofien,  their  tloud  is  near.  Go  to  the  valley  of  flreams, 
to  the  wanderiuCT  of  herds,  on  Lunion  ;  there  dwells,  in  his  lazy  mift,  the  man  of 
:r.ariy  days.  But  he  is  unknown,  Sul-malla,  like  the  thiflle  of  the  rocks  of  roes; 
it  {hakes  its  p;rty  beard,  in  the  wind,  and  falls,  unfeen  ot  our  eyes.  Not  luch  are 
the  kings  of  men,  their  departure  is  a  meteor  of  fiie,  which  pours  its  red  courfe, 
from  the  defart,  over  the  bofom  of  night. 

"  He  is  mixed  with  the  warriors  of  old,  thofe  fires  that  have  hid  their  heads.  At 
times  fiiall  they  come  forth  in  fong.  Not  forgot  has  the  warrior  failed.  He  has 
r.otfeen,  Sul-malla,  the  fall  of  a  beam  of  his  own:  no  fair-haired  fon,  in  his  blood, 
3'oun,'^  troubicr  of  the  field.  I  am  lonely,  youne;  branch  of  Lumon,  I  may  hear 
the  voice  of  the  feeble,  when  my  ftrength  fhall  have  failed  in  years,  for  young  Of- 
car  has  ccafed,  on  his  field."— *       *       *       *       * 

Sul-malla  r-'turntd  to  her  own  country.  She  makes  a  confiderable  figure  in  ano- 
ther poem  ;  her  behaviour  in  that  piece  accounts  for  that  partial  regard  with  which 
'he  poet  ou.:,ht  to  fpeak  of  her  throughout  Temora. 

*  Before  I  fniirn  my  notes,  it  may  not  be  altogether  improper  to  obviate  an  ob- 
,  -clion,  which  mriv  be  made  to  the  credibility  of  the  ftory  of  Temora.  It  may  be 
.liKed,  whether  it  is  probable,  that  Fingal  could  perform  fuch  aBions  as  are  afcnbed 
;o  hirn  in  this  l)0ok,  at  an  age  when  his  grandfon,  Ofcar,  had  acquired  io  much  re- 
putation in  arms.  To  this  it  may  be  anfwered,  that  Fingal  was  but  very  young 
[book  4th]  when  he  took  to  wife  Ros-crana,  who  (oon  after  became  the  mother  of 
Ofhan.  Offian  was  alfo  extremely  young  when  he  married  Ever-allin,  the  mother 
of  Ofcar.  Tradition  relates,  that  Fingal  was  but  eighteen  years  old  at  the  birth  oi 
his  fon  OiTran;  and  that  Offi;n  was  much  about  the  fame  age,  when  Olcar,  his 
fon,  was  born.     Ofcar,  perhaps,  might  be  about  twenty,  when  he  was  killed,  in 


•I 


Book  VIII.        An   EPIC    POEM.  351 

"  Sons  of  Mcrven,  fpread  the  feafl; ;  fend  the  night 
away  in  fong.  Ye  have  fhone  around  me,  and  the  dark 
florm  is  paft.  My  people  are  the  windy  rocks,  from  which 
I  fpread  my  eagle-wings,  when  I  rulh  forth  to  renown, 
and  feize  it  on  its  jfield.  Offian,  l:hou  hafl  the  fpear  of 
Fingal :  it  is  not  the  flaff  of  a  boy  v/ith  which  he  ftrews 
the  thiflle  round,  young  wanderer  of  the  field.  No  :  it 
is  the  lance  of  the  mighty,  with  which  they  ftretched  forth 
their  hands  to  death.  Look  to  thy  fathers,  my  fon  ;  they 
are  awful  beams.  With  morning  lead  Ferad-artho  forth 
to  the  echoing  halls  of  Temora.  Remind  him  of  the 
kings  of  Erin  ;  the  (lately  forms  of  old.  Let  not  the 
fallen  be  forgot ;  they  were  mighty  in  the  field.  Let 
Carril  pour  his  fong,  that  the  kings  may  rejoice  in  their 
mill.  To-morrow  I  fpread  my  fails  to  Selma's  fhaded 
walls ;  where  flreamy  Duthula  Avinds  through  the  feats 
of  roes.'* 

the  battle  of  Gabhra,  [book  ift]  fo  the  a<Te  of  Fingal,  when  the  decifive  battle  was' 
fought  between  him  and  Cathmor,  wasjuU  {ifty-(ix  years.  In  thofe  times  of  ac- 
tivity and  health,  the  natural  flrength  and  vigour  of  a  man  was  little  abated,  at  fuch 
?n  age ;  fo  that  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  anions  of  Fingal,  as  related  in 
this  book. 


CONLATH 


CONLATH  and  CUTHONA 


P  O  E  M, 


Yy 


ARGUMENT. 

CONLATH  vvastheyoungcft  of  Moral's  fons,  and  brother  to  the  celebrated  Gaul. 
He  was  in  love  with  Cuthona  the  daughter  of  Rumar,  when  Tofcar  the  fon  of 
Kinfena,  accompanied  by  Fercuth  his  friend,  arrived,  from  Ireland,  at  Mora, 
where  Conlath  dwelt.  He  was  hofpitably  received,  and,  according  to  the  cudom 
of  the  times,  feailed,  three  days,  with  Conlath.  On  the  fourth  he  fet  fall,  and 
coafllng  the  ijland  of  waves,  one  of  the  Hebrides,  he  faw  Cuthona  hunting,  fell 
in  love  with  her,  and  carried  her  away,  by  force,  in  his  fliip.  He  was  forced, 
by  O.refs  of  weather,  into  I-thona  a  defart  ifle.  In  the  mean  time  Conlath,  hear- 
ing of  the  rape,  failed  after  him,  and  found  him  on  the  point  of  failing  for  the 
coaft  of  Ireland.  They  fought;  and  they  and  their  followers  fell  by  mutual 
wounds.  Cuthona  did  not  long  furvive;  for  fhe  died  of  grief  the  third  day  af- 
ter. Fingal,  hearing  of  their  unfortunate  death,  fcnt  Stormal  the  fon  of  Moran 
t'o  bury  them,  but  forgot  to  fend  a  bard  to  fing  the  funeral  fong  over  their  tombs. 
Theghoft  of  Conlath  comes,  long  after,  to  Offian,  to  intreat  him  to  tranfmit  to 
pofterlty  his  and  Cuthona's  fame.  For  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  times,  that  the 
fouls  of  the  dcccafed  were  not  happy,  till  their  elegies  were  compofed  by  a  bard 


CONLATH  AND  CUTHONA  : 


O  E  M. 


DID  not  OfTian  hear  a  voice  ?  or  is  it  the  found  of 
days  that  are  no  more  ?  Often  does  the  memory  of 
former  times  come,  like  the  evening  fun,  on  my  foul. 
The  noife  of  the  chace  is  renewed.  In  thought,  I  lift  the 
fpear.  But  Offian  did  hear  a  voice  1  Who  art  thou,  fon 
of  night  ?  The  children  of  the  feeble  are  afleep.  The 
midnight  wind  is  in  my  hall.  Perhaps  it  is  the  lliield  of 
Fingalthat  echoes  to  the  blaft.  It  hangs  in  Offian's  hall. 
He  feels  it  fometimes  with  his  hands.  Yes!  I  hear  thee, 
my  friend !  Long  has  thy  voice  been  abfent  from  mine 
ear !  What  brings  thee,  on  thy  cloud,  to  Offian,  fon  of 
generous  Morni  ?  Are  the  friends  of  the  aged  near  thee? 
Where  is  Ofcar,  fon  of  fame  ?  He  was  often  near  thee,  O 
Conlath,  when  the  found  of  battle  arofe. 
Ghost  of  Conlath. 
Sleeps  the  fweet  voice  of  Cona,  in  the  midlt  of  his 
ruflling  hall  ?  Sleeps  Offian  in  his  hall,  and  his  friends 
without  their  fame  ?  The  fea  rolls  round  dark  I-thona  *. 
Our  tombs  are  not  feen  in  our  ifle.  Hov/  long  ffiall  our 
fame  be  unheard,  fon  of  refounding  Selma  ? 

OssiAN. 
O  THAT  mine  eyes  could  behold  thee !  Thou  fitteft, 
dim,  on  thy  cloud !  Art  thou  like  the  mifl  of  Lano  ?  an 
half-extingui filed  meteor  of  fire  ?  Of  what  are  the  fkirts 
of  thy  robe  ?  of  what  is  thine  airy  bow  ?  He  is  gone  on 
his  blaft,  like  the  fhade  of  a  wandering  cloud.  Come  ft-om 
thy  wall,  O  harp !   Let  me  hear  thy  found.    Let  the  light 

of 

*  I-thona,  ijland  of  waves,  one  of  the  uninhabited  wefternifles. 


356      CONLATH  and  CUTHONA: 

of  memory  rife  on  I-thona.  Let  me  behold  again  my 
friends! — And  Offian  does  behold  his  friends,  on  the  dark- 
blue  ifle.  The  cave  of  Thona  appears,  with  its  mofly 
rocks  and  bending  trees.  A  ftream  roars  at  its  mouth. 
Tofcar  bends  over  its  courfe.  Fercuth  is  fad  by  his  fide. 
Cuihona  *  fits  at  a  diftance,  and  vi^eeps.  Does  the  wind 
of  the  waves  deceive  me  ?  or  do  I  hear  them  fpeak  ? 

TOSCAR. 

The  night  was  flormy.  From  their  hills  the  groaning 
oaks  came  down.  The  fea  darkly  tumbled  beneath  the 
blait.  The  roaring  waves  cHmbed  againft  our  rocks.  The 
lightning  came  often,  and  fhewed  the  blalled  fern.  Fer- 
cuth !  I  law  the  ghoft  who  embroiled  the  night  f .  Silent 
he  flood,  on  that  bank.  His  robe  of  mill  flew  on  the 
wind.  I  could  behold  his  tears.  An  aged  man  he  feemed, 
and  full  of  tkought ! 

Fercuth. 

It  was  thy  father,  O  Tofcar.  He  forefees  fome  death 
among  his  race.  Such  was  his  appearance  on  Cromla,  be- 
fore the  great  Ma-ronnan  [j  fell.  Erin  of  hills  of  grafs  ! 
how  pleafant  are  thy  vales  ?  Silence  is  near  thy  blue' 
flreams.  The  fun  is  on  thy  fields.  Soft  is  the  found  of 
the  harp  in  Selama  §  :  lovely  the  cry  of  the  hunter  on 
Cromla.  But  we  are  in  dark  I-thona,  furrounded  by  th« 
florm.  The  billows  lift  their  white  heads  above  our  rocks. 
We  tremble  amidlt  the  night. 

ToSCAR. 

Whither  is  the  foul  of  battle  fled,  Fercuth  with  locks 
of  age  ?  I  have  feen  thee  undaunted  in  danger:  thine  eyes 
burning  with  joy  in  the  fight.  Whither  is  the  foul  of  bat- 
tle fled?  Our  fathers  never  feared.  Go:  view  the  fetthng 
fea.    The  flormy  wind  is  laid  :  the  billows  flill  tremble 


*  Cuthona,  the  daughter  of  Rumar,  whom  Tofcar  had  carried  away  by  force. 

i  It  was  long  thought,  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  that  florms  were  raiied  by  the 
ghofts  of  the  deceafed.  This  notion  is  ftill  entertained  by  the  vulgar;  for  they  think 
that  whirlwinds,  and  fudden  fqualls  of  wind,  are  occafioned  by  fpirits,  who  tranf- 
port  themfelves,  in  that  manner,  from  one  place  to  another. 

II  IV^a-ronnan  was  the  brother  of  Tofcar. 

i  Seiamath,  beautiful  to  behold,  the  name  of  Tofcai's  refidence,  on  the  coaft  of 
Uluer,  near  the  mountain  Cjom.Ia. 


A    P  O  E  M.  357 

©n  the  deep.  They  feem  to  fear  the  blall:.  Go  view  the 
fettling  fea.  Morning  is  grey  on  our  rocks.  The  fun  will 
foon  look  from  his  call ;  in  all  his  pride  of  light !  I  lifted 
up  my  fails,  with  joy,  before  the  halls  of  generous  Con- 
lath.  My  courfe  was  by  a  defart  ifle,  where  Cuthona  pur- 
fued  the  deer.  I  faw  her,  like  that  beam  of  the  fun  that 
ilfues  from  the  cloud.  Her  hair  was  on  her  heaving  breafl. 
She,  bending  forward,  drew  the  bow.  Her  white  arm 
feemed,  behind  her,  like  the  fnow  of  Cromla.  Come  to 
my  foul,  I  faid,  huntrefs  of  the  defart  iile  !  But  flie  waftes 
her  time  in  tears.  She  thinks  of  the  generous  Conlath. 
Where  can  1  find  thy  peace,  Cuthona,  lovely  maid ! 

CUTKONA*. 

A  DISTANT  deep  bends  over  the  fea,  with  aged  trees 
and  molly  rocks.  The  billow  rolls  at  its  feet.  On  its  fide 
is  the  du  elling  of  roes.  The  people  call  it  Mora.  There 
the  towers  of  my  love  arife.  There  Conlath  looks  over 
the  fea  for  his  only  love.  The  daughters  of  the  chace  re- 
turned. He  beheld  their  downcaft  eyes.  "  Where  is  the 
daughter  of  Rumar  ?"  But  they  anfwered  not.  My  peace 
dwells  on  Mora,  fon  of  the  diftant  land ! 

TOSCAR. 

Cuthona  fhall  return  to  her  peace  ;  to  the  towers  of 
generous  Conlath.  He  is  the  friend  of  Tofcar  !  I  have 
feafted  in  his  halls.  Rife,  ye  gentle  breezes  of  Erin. 
Stretch  my  fails  towards  Mora's  fliores.  Cuthona  fhall  reft 
on  Mora  ;  but  the  days  of  Tol'car  muft  be  fad.  I  fliall 
fit  in  my  cave,  in  the  field  of  the  fun.  The  blafl:  v/ill 
ruftle  in  my  trees.  I  fliall  think  it  is  Cuthona's  voice. 
But  fhe  is  diftant  far,  in  the  halls  of  the  mighty  Conlath  ! 
Cuthona. 

Ha  !  what  cloud  is  that  ?  It  carries  the  ghofts  of  my 
fathers.  I  fee  the  ikirts  of  their  robes,  like  grev  and  watry 
mift.  When  fliall  I  fall,  O  Rumar  ?  Sad  Cuthona  fore- 
fees  her  death.  Will  not  Conlath  behold  me,  before  I 
enter  the  narrow  houfe  f  ?  ^ 

'  OSSIAN. 

*  Cu-thona,  the  mournful  found  of  the  waves;  a  poetical  name  given  her  on  ac- 
count of  her  mourning  to  the  found  of  the  waves;  her  name  in  tradition  is  Gorm- 
fcuil,  the  blue-eyed  maid. 

+  The  grave. 


358      CONLATH  and  CUTHONA. 

OSSIAN. 

He  fhall  behold  thee,  O  maid  !  He  eomes  along  the 
heaving  fea.  The  death  of  Tofcar  is  dark  on  his  fpear. 
A  wound  is  in  his  fide  !  He  is  pale  at  the  cave  of  Thona. 
He  fliews  his  ghaftly  wound.  Where  art  thou,  with  thy 
tears,  Cuthona  ?  The  chief  of  Mora  dies  !--The  vinon 
grows  dim  on  my  mind :  I  behold  the  chiefs  no  more  1 
But,  O  ye  bards  of  future  times,  remember  the  fall  of 
Conlath  with  tears.  He  fell  before  his  day.  Sadnefs 
darkened  in  his  hall.  His  mother  looked  to  his  fliield  on 
the  wall,  and  it  was  bloody  f .  She  knew  thac  her  hero 
fell.  Her  forrow  was  heard  on  Mora.  Art  thou  pale  on 
thy  rock,  Cuthona,  befide  the  fallen  chiefs  r  Night  comes, 
and  day  returns,  but  none  appears  to  raife  their  tomb. 
Thou  frighteneft  the  fcreaming  fowls  away.  Thy  tears 
forever  flow.  Thou  art  pale  as  a  watry  cloud,  that  rifes 
from  a  lake  ! 

The  fons  of  green  Selma  came.  They  found  Cuthona 
cold.  They  railed  a  tomb  over  the  heroes.  She  relts  at 
the  fide  of  Conlath.  Come  not  to  my  dreams,  O  Con- 
lath  !  Thou  haft  received  thy  fame.  Be  ttiy  voice  far- 
diftant  from  my  hall,  that  lleep  may  defcend  at  night.  O 
that  I  could  forget  my  friends  ;  till  my  footfteps  Ihould 
ceafe  to  be  feen  !  till  I  come  among  them  with  joy  !  and 
lay  my  aged  limbs  in  the  narrow  houfe  ! 

+  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  times,  that  the  arms  left  by  the  heroes  at  home,  be- 
came bloody  the  very  iiiftant  their  owners  were  killed,  though  at  ever  fo  great  « 
diftancc. 


BERRA- 


BERRATHON 


POEM. 


ARGUMENT. 

FINGAL,  in  his  voyage  to  Lochlin,  whither  he  had  been  invited  by  Starno  the  fa« 
ther  of  Agandecca,  touched  at  Berrathon,  an  ifland  of  Scandinavia,  v/here  he 
was  kindly  entertained  by  Laithmor  the  petty  king  of  the  place,  who  was  a  vaf- 
fal  of  the  fupremc  kin^s  of  Lochlin.  The  hofpitality  of  Larthmor  gained  him 
Fingal's  friendfliip,  which  that  hero  manifcfted,  after  the  imprifonment  of  Larth- 
mor by  his  own  fon,  by  fending  Oflian  and  Tofcar,  the  father  of  Malvina  fo  of- 
ten mentioned,  to  refcuc  Larthmor,  and  to  punifli  the  unnatural  behavioui  of 
Uthal.  Uthal  was  handfome,  and,  by  the  ladies,  much  admired.  Nina-thoma^ 
the  beautiful  daughter  of  Torthoma,  a  neighbouring  prince,  fell  in  love  and  fled 
with  him.  He  proved  unconftant;  for  another  lady,  whofe  name  is  not  men- 
tioned, gaining  his  afFeftions,  he  confined  Nina-thoma  to  a  defart  ifland  near 
the  coaft  of  Berrathon.  She  was  relieved  "by  Oflian,  who,  in  company  with 
Tofcar,  landing  on  Berrathon,  defeated  the  forces  of  Uthal,  and  killed  him  in 
a  Angle  combat.  Nina-thoma,  whofe  love  not  all  the  bad  behaviour  of  Uthal 
could  erafe,  hearing  of  his  death,  died  of  grief.  In  the  mean  time  Larthmor  is 
reftored,  and  Oflian  and  Tofcar  return  in  triumph  to  Fingal. 

The  poem  opens  wiih  an  elegy  on  the  death  of  Malvina,  the  daughter  of  Tof- 
tai,  and  clofes  with  prefages  of  Oflian's  death. 


BERRATHON 


POEM. 

BEND  thy  blue  courfe,  O  ftream,  round  the  narrow 
plain  of  *  Lutha.  Let  the  green  woods  hang  over  it, 
from  their  hills ;  the  fun  look  on  it  at  noon.  The  thiflle 
is  there  on  its  rock,  and  fhakes  its  beard  to  the  wind.  The 
flower  hangs  its  heavy  head,  waving,  at  times,  to  the  gale. 
"  Why  doft  thou  awake  me,  O  gale,"  it  feems  to  fay,  "  I 
am  covered  with  the  drops  of  heaven  ?  The  time  of  my 
fading  is  near,  the  blaft  that  fliall  fcatter  my  leaves.  To- 
morrovvT  fhall  the  traveller  come ;  he  that  faw  me  in  my 
beauty  fhall  come.  His  eyes  will  fearch  the  field,  but 
they  will  not  find  me  ?"  So  fliall  they  fearch  in  vain,  for 
the  voice  of  Cona,  after  it  has  failed  in  the  field.  The 
hunter  fhall  come  forth  in  the  morning,  and  the  voice  of 
my  harp  fliall  not  be  heard.  "  Where  is  the  fon  of  car- 
borne  Fingal  ?"  The  tear  will  be  on  his  cheek !  Then 
come  thou,  O  Malvina,  with  all  thy  mufic  come.  Lay 
Ollian  in  the  plain  of  Lutha :  let  his  tomb  rife  in  the 
lovely  field. 

Malvina  !  where  art  thou,  with  thy  fongs,  with  the 
foft  found  of  thy  fleps  ?  Son  |  of  Alpin,  art  thou  near  ? 
where  is  the  daughter  of  Tofcar  ?  "  I  paffed,  O  fon  of 
Fingal,  by  Tor-lutha's  mofly  walls.  The  fmoke  of  the 
hall  was  ceafed.  Silence  was  among  the  trees  of  the  hilL 
The  voice  of  the  chace  was  over.  I  faw  the  daughters  of 
the  bow.  I  afked  about  Malvina,  but  they  anfwered  not. 
They  turned  their  faces  away:  thin  darknefs  covered  their 
beauty.  They  were  like  ftars,  on  a  rainy  hill,  by  night, 
each  looking  faintly  through  her  mift." 

Z  z  Pleasant 


*  Lutha,  fu'ift  Jlream. 

+   His  father  was  one  of  Fingal's  principal  bards,  and  hs  had  a  poetical  geniu? 


362  B  E  R  R  A  T  H  O  N  : 

Pleasant  *  be  thy  reft,  O  lovely  beam !  foon  haft 
thou  fet  on  our  hills !  The  fteps  of  thy  departure  were 
ftately,  like  the  moon  on  the  blue  trembling  wave.  But 
thou  haft  left  us  in  darknefs,  firft  of  the  maids  of  Lutha! 
We  fit,  at  the  rock,  and  there  is  no  voice ;  no  Hght  but 
the  meteor  of  fire!  Soon  haft  thou  fet,  O  Malvina,  daugh- 
ter of  generous  Tofcar  !  But  thou  rifeft  like  the  beam  of 
the  eaft,  among  the  fpirits  of  thy  friends,  where  they  fit, 
in  their  ftormy  halls,  the  chambers  of  the  thunder  !  A 
cloud  hovers  over  Cona.  Its  blue  curling  fides  are  high. 
The  winds  are  beneath  it,  with  their  wings.  Within  it  is 
the  dwelling  |  of  Fingal.  There  the  hero  fits  in  darknefs. 
His  airy  fpear  is  in  his  hand.  His  fhield,  half-covered  with 
clouds,  is  like  the  darkened  moon  ;  when  one  half  ftill 
remains  in  the  wave,  and  the  other  looks  fickly  on  the 
field! 

His  friends  fit  around  the  king,  on  mift !  They  hear 
the  fongs  of  Ullin:  he  ftrikes  the  half-viewlefs  harp.  He 
raifes  the  feeble  voice.  The  lefler  heroes,  with  a  thoufand 
meteors,  light  the  airy  hall.  Malvina  rifes,  in  the  midft ; 
a  blufti  is  on  her  cheek.  She  beholds  the  unknown  faces 
of  her  fathers.  She  turns  afide  her  humid  eyes.  "  Ari: 
thou  come  fo  foon  ?"  faid  Fingal,  "  daughter  of  generous 
Tofcar.  Sadnefs  dwells  in  the  halls  of  Lutha.  My  aged 
fon  II  is  fad  !  I  hear  the  breeze  of  Cona,  that  was  v/ont  to 
lift  thy  heavy  locks.  He  comes  to  the  hall,  but  thou  art  not 
there.  Its  voice  is  mournful  among  the  arms  of  thy  fa- 
thers !  Go,  with  thy  ruftling  wing,  O  breeze  !  figh  on 
Malvina's  tomb.  It  rifes  yonder  beneath  the  rock,  at  the 
blue  ftream  of  Lutha.  The  maids  §  are  departed  to  their 
place.    Thou  alone,  O  breeze,  mourneft  there  V* 

But  who  comes  from  the  dulky  weft,  fupported  on  a 

cloud  ? 

*  OfTian  fueaks.  He  calls  Malvina  a  learn  of  light,  and  continues  the  nicta- 
phoi  fhrou^hout  the  paragraph. 

+  Thtdeicrlptioi  of  this  ideal  palace  of  Fingal  is  agreeable  to  the  notions  of 
thole  times,  concerning  tht  ilate  of  the  deceafed,  who  were  fuppofed  to  purfue, 
after  deatii,  the  pleafures  and  e\nployn:ients  of  their  for;ner  life.  The  fituation  at 
the  Celtic  !i-:;oes,  in  their  feparate  ibte,  if  not  entirely  happv,  is  more  agreeable, 
than  the  n;-  ions  of  the  ancient  Greeks  concerning;  their  departed  heroes. 

II  OlTiaii;  who  had  a  great  ii  ii  .dfliip  foi  Malvina,  boih  on  account  of  her  love 
for  his  Ion  Ofcar,  and  h^r  attention  to  himfelf. 

\  That  is,  the  young  virgins  who  fung  the  funcu!  eicg}-  over  her  tcml>. 


A     P  O  E  M.  363 

cloud  ?  A  fmile  is  on  liIs  grey,  wati-y  face.  His  locks  of 
mid  fly  on  wind.  He  bends  forward  on  his  airy  fpear.  It 
is  thy  father,  Malvina !  "  Why  fliinell  thou,  fo  foon,  on 
our  clouds,"  he  fays,  "  O  lovely  light  of  Lutha!  But  thou 
wcrt  fad,  my  daughter.  Thy  friends  had  palled  away. 
The  fons  of  little  men  *  were  in  the  hall.  None  remained 
of  the  heroes,  but  Oflian  king  of  fpcars !" 

And  doft  thou  remember  Ofiian,  car-borne  Tofcarf, 
fon  of  Conloch  !  The  battles  of  our  youth  were  many. 
Our  fwords  went  together  to  the  field.  They  faw  us  com- 
ing like  two  falling  rocks.  The  fons  of  the  flranger  fled. 
"  There  come  the  warriors  of  Cona!"  they  faid.  "  Their 
fleps  are  in  the  paths  of  the  flying !"  Draw  near,  fon  of 
Alpin,  to  the  fong  of  the  aged.  The  deeds  of  other  times 
are  in  my  foul.  My  memory  beams  on  the  days  that  are 
pad  ;  on  the  days  of  mighty  Tofcar,  when  our  path  was 
in  the  deep.  Draw  near,  fon  of  Alpin,  to  the  iait  found 
of  the  voice  of  Cona  ! 

The  king  of  Morven  commanded.  I  raifed  my  fails  to 
the  wind.  Tofcar  chief  of  Lutha  flood  at  my  lide:  I  rofe 
on  the  dark-blue  wave.  Our  courfe  was  to  fea-furrounded 
Berrathon||,  the  ifle  of  many  ftorms.  There  dwelt,  with 
his  locks  of  age,  the  ftately  ilrength  of  Larthmor.  I  arth- 
mor,  who  fpread  the  fead  of  fliells  to  Fingal,  when  he 
went  to  Starno's  halls,  in  the  days  of  Agandecca.  Put 
when  the  chief  was  old,  the  pride  of  his  fon  arofe  ;  the 
pride  of  fair-haired  Uthal,  the  love  of  a  thoufand  maids. 
He  bound  the  aged  Larthmor,  and  dwelt  in  his  founding 
halls ! 

Long  pined  the  Idng  in  his  cave,  befide  his  roiling  fea. 
Day  did  not  come  to  his  dweUing  ;  nor  the  burning  oak 
by  night.  But  the  wind  of  ocean  was  there,  and  the 
parting  beam  of  the  moon.  The  red  dar  looked  on  the 
king,  when  it  trenbled  on  the  wedern  wave.    Snitho  came 

to 

*  Tradition  is  entirely  filent  concerning  vhat  paffed  in  the  north,  immediately 
after  the  death  of  Fingal,  and  all  his  heroes;  by  which  it  would  feem  that  the  ac- 
tions of  their  fucccflbrs  were  not  to  be  compared  to  thofe  of  the  renowned  Finga- 
lians. 

+  Tofcar  was  the  fon  of  that  Conloch,  who  was  alfo  father  to  the  lady,  whofc 
unfortunate  death  is  related  in  the  laft  epiftle  of  the  fccond  book  of  Fingal. 

11  Berrathon,  a  promontory  in  the  midjl  of  waves. 


3^4  B  E  R  R  A  T  H  O  N  : 

to  Selma's  hail :  Snitho,  the  friend  of  Lartlimor's  youth. 
He  told  of  the  king  of  Berrathon :  the  wrath  of  Fingal 
arofe.  Thrice  he  aifumed  the  fpear,  refolved  to  ftretch 
his  hand  to  Uthal.  But  the  memory  *  of  his  deeds  rofe 
before  the  king.  He  fent  his  fon  and  Tofcar.  Our  joy 
was  great  on  the  rolling  fea.  We  often  half-unfheathed 
our  fwords.  For  never  before  had  we  fought  alone,  in 
battles  of  the  fpear. 

Night  came  down  on  the  ocean.  The  winds  departed 
on  their  wings.  Cold  and  pale  is  the  moon.  The  red 
ftars  lift  their  heads  on  high.  Our  courfe  is  flow  along 
the  coaft  of  Berrathon.  The  white  waves  tumble  on  the 
rocks.  "  What  voice  is  that,'*  faid  Tofcar,  "  which  comes 
between  the  founds  of  the  waves  ?  It  is  foft  but  mournful, 
like  the  voice  of  departed  bards.  But  I  behold  a  maidf. 
She  fits  on  the  rock  alone.  Her  head  bends  on  her  arm 
of  fnow.  Her  dark  hair  is  in  the  wind.  Hear,  fon  of 
Fingal,  her  fong;  it  is  fmooth  as  the  gliding  ftream."  We 
came  to  the  filent  bay,  and  heard  the  maid  of  night. 

"  How  long  will  ye  roll  around  me,  blue-tumbling  wa- 
ters of  ocean  ?  My  dwelling  was  not  always  in  caves,  nor 
beneath  the  whiRling  tree.  The  feaft  was  fpread  in  Tor- 
thoma's  hall.  My  father  delighted  in  my  voice.  The 
youths  beheld  me  in  the  fteps  of  my  lovelinefs.  They 
bleiTed  the  dark-haired  Nina-thoma.  It  was  then  thou  didil 
come,  O  Uthal  !  like  the  fun  of  heaven !  The  fouls  of 
the  virgins  are  thine,  fon  of  generous  Larthmor!  But  why 
doll  thou  leave  me  alone,  in  the  midft  of  roaring  waters  ? 
"Was  my  foul  dark  with  thy  death  ?  Did  my  white  hand 
lift  the  fword  ?  Why  then  haft  thou  left  me  alone,  king 
of  high  Finthormo  || !" 

ThxL  tear  ftarted  from  my  eye,  when  I  heard  the  voice 
of  the  maid.  I  flood  before  her  in  my  arms.  I  fpoke  the 
words  of  peace  !  "  Lovely  dweller  of  the  cave  !  what  figh  ■ 


*  The  meaning  is,  that  Fingal  remembered  his  own  great  aftions,  and  confc- 
quently  would  not  fully  them  by  engaging  in  a  petty  war  againft  Uthal,  who  was 
ib  far  his  inferior  in  valour  and  power. 

+  Nina-thoma,  the  daughter  of  Torthoma,  who  had  been  confined  to  a  defart 
ifland  by  her  lover  Uthal. 

II  F'nthormo,  the  palace  of  Uthal.  The  names  in  this  epii"ode  are  not  of  a  Cel- 
tic original. 


A     P  O  E  M.  365 

is  in  thy  breafl:  ?  Shall  Offian  lift  his  fword  in  thy  pre- 
ience,  the  deftruftion  of  thy  foes  ?  Daughter  of  Tortho- 
ma,  rife.  I  have  heard  the  words  of  thy  grief.  The  race 
of  Morven  are  around  thee,  who  never  injured  the  weak. 
Come  to  our  dark-bofomed  fliip !  thou  brighter  than  that 
fetting  moon !  Our  courfe  is  to  the  rocky  Berrathon,  to 
the  echoing  walls  of  Finthormo."  She  came  in  her  beau- 
ty ;  file  came,  with  all  her  lovely  fteps.  Silent  joy  bright- 
ened in  her  face ;  as  when  the  fliadows  fly  from  the  field 
of  fpring ;  the  blue  ftream  is  rolling  in  brightnefs,  and 
the  green  bulh  bends  over  its  courfe  ! 

The  morning  rofe  with  its  beams.  We  came  to  Roth- 
ma's  bay.  A  boar  ruihed  from  the  wood :  my  fpear  pierc- 
ed his  fide,  and  he  fell.  I  rejoiced  over  the  blood  *.  I 
forefaw  my  growing  fame.  But  now  the  found  of  Uthal's 
train  came,  from  the  high  Finthormo.  They  fpread  over 
the  heath  to  the  chace  of  the  boar.  Himfelf  comes  llowly 
on,  in  the  pride  of  his  ftrength.  He  lifts  two- pointed 
fpears.  On  his  fide  is  the  hero's  fword.  Three  youths 
carry  his  poliihed  bows.  The  bounding  of  five  dogs  is 
before  him.  His  heroes  move  on,  at  a  diflance,  admiring 
the  fteps  of  the  king.  Stately  was  the  fon  of  Larthmor ! 
but  his  foul  was  dark !  Dark  as  the  troubled  face  of  the 
moon,  when  it  foretels  the  ftorms  ! 

We  rofe  on  the  heath  before  the  king.  He  ftopt  in  the 
midft  of  his  courfe.  His  heroes  gathered  round.  A  gray- 
haired  bard  advanced.  "  Whence  are  the  fons  of  the 
ftrangers  ?"  began  the  bard  of  fong.  "  The  children  of 
the  unhappy  come  to  Berrathon ;  to  the  fword  of  car- 
borne  Uthal.  He  fpreads  no  feaft  in  his  hall  :  the  blood 
of  ftrangers  is  on  his  ftreams.  If  from  Selma's  walls  ye 
com.e,  from  the  moffy  walls  of  Fingal,  chufe  three  youths 
to  go  to  your  king,  to  tell  of  the  fall  of  his  people.  Per- 
haps the  hero  may  come  and  pour  his  blood  on  Uthal's 
fword.  So  fiiall  the  fame  of  Finthormo  arife,  like  the 
growing  tree  of  ihe  vale  !" 

"  Never 

*  OfiTian  might  have  thought  that  his  killing  a  boar  on  his  firft  landing  in  Berra- 
thon, was  a  good  omen  of  his  future  fuccefs  in  that  ifland.  The  prefent  Highland- 
ers look,  with  a  degree  of  fuperftition,  upon  the  fuccefs  of  their  firft  aHion,  after 
tl)ey  have  engaged  in  any  dcfperatc  undertaking. 


366  B  E  R  R  A  T  H  O  N : 

"  Never  will  it  rife,  O  bard,"  I  faid,  in  the  pride  of 
my  wrath.  "  He  would  fhrink  from  the  prefence  of  Fin- 
gal,  whofe  eyes  are  the  flames  of  death.  The  fon  of  Com- 
hal  comes,  and  kings  vanifh  before  him.  They  are  rolled 
together,  like  mift,  by  the  breath  of  his  rage.  Shall  three 
tell  to  Fingal,  that  his  people  fell  ?  Yes  !  they  may  tell  it, 
bard  !  but  his  people  fliall  fill  with  fame  !" 

I  STOOD  in  the  darknefs  of  my  ftrength.  Tofcar  drew 
his  fword  at  my  fide.  The  foe  came  on  like  a  dream.  The 
mingled  found  of  death  arofe.  Man  took  man  ;  Ihield 
met  ihield  ;  fteel  mixed  its  beams  with  Reel.  Darts  hifs 
through  air.  Spears  ring  on  mails.  Swords  on  broken 
bucklers  bound.  As  the  noife  of  an  aged  grove  beneath 
the  roaring  wind,  when  a  thoufand  ghofts  break  the  trees 
by  night,  inch  was  the  din  of  arms  !  But  Uthal  fell  be- 
neath my  fword.  The  fons  of  Berrathon  fled.  It  was 
then  I  faw  him  in  his  beauty  ;  and  the  tear  hung  in  my 
eye  !  "  Thou  art  fallen*,  young  tree,"  I  laid,  "  with  all 
thy  beauty  round  thee.  Thou  art  fallen  on  thy  plains, 
and  the  field  is  bare.  The  winds  come  from  the  defart  j 
there  is  no  found  in  thy  leaves  !  Lovely  art  thou  in  death, 
fon  of  car-borne  Larthmor  !" 

NiNA-THOMA  fat  on  the  fhore.  She  heard  the  found 
of  battle.  She  turned  her  red  eyes  on  Lethmal,  the  gray- 
liaired  bard  of  Selma.  He  alone  had  remained  on  the 
coall,  with  the  daughter  of  Torthoma.  "  Son  of  the 
times  of  old  !"  flie  faid,  -'  I  hear  the  noife  of  death.  Thy 
friends  have  met  with  Ulhal,  and  the  chief  is  low !  O  that 
I  had  remained  on  the  rock,  inclofed  with  the  tumbling 
waves  !  Then  would  my  foul  be  fad,  but  his  death  would 
not  reach  my  ear.  Art  thou  fallen  on  thy  heath,  O  fon 
of  high  Finthormo  !  Thou  didil  leave  me  on  a  rock,  but 
my  foul  was  full  of  thee.  Son  of  high  Finthormo !  art 
thou  fallen  on  thy  heath  ?" 

She  rofe  pale  in  her  tears.  She  faw  the  bloody  fhield 
of  Uthal.    She  faw  it  in  Ofl^ian's  hand.    Her  fleps  were 

difl:raaed 

*  To  mourn  over  the  fall  of  their  enemies,  was  a  praflice  univerfal  among  the 
Celtic  heroes.  This  is  more  agreeable  to  humanity,  than  the  fliameful  infukiiig  of 
the  dead,  fo  cominon  in  Homer,  and,  after  him,  fervilely  copied  by  all  his  imita- 
tors, the  humane  Virgil  not  excepted,  who  have  been  more  furcefsful  in  borrowing 
the  imperfeftions  of  that  great  poet,  than  in  theii  imitations  of  his  beauties. 


A    POEM:  367 

(riRracled  on  the  heath.  She  flew.  She  found  him.  She 
fell.  Her  foul  came  forth  In  a  figh.  Her  hair  is  fpread 
on  his  face.  My  burlling  tears  defcend.  A  tomb  arofc 
on  the  unhappy.  My  fong  of  woe  was  heard.  "  Reft, 
haplefs  children  of  youth  !  Reft  at  the  noife  of  that  molTy 
ftream  !  The  virgins  will  fee  your  tomb,  at  the  chace,  and 
turn  away  their  weeping  eyes.  Your  fame  will  be  in 
fong.  The  voice  of  the  harp  will  be  heard  in  your  praife. 
The  daughters  of  Selma  fhall  hear  it :  your  renown  fhall 
be  in  other  lands.  Reft,  children  of  youth,  at  the  noife 
of  the  moffy  ftream." 

Two  days  we  remained  on  the  coaft.  The  heroes  of 
Berrathon  convened.  We  brought  Larthmor  to  his  halls. 
The  feaft  of  ftells  is  fpread.  The  joy  of  the  aged  was 
great.  He  looked  to  the  arms  of  his  fathers  :  the  arms 
which  he  left  in  his  hall,  when  the  pride  of  Uthal  rofe. 
We  were  renowned  before  Larthmor.  He  bleffed  the 
chiefs  of  Morven.  He  knew  not  that  his  fon  was  low, 
the  ftately  ftrength  of  Uthal !  They  had  told,  that  he  had 
retired  to  the  woods,  with  the  tears  of  grief.  They  had 
told  it ;  but  he  was  filent  in  the  tomb  of  Rothma's  heath. 

On  the  fourth  day  we  raifed  our  fails,  to  the  roar  of  the 
northern  wind.  Larthmor  came  to  the  coaft.  His  bards 
exalted  the  fong.  The  joy  of  the  king  was  great.  He 
looked  to  Rothma's  gloomy  heath  :  he  faw  the  tomb  of 
his  fon.  The  memory  of  Uthal  rofe.  "  Who  of  my  he- 
roes," he  faid,  "  lies  there  ?  He  feems  to  have  been  of 
the  kings  of  men.  Was  he  renowned  in  my  halls,  before 
the  pride  of  Uthal  rofe  ?  Ye  are  fdent,  fons  of  Berra- 
thon !  is  the  king  of  heroes  low  ?  My  heart  melts  for 
thee,  O  Uthal  !  though  thy  hand  was  againft  thy  father. 
O  that  I  had  remained  in  the  cave !  that  my  fon  had 
dwelt  in  Finthormo  !  I  might  have  heard  the  tread  of 
his  feet,  when  he  went  to  the  chace  of  the  boar  :  I  might 
have  heard  his  voice  on  the  blaft  of  my  cave.  Then  would 
my  foul  be  glad  :  but  now  darknefs  dwells  in  my  halls." 

Such*  were  my  deeds,  fon  of  Alpin,  when  the  arm  of 
my  youth  was  ftrong.  Such,  the  actions  of  Tofcar,  the 
car-borne  fon  of  Conloch.     But  Tofcar  is  on  his  living 

cloud. 

*  Ofliaa  fpeab. 


368 


BERRATHON: 


cloud.  I  am  alone  at  Lutha.  My  voice  is  like  the  iafl: 
found  of  the  wind,  when  it  forfakes  the  woods.  But  Offian 
fhall  not  be  long  alone.  He  fees  the  mill:  that  fhall  veceive 
his  ghoft.  He  beholds  the  mill  that  fhall  form  his  robe, 
when  he  appears  on  his  hills.  The  fons  of  feeble  men  fhall 
behold  me,  and  admire  the  ftature  of  the  chiefs  of  old. 
They  fhall  creep  to  their  caves.  They  fliall  look  to  the 
fky  with  fear  ;  for  my  fteps  fhall  be  in  the  clouds.  Dark- 
nefs  fhall  roll  on  my  fide. 

Lead,  fon  of  Alpin,  lead  the  aged  to  his  woods.  The 
winds  begin  to  rife.  The  dark  wave  of  the  lake  refounds. 
Bends  there  not  a  tree  from  Mora,  with  its  branches  bare  ? 
It  bends,  fon  of  Alpin,  in  the  ruflling  blafl.  My  harp 
hangs  on  a  blafled  branch.  The  found  of  Its  firings  is 
mournful.  Does  the  wind  touch  thee,  O  harp  !  or  is  it 
fome  pafTmg  ghofl  ?  It  is  the  hand  of  Malvina  !  Bring 
me  the  harp,  fon  of  Alpin.  Another  fong  fhall  rife.  My 
foul  fhall  depart  in  the  found.  My  fathers  fhall  hear  it  in 
their  airy  hall.  Their  dim  faces  fhall  hang,  with  joy,  from 
their  clouds  ;  and  their  hands  receive  their  fon.  The  aged 
oak  bends  over  the  flream.  It  fighs  with  all  its  mofs. 
The  withered  fern  whiflles  near,  and  mixes,  as  it  waves, 
with  Oflian's  hair. 

Strike  the  harp,  and  raife  the  fong  :  be  near,  with  all 
your  wings,  ye  winds.  Bear  the  mournful  found  away  to 
Fingal's  airy  hail.  Bear  it  to  Fingal's  hall,  that  he  may 
hear  the  voice  of  his  fon  ;  the  voice  of  him  that  praifed 
the  mighty  ! 

The  blaft  of  north  opens  thy  gates,  O  king  !  I  behold 
thee  fitting  on  mifl,  dimly  gleaming  in  all  thine  arms. 
Thy  form  now  is  not  the  terror  of  the  valiant.  It  is  like 
a  watry  cloud  ;  when  we  fee  the  ftars  behind  it,  with  their 
weeping  eyes.  Thy  fhield  is  the  aged  moon ;  thy  fword, 
a  vapour  half-kindled  with  fire.  Dim  and  feeble  is  the 
chief,  who  travelled  in  brightnefs  before!   But  thy  fleps* 

are 

*  This  dcfcription  of  the  power  of  Fingal  over  the  winds  and  florms,  and  the 
image  of  his  taking  the  fun,  and  hiding  him  in  the  clouds,  do  not  correfpond  with 
:he  preceding  paragraph,  where  he  is  reprefented  as  a  feeble  ghoft,  and  no  more 
the  nrrci-  of  the  -jaliant;  but  it  agrees  with  the  notion  of  the  times  concerning  the 
fouls  of  !iie  deceafed,  who,  it  was  fuppofed,  had  the  command  of  the  winds  and 
ilorm?,  but  tcok  no  concern  in  the  afiairs  of  men. 


A     P  O  E  M.  369 

are  on  the  winds  of  the  defart.  The  florms  are  darkening 
in  thy  hand.  Thou  takefl  the  fun  in  thy  wrath,  and  hidelt 
him  in  thy  clouds.  The  fons  of  little  men  are  afraid. 
A  thoufand  fliowers  defcend.  But  when  thou  corned  forth 
in  thy  mildnefs,  the  gale  of  the  morning  is  near  thy  courfe. 
The  fun  laughs  in  his  blue  fields.  The  grey  llream  winds 
in  its  vale.  The  buflies  lliake  their  green  heads  in  the 
wind.    The  roes  bound  towards  the  defart. 

There  is  a  murmur  in  the  heath!  the  llormy  winds 
abate  !  I  hear  the  voice  of  Fingal.  Long  has  it  been  ab- 
fent  from  mine  ear  !  "  Come,  Offian,  come  away,"  he 
fays  :  "  Fingal  has  received  his  fame.  We  palTed  away, 
like  flames  that  had  fhone  for  a  feafon.  Our  departure 
was  in  renown.  Though  the  plains  of  our  battles  are  dark 
and  filent,  our  fame  is  in  the  four  grey  ftones.  The  voice 
of  Olfian  has  been  heard.  The  harp  has  been  ftrung  in 
Selma.  Come,  Offian,  come  away,"  he  fays ;  "  come, 
fly  with  thy  fathers  on  clouds."  I  come,  I  come,  thou 
king  of  men  !  The  life  of  Oflran  fails.  I  begin  to  vanifh 
on  Cona.  My  fteps  are  not  feen  in  Selma.  Befide  the 
flone  of  Mora  I  fliali  fall  afleep.  The  winds  whiftling  in 
my  grey  hair,  fliall  not  awaken  me.  Depart  on  thy  wings, 
O  wind  !  thou  canft  not  difliurb  the  reft  of  the  bard.  The 
night  is  long,  but  his  eyes  are  heavy.  Deuart,  thou  ruft- 
ling  blaft  ! 

But  why  art  thou  fad,  fon  of  Fingal  ?  Why  grows  the 
cloud  of  thy  foul  ?  The  chiefs  of  other  times  are  depart- 
ed. They  have  gone  without  their  fame.  The  fons  of  fu- 
ture years  fhall  pafs  away  :  another  race  fliall  arife.  The 
people  are  like  the  waves  of  ocean  ;  like  the  leaves  of 
woody  Morven :  they  pafs  away  in  the  ruft:ling  blaft,  and 
other  leaves  lift  their  green  heads  on  high.  Did  thy 
beauty  laft,  O  Ryno*?  Stood  the  ftrength  of  car-borne 
A  a  a  Ofcar  ? 

*  Ryno,  the  fon  of  Fingal,  who  was  killed  in  Ireland,  in  the  war  againft  Swa- 
ran,  was  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  his  pcrfon,  his  fwiftnefs  and  great  exploits. 
Minvane,  the  daughter  of  Morni,  and  filler  to  Gaul,  was  in  love  with  Ryno.  Her 
lamentation  over  her  lover  follows. 

SHE  blufhing  fad,  from  Morven's  rocks,  bends  over  the  darkly-rolling  fea.    She 
fees  the  youth  in  all  their  arms.     Where,  Ryno,  where  art  thou  ? 

Our 


370 


BERRATHON. 


Ofcar  ?  Fingal  himfelf  departed.  The  halls  of  his  fathers 
forgot  his  fteps,  Shalt  thou,  then,  remain,  thou  aged 
bard  !  when  the  mighty  have  failed  ? — But  my  fame  (hall 
remain,  and  grow  like  the  oak  of  Morven  ;  which  lifts  its 
broad  head  to  the  florm,  and  rejoices  in  the  courfe  of 
the  wind ! 

Our  dark  looks  told  that  lie  was  low!  That  pale  the  hero  flew  on  clouds !  That 
in  the  grafs  of  Morven's  hills,  his  feeble  voice  was  heard  in  wind  I 

And  is  the  fon  of  Fingal  fallen,  on  UHln's  niofTy  plains  ?  Strong  was  the  arm 
that  vanquilhed  him  !    Ah  nie  I  1  am  alone! 

Alone  I  fhall  not  be,  ye  winds !  that  lift  my  dark-brown  hair.  My  fighs  fhall 
not  long  mix  with  your  ftream  ;  for  I  mud  deep  with  Rvno. 

1  fee  thee  not,  with  beauty's  fteps,  returning  from  the  chace.  The  night  is  round 
Minvane's  love.     Dark  filence  dwells  with  Ryno. 

Where  are  thy  dogs,  and  where  thy  bow?  Thy  fiiield,  that  was  fo  ftrong  ?  Thy 
fword,  like  heaven's  defcending  fire  ?  The  bloody  fpcar  of  Ryno  ? 

I  fee  them  mixed  in  thy  deep  fhip;  I  fee  them  ftaincd  with  blood.  No  arms  arc 
in  thy  narrow  hall,  O  darkly-dwelling  R)'no  ! 

When  will  the  morning  come,  and  fay,  "  arife,  thou  king  of  fpears  I  arife,  the 
hunters  are  abroad.     The  hinds  are  near  thee,  Ryno!" 

Away,  thou  fair-haired  morning,  away !  the  {lumbering  king  hears  thee  not ! 
The  hinds  bound  over  his  narrow  tomb  !  for  death  dwells  round  young  Ryno. 

But  I  will  tread  foftly,  my  king  !  and  Ileal  to  the  bed  of  thy  repofc.  Minvane 
Xvill  lie  in  filence,   nor  diftuib  the  flumbering  Rvno. 

The  maids  ihall  feek  me  ;  but  they  fhall  not  find  me  :  they  fliall  follow  oiy  de- 
parture with  fongs.  But  1  fliall  not  hear  you,  O  maids;  I  fleep  with  fair-haired 
Rvno. 


DISSERTATION 


CONCERNING   THE 


^RA   OF   OSSIAN. 


A 

DISSERTATION 

CONCERNING    THE 

J*    R    A      OF     O    S     S    I     A    N. 


INQUIRIES  into  the  antiquities  of  nations  afford  more 
pleafure  than  any  real  advantage  to  mankind.  The  in- 
genious may  form  fyftems  of  hiftory  on  probabilities  and 
a  few  fads;  but  at  a  great  diilance  of  time,  their  accomits 
mud  be  vague  and  uncertain.  The  infancy  of  dates  and 
kingdoms  is  as  dellitute  of  great  events,  as  of  the  means 
of  tranfmitting  them  to  pollerity.  The  arts  of  poliflied  life, 
by  which  alone  facts  can  be  preferved  with  certainty,  are 
the  produdtions  of  a  well-formed  community.  It  is  then  hif- 
torians  begin  to  write,  and  public  tranfactions  to  be  worthy 
remembrance.  The  adions  of  former  times  are  left  in  ob- 
fcurity,  or  magnified  by  uncertain  traditions.  Hence  it  is 
that  we  find  fo  much  of  the  marvellous  in  the  origin  of  every 
nation  ;  poflerity  being  always  ready  to  believe  any  thing, 
however  fabulous,  that  reflects  honour  on  their  anceffcors. 

The  Greeks  and  Romans  were  remarkable  for  this 
weaknefs.  They  fwallowed  the  mofl  abfurd  fables  con- 
cerning the  high  antiquities  of  their  refpeftive  nations. 
Good  hiflorians,  however,  rofe  very  early  amongfl  them, 
and  tranfraitted,  with  luflre,  their  great  aftions  to  pofle- 
rity. It  is  to  them  that  they  owe  that  unrivalled  fame  they 
now  enjoy,  while  the  great  actions  of  other  nations  are 
involved  in  fables,  or  loft  in  obfcurity.  The  Celtic  nati- 
ons afford  a  flriking  inftance  of  this  kind.  They,  though 
once  the  mafters  of  Europe  from  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Oby  *,  in  RufTia,  to  Cape  Finiftcrre,  the  weflern  point  of 
Gallicia  in  Spain,  are  very  little  mentioned  in  hiftory. 
They  trufted  their  fame  to  tradition  and  the  fongs  of  their 
bards,  which,  by  the  viciffitude  of  human  affairs,  are  long 

fince 
*  Plin.  1.  6. 


374 


A  DISSERTATION  concerning 


fince  lofr.  Their  ancient  language  is  the  only  monument 
that  remains  of  them ;  and  the  traces  of  it  being  found  in 
places  fo  widely  diftant  from  each  other,  ferves  only  to 
fhew  the  extent  of  their  ancient  power,  but  throws  very 
little  light  on  their  hiftory. 

Of  all  the  Celtic  nations,  that  which  poflfeffed  old  Gaul 
is  the  mod  renowned ;  not  perhaps  on  account  of  worth 
fuperior  to  the  reft,  but  for  their  wars  with  a  people  who 
had  hiftorians  to  tranfmit  the  fame  of  their  enemies,  as 
well  as  their  own,  to  pofterity.  Britain  was  firfl  peopled 
by  them,  according  to  the  teflimony  of  the  beft  authors  *  ; 
its  fituation  in  refpect  to  Gaul  makes  the  opinion  proba- 
ble ;  but  what  puts  it  beyond  alt  difpute,  is  that  the  fame 
cuftoms  and  language  prevailed  among  the  inhabitants  of 
both  in  the  days  of  Julius  Csefar  |. 

The  colony  from  Gaul  pofleffed  themfelves,  at  firft,  of 
that  part  of  Britain  which  was  next  to  their  own  country; 
and  fpreading  northward,  by  degrees,  as  they  increafed 
in  numbers,  peopled  the  whole  ifjand.  Some  adventurers 
palling  over  from  thofe  parts  of  Britain  that  are  wdthin 
fight  of  Ireland,  were  the  founders  of  the  Irifh  nation  : 
which  is  a  more  probable  ftory  than  the  idle  fables  of  Mi- 
lefian  and  Gallician  cclonies.  Diodorus  Siculus  ||  menti- 
ons it  as  a  thing  well  known  in  his  time,  that  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Ireland  were  originally  Britons,  and  his  teftimony 
is  unqueilionable,  when  v/e  confider  that,  for  many  ages, 
the  language  and  cuftoms  of  both  nations  were  the  fame. 

Tacitus  was  of  opinion  that  the  ancient  Caledonians 
were  of  German  extraft ;  but  even  the  ancient  Germans 
theuifelves  were  Gauls.  The  prefent  Germans,  properly 
fo  called,  were  not  the  fame  with  the  ancient  Celt^e.  The 
manners  and  cuftoms  of  the  two  nations  were  ftmilar;  but 
their  language  different.  The  Germ.ans§  are  the  genuine 
deicendents  of  the  ancient  Scandinavians,  who  crofl'ed,  in 
an  early  period,  the  Baltic.  The  Celtje  ^,  anciently,  fent 
many  colonies  into  Germany,  all  of  whom  retained  their 
own  laws,  language,  and  cuftoms,  till  they  were  diffipated, 


*  Caef.  1.  5.  Tac.  Agric.  c.  2.  I  Carfar.  Pomp.  Mel.  Tacitus. 

!1  Diod.  Sic.  1.  J.  II  Strabo,  1.  7.  f  Cvef.  1.   6.     Uv.   V. 

Tic.  dc  mor.  Germ, 


THE  yiL.RA  OF  OSSIAN.  375 

in  the  Roman  empire ;  and  it  is  of  them,  if  any  colonies 
came  from  Germany  into  Scotland,  that  the  ancient  Ca- 
ledonians were  defcended. 

But  whether  the  Caledonians  were  a  colony  of  the  Cel- 
tic Germans,  or  the  fame  with  the  Gauls  that  firfl  poffef- 
led  themfelves  of  Britain,  is  a  matter  of  no  moment  at 
this  diftance  of  time.  Whatever  their  origin  was,  we  find 
them  very  numerous  in  the  time  of  Julius  Agricola,  which 
is  a  prefumption  that  they  were  long  before  fettled  in  the 
country.  The  form  of  their  government  was  a  mixture 
of  ariftocracy  and  monarchy,  as  it  was  in  all  the  countries 
where  the  Druids  bore  the  chief  fway.  This  order  of  men 
feems  to  have  been  formed  on  the  fame  principles  with 
ihe  Daftyli  Idsei  and  Curetes  of  the  ancients.  Their  pre 
tended  intercourfe  with  heaven,  their  magic  and  divina- 
tion, were  the  fame.  The  knowledge  of  the  Druids  in  na- 
tural caufes,  and  the  properties  of  cer':ain  things,  the  fruit 
of  the  experiments  of  ages,  gained  them  a  mighty  repu- 
tation among  the  people.  The  efteem  of  the  populace 
foon  increafed  into  a  veneration  for  the  order;  which  thefe 
cunning  and  ambitious  priefts  took  care  to  improve,  to 
fuch  a  degree,  that  they,  in  a  manner,  engroffed  the  ma- 
nagement of  civil,  as  well  as  religious,  matters.  It  is  ge- 
nerally allowed  that  they  did  not  abufe  this  extraordinary 
power  ;  the  preferving  their  character  of  fandity  was  fo 
effentiai  to  their  influence,  that  they  never  broke  out  into 
violence  or  oppreflion.  The  chiefs  w^^e  allowed  to  exe- 
cute the  laws,  but  the  legiHative  power  was  entirely  in  the 
hands  of  the  Druids*.  It  was  by  their  authority  that  the 
tribes  were  united,  in  times  of  the  greateft  danger,  un- 
der one  head.  This  temporary  king,  or  Vergobretns  -j-. 
was  chofen  by  them,  and  generally  laid  down  his  office  at 
!he  end  of  the  war.  Thefe  prieils  enjoyed  long  this  extra- 
ordinary privilege,  among  the  Celtic  nations  who  lay  be- 
yond the  pale  of  the  Roman  empire.  It  was  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  fecond  century  that  their  power  among  the 
Caledonians  began  to  decline.  The  traditions  concerning 
Trathal  and  Cormac,  anceftors  to  Fingal,  are  full  of  the 
particulars  of  the  fall  of  the  Druids :  a  fmgular  fate,   it 

muft 

*  Caif.  i.  6.  +  Fer-jiubjeih.   t!ii  man  to  iudje. 


376      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

muft  be  owned,  of  priefts,  who  had  once  eflablifhed  their 
fuperltition ! 

The  continual  wars  of  the  Caledonians  againft  the  Ro- 
mans hindered  the  better  fort  from  initiating  themfeives, 
as  the  cuflom  formerly  was,  into  the  order  of  the  Druids. 
The  precepts  of  their  religion  were  confined  to  a  few,  and 
were  not  much  attended  to  by  a  people  inured  to  war. 
The  Vergobretus,  or  chief  magiftrate,  was  chofen  with- 
out the  concurrence  of  the  hierarchy,  or  continued  in  of- 
fice againft  their  will.  Continual  power  ftrengthened  his 
intereft  among  the  tribes,  and  enabled  him  to  fend  down, 
as  hereditary  to  his  poflerity,  the  ofiice  he  had  only  re- 
ceived himfelf  by  eleftion. 

On  occafion  of  a  new  war  againft  the  King  of  the  World, 
as  tradition  emphatically  calls  the  Roman  emperor,  the 
Druids,  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  order,  began  to 
refurne  their  ancient  privilege  of  chufmg  the  Vergobretus. 
Garmal,  the  fon  of  Tarno,  being  deputed  by  them,  came 
to  the  grandfather  of  the  celebrated  Fingal,  who  was  then 
Vergobretus,  and  commanded  him,  in  the  name  of  the 
whole  order,  to  lay  down  his  office.  Upon  his  refufal,  a 
civil  war  commenced,  which  foon  ended  in  the  almoft  to- 
tal extinction  of  the  religious  order  of  the  Druids.  A  few 
that  remained,  retired  to  the  dark  receffes  of  their  groves, 
and  the  caves  they  had  formerly  ufed  for  their  meditati- 
ons. It  is  then  we  find  them  in  the  circle  ofjiones,  and  un- 
heeded by  the  world.  A  total  dilVegard  for  the  order,  and 
utter  abhorrence  of  the  Druidical  rites,  enfued.  Under 
this  cloud  of  public  hate,  all  that  had  any  knowledge  of 
the  religion  of  the  Druids  became  extindt,  and  the  nation 
fell  into  the  laft  degree  of  ignorance  of  their  rites  and  ce- 
remonies. 

It  is  no  matter  of  wonder  then,  that  Fingal  and  his  fon 
OfTian  diiliked  the  Druids,  who  were  the  declared  enemies 
to  their  fuccefTion  in  the  fupreme  magiftracy.  It  is  a  fm- 
gular  cafe,  it  muft  be  allowed,  that  there  are  no  traces  of 
religion  in  the  poems  afcribed  to  OfTian ;  as  the  poetical 
compofitions  of  other  nations  are  fo  clofely  connefted  with 
their  mythology.  But  gods  are  not  neceffary,  when  the 
poet  has  genius.  It  is  hard  to  account  for  it  to  tbofe  who 

are 


THE  .flRA  OF  OSSIAN.  377 

are  not  made  acquainted  with  the  manner  of  the  old  Scot- 
tiih  bards.  That  race  of  men  carried  their  notions  of  mar- 
tial honour  to  an  extravagant  pitch.  Any  aid  given  their 
heroes  in  battle  was  thought  to  derogate  from  their  fame  ; 
and  the  bards  immediately  transferred  the  glory  of  the  ac- 
tion to  him  who  had  given  that  aid. 

Had  the  poet  brought  down  gods,  as  often  as  Homer 
hath  done,  to  affift  his  heroes,  his  work  had  not  confifted 
of  eulogiums  on  men,  but  of  hymns  to  fuperior  beings. 
Thofe  who  write  in  the  Galic  language  feldom  mention 
religion  in  their  profane  poetry;  and  when  they  profefledly 
write  of  religion,  they  never  mix  with  their  compofitions, 
the  adions  of  their  heroes.  This  cuflom  alone,  even  tho' 
the  religion  of  the  Druids  had  not  been  previouily  extin- 
guifhed,  may,  in  fome  meafure,  excufe  the  author's  filence 
concerning  the  religion  of  ancient  times. 

To  allege,  that  a  nation  is  void  of  all  religion,  would 
betray  ignorance  of  the  hiftory  of  mankind.  The  tradi- 
tions of  their  fathers,  and  their  own  obfervatlons  on  the 
works  of  nature,  together  with  that  fuperflition  which  is 
inherent  in  the  human  frame,  have,  in  all  ages,  raifed  in 
the  minds  of  men  fome  idea  of  a  fnperior  being.  Hence 
it  is,  that  in  the  darkeft  times,  and  amongft  the  mod  bar- 
barous nations,  the  very  populace  themfelves  had  fome 
faint  notion,  at  leaft  of  a  divinity.  The  Indians,  who  wor- 
fhip  no  God,  believe  that  he  exifts.  It  would  be  doing 
injuflice  to  the  author  of  thefe  poems,  to  think,  that  he 
had  not  opened  his  conceptions  to  that  primitive  and 
greatefl  of  all  truths.  But  let  his  religion  be  what  it  will, 
it  is  certain  that  he  has  not  alluded  to  Chriilianity,  nor 
any  of  its  rites,  in  his  poems;  which  ought  to  fix  his  opi- 
nions, at  lead  to  an  aera  prior  to  that  religion.  Conjec- 
tures, on  this  fubject,  muft  fupply  the  place  of  proof.  The 
perfecution  begun  by  Dioclefian,  in  the  year  303,  is  the 
moffc  probable  time  in  which  the  firft  dawning  of  Chriili- 
anity in  the  north  of  Britain  can  be  fixed.  The  humane 
and  mild  character  of  Conftantius  Chlorus,  who  com- 
manded then  in  Britain,  induced  the  perfecuted  Chriftians 
to  take  refuge  under  him.  Some  of  them,  through  a  zeal 
to  propagate  their  tenets,  or  through  fear,  went  beyond 
B  b  b  the 


378      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

the  pale  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  fettled  among  the  Ca- 
ledonians ;  who  were  ready  to  hearken  to  their  doctrines, 
as  the  religion  of  the  Druids  was  exploded  long  before. 

These  miflionaries,  either  through  choice,  or  to  give 
more  weight  to  the  do£lrine  they  advanced,  took  poiTeffion 
of  the  cells  and  groves  of  the  Druids ;  and  it  was  from 
this  retired  life  that  they  had  the  name  of  Ctildees*,  which 
in  the  language  of  the  country  {\^m.^^di  fequejiered perfom. 
It  vi^as  with  one  of  the  Culdees  that  Offian,  in  his  extreme 
old  age,  is  faid  to  have  difputed  concerning  the  Chriftian 
religion.  This  difpute,  they  fay,  is  extant,  and  is  couched 
in  verfe,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  times.  The  ex- 
treme ignorance  on  the  part  of  Offian,  of  the  Chriftian  te- 
nets, fhews,  that  that  religion  had  only  been  lately  intro- 
duced, as  it  is  not  eafy  to  conceive,  how  one  of  the  firft 
rank  could  be  totally  unacquainted  with  a  religion  that 
had  been  known  for  any  time  in  the  country.  The  difpute 
bears  the  genuine  marks  of  antiquity.  The  obfolete  phrafes 
and  exprelTions,  peculiar  to  the  times,  prove  it  to  be  no 
forgery.  If  Offian  then  lived  at  the  introduction  of  Chrif^^ 
tianity,  as  by  all  appearance  he  did,  his  epoch  will  be  the 
latter  end  of  the  third,  and  beginning  of  the  fourth,  cen- 
tury.    Tradition  here  fteps  in  with  a  kind  of  proof. 

The  exploits  of  Fingal  againft  Caracul  f ,  the  fon  of 
the  khig  of  the  world,  are  among  the  firft  brave  actions  of 
his  youth.  A  complete  poem,  which  relates  to  this  fubr 
jeft,  is  printed  in  this  colleftion. 

In  the  year  210  the  emperor  Severus,  after  returning 
from  his  expedition  againft  the  Caledonians,  at  York  fell 
into  the  tedious  illnefs  of  which  he  afterwards  died.  The 
Caledonians  and  Malatas,  refuming  courage  from  his  in- 
difpofition,  took  arms,  in  order  to  recover  the  pofleffions 
they  had  loft.  The  enraged  emperor  commanded  his  ar- 
my to  march  into  their  country,  and  to  deftroy  it  with  fire 
and  fword.  His  orders  were  but  ill  executed,  for  his 
fon,  Caracalla,  was  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  his 
thoughts  were  entirely  taken  up  with  the  hopes  of  his 
father's  death,  and  with  fchemes  to  fupplant  his  brother 
'  Geta. 

*  Culdich.  +  Carac'huil,  terrible  eye.      Carac'hcalla,  terrible  look. 

Carac'challamh,  ajort  of  upper  garment. 


THE  ^RA  OF  OSSIAN.  379 

Oeta. ^He  fcarcely  had  entered  the  enemy's  country, 

\vhen  news  was  brought  him  that  Severus  was  dead. — A 
fudden  peace  is  patched  up  with  the  Caledonians,  and,  as 
it  appears  from  Dion  Caflius,  the  country  they  had  loft  to 
Severus  was  reftored  to  them. 

The  Caracul  of  Fingal  is  no  other  than  Caracalla,  whoj 
as  the  fon  of  Severus,  the  Emperor  of  Rome,  whofe  do- 
minions were  extended  almofl  over  the  known  world,  was 
not  without  reafon  called  the  Son  of  the  kifig  of  the  world* 
The  fpace  of  time  between  211,  the  year  Severus  died, 
the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century,  is  not  fo  great,  but 
OlTian,  the  fon  of  Fingal,  might  have  feen  the  Chriflians 
whom  the  perfecution  under  Dioclefian  had  driven  be- 
yond the  pale  of  the  Roman  empire. 

In  one  of  the  many  lamentations  on  the  death  of  Of- 
car,  a  battle  which  he  fought  againft  Caros,  king  of  fhips, 
on  the  banks  of  the  winding  Carun*,  is  mentioned  among 
his  great  actions.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  Caros 
mentioned  here,  is  the  fame  with  the  noted  ufurper  Ca- 
raufms,  who  affumed  the  purple  in  the  year  287,  and  feiz- 
ing  on  Britain,  defeated  the  emperor  Maximian  Hercu- 
lius,  in  feveral  naval  engagements,  which  giVes  propriety 
to  his  being  called  the  King  of  Ships.  The  zvi?tding  Cariat 
is  that  fmall  river  retaining  ftill  the  name  of  Carron,  and 
runs  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Agricola's  wall,  which  Ca- 
laufius  repaired,  to  ob(lru£l  the  incurfions  of  the  Caledo- 
nians. Several  other  paiTages  in  traditions  allude  to  the 
wars  of  the  Romans ;  but  the  two  juft  mentioned  clearly 
fix  the  epocha  of  Fingal,  to  the  third  century  ;  and  this: 
account  agrees  exaftly  with  the  Irifh  hiftories,  which  place 
the  death  of  Fingal,  the  fon  of  Comhal,  in  the  year  283, 
and  that  of  Ofcar  and  their  own  celebrated  Cairbre,  in  the 
year  296.    ■ 

Some  people  may  imagine,  that  the  allufions  to  the  Ro- 
man hiftory  might  have  been  derived  by  tradition,  from 
learned  men,  more  than  from  ancient  poems.  This  muft 
then  have  happened  at  leaft  three  ages  ago,  as  thefe  allufi-. 
ons  are  mentioned  often  in  the  compofitions  of  thofe  times- 

Every  one  knows  what  a  cloud  of  ignorance  and  bar- 

barifm 

i  Car-ravon,  winding  rivert 


38o     A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

barifm  overfpread  the  north  of  Europe  three  hundred 
years  ago.  The  minds  of  men,  addided  to  fuperftition, 
contracted  a  narrownefs  that  deftroyed  genius.  Accord- 
ingly, we  find  the  compofitions  of  thofe  times  trivial  and 
puerile  to  the  laft  degree.  But  let  it  be  allowed,  that, 
amidft  all  the  untoward  circumftances  of  the  age,  a  genius 
might  arife,  it  is  not  eafy  to  determine  what  could  induce 
him  to  allude  to  the  Roman  times.  We  find  no  fa£t  to 
favour  any  defigns  which  could  be  entertained  by  any  man 
who  lived  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

The  ftrongeft  objedion  to  the  antiquity  of  the  poems 
now  given  to  the  public  under  the  name  of  Offian,  is  the 
improbability  of  their  being  handed  down  by  tradition 
through  fo  many  centuries.  Ages  of  barbarifm,  fome  will 
fay,  could  not  produce  poems  abounding  with  the  difin- 
terefted  and  generous  fentiments  fo  confpicuous  in  the 
compofitions  of  Offian  ;  and  could  thefe  ages  produce 
them,  it  is  impoffible  but  they  muft  be  loft,  or  altogether 
corrupted,  in  a  long  fucceffion  of  barbarous  generations. 

These  objections  naturally  fuggeft  themfelves  to  men 
unacquainted  with  the  ancient  ftate  of  the  northern  parts 
of  Britain.  The  bards,  who  were  an  inferior  order  of 
the  Druids,  did  not  fhare  their  bad  fortune.  They  were 
fpared  by  the  victorious  king,  as  it  was  through  their 
means  only  he  could  hope  for  immortality  to  his  fame. 
They  attended  him  in  his  camp,  and  contributed  to  efta- 
blifh  his  power  by  their  fongs.  His  great  actions  were  mag- 
nified, and  the  populace,  who  had  no  ability  to  examine 
into  his  character  narrowly,  were  dazzled  with  his  fame 
in  the  rhimes  of  the  bards.  In  the  mean  time,  men  af- 
fumed  fentiments  that  are  rarely  to  be  met  v/ith  in  an  age 
of  barbarifm.  The  bards,  who  were  originally  the  difci- 
ples  of  the  Druids,  had  their  minds  opened,  and  their 
ideas  enlarged,  by  being  initiated  in  the  learning  of  that 
celebrated  order.  They  could  form  a  perfeCt  hero  in  their 
own  minds,  and  afcribe  that  character  to  their  prince. 
The  inferior  chiefs  made  this  ideal  character  the  model  of 
their  conduct,  and  by  degrees  brought  their  minds  to  that 
generous  fpirit  which  breathes  in  all  the  poetry  of  the 
times.     The  prince,  flattered  by  hi<  bards,  and  rivalled 

in 


THE  JERA  OF  OSSIAN.  381 

by  his:  own  heroes,  who  imitated  his  charader  as  defcribed 
in  the  eulogies  of  his  poets,  endeavoured  to  excel  his  peo- 
ple in  merit,  as  he  was  above  them  in  flation.  This  emu- 
lation continuing,  formed  at  laft  the  general  charadler  of 
the  nation,  happily  compounded  of  what  is  noble  in  bar- 
barity, and  virtuous  and  generous  in  a  poliflied  people. 

When  virtue  in  peace,  and  bravery  in  war,  are  the 
charaderillics  of  a  nation,  their  adtions  become  intereft- 
ing,  and  their  fame  worthy  of  immortality.  A  generous 
fpirit  is  warmed  with  noble  actions,  and  becomes  ?mblti- 
ous  of  perpetuating  them.  This  is  the  true  fource  of  that 
divine  infpiratlon,  to  which  the  poets  of  all  ages  pretend- 
ed. When  they  found  their  themes  inadequate  to  the 
warmth  of  their  imaginations,  they  varnifhed  them  over 
with  fables,  fupplied  by  their  own  fancy,  or  furnifhed  by 
abfurd  traditions.  Thefe  fables,  however  ridiculous,  had 
their  abettors  :  poflerlty  either  believed  them,  or,  through 
a  vanity  natural  to  mankind,  pretended  they  did.  They 
loved  to  place  the  founders  of  their  families  in  the  days 
of  fable,  w^hen  poetry,  without  the  fear  of  contradiftion, 
could  give  what  charafters  flie  pleafed  of  her  heroes.  It 
is  to  this  vanity  that  we  owe  the  prefervation  of  what  re- 
main of  the  more  ancient  poems.  Their  poetical  merit 
made  their  heroes  famous  in  a  country  where  heroifm  was 
much  efteemed  and  admired.  The  pofterity  of  thofe  he- 
roes, or  thofe  who  pretended  to  be  defcended  from  them, 
heard  with  pleafure  the  eulogiums  of  their  anceftors ;  bards 
were  employed  to  repeat  the  poems,  and  to  record  the  con- 
nexion of  their  patrons  with  chiefs  fo  renowned.  Every 
chief.  In  procefs  of  time,  had  a  bard  in  his  family,  and  the 
office  became  at  laft  hereditary.  By  the  fucceffion  of  thefe 
bards,  the  poems  concerning  the  anceftors  of  the  family 
were  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation ;  they 
were  repeated  to  the  whole  clan  on  folemn  occafions,  and 
always  alluded  to  in  the  new  compofitions  of  the  bards. 
This  cuftom  came  down  to  near  our  own  times;  and  after 
the  bards  were  difcontlnued,  a  great  number  in  a  clan  re- 
tained by  memory,  or  committed  to  writing,  their  compo- 
fitions, and  founded  the  antiquity  of  their  families  on  the 
authority  of  their  posms. 

Tllir 


382      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

The  ufe  of  letters  was  not  known  in  the  north  of  Eu* 
rope  till  long  after  the  inflitution  of  the  bards  :  the  records 
of  the  families  of  their  patrons,  their  own,  and  more  an^ 
cient  poems,  were  handed  down  by  tradition.  Their 
poetical  compofitions  were  admirably  contrived  for  that 
purpofe.  They  were  adapted  to  mufic ;  and  the  mofl 
perfect  harmony  was  obferved.  Each  verfe  was  fo  con- 
nefted  with  thofe  which  preceded  or  followed  it,  that  if 
one  line  had  been  remembered  in  a  flanza,  it  was  almoll 
impoffible  to  forget  the  reft.  The  cadences  followed  in 
fo  natural  a  gradation,  and  the  words  were  fo  adapted  to 
the  common  turn  of  the  voice,  after  it  is  raifed  to  a  cer- 
tain key,  that  it  was  almofl:  impoffible,  from  a  fimilarity 
of  found,  to  fubftitute  one  word  for  another.  This  ex- 
cellence is  peculiar  to  the  Celtic  tongue,  and  perhaps  is 
to  be  met  with  in  no  other  language.  Nor  does  this  choice 
of  words  clog  the  fenfe  or  weaken  the  expreffion.  The 
numerous  fle£lions  of  confonants,  and  variation  in  declen- 
fion,  make  the  language  very  copious. 

The  defcendents  of  the  Celtje,-  who  inhabited  Britain 
and  its  illes,  were  not  Angular  in  this  method  of  preferving 
the  moil  precious  monuments  of  their  nation.  The  an- 
cient laws  of  the  Greeks  were  couched  in  verfe,  and  hand- 
ed down  by  tradition.  The  Spartans,  through  a  long  ha- 
bit, became  fo  fond  of  this  cuftom,  that  they  would  never 
allow  their  laws  to  be  committed  to  writing.  The  adlions 
of  great  men,  and  the  eulogiums  of  kings  and  heroes, 
were  preferved  in  the  fame  manner.  All  the  hiflorical 
monuments  of  the  old  Germans  were  comprehended  in 
their  ancient  fongs  *  !  which  were  either  hymns  to  their 
gods,  or  elegies  in  praife  of  their  heroes,  and  were  in- 
tended to  perpetuate  the  great  events  in  their  nation  which 
were  carefully  interwoven  with  them.  This  fpecies  of 
compofition  was  not  committed  to  writing,  but  delivered 
by  oral  traditionf.  The  care  they  took  to  have  the  poems 
taught  to  their  children,  the  uninterrupted  cuftom  of  re- 
peating them  upon  certain  occafions,  and  the  happy  mea- 
fiire  of  the  verle,  ferved  to  preferve  them  for  a  long  time 
uncorrupted.     This  oral  chronicle  of  the  Germans  was 

not 

*  Tacit,  de  moT.  Germ.  f  Abbe  de la  Bietme  Rtmarquesfur  laGcrmaine, 


THE  .^RA  OF  OSSIAN.  383 

not  forgot  in  the  eighth  century,  and  it  probably  would 
have  remained  to  this  day,  had  not  learning,  which  thinks 
every  thing,  that  is  not  committed  to  writing,  fabulous, 
been  introduced.  It  was  from  poetical  traditions  that 
GarcillafTo  compofed  his  account  of  the  Yncas  of  Peru. 
The  Peruvians  had  loft  all  other  monuments  of  their  hif- 
tory ;  and  it  was  from  ancient  poems  which  his  mother,  a 
princefs  of  the  blood  of  the  Yncas,  taught  him  in  his 
youth,  that  he  collected  the  materials  of  his  hiftory.  If 
other  nations,  then,  that  had  been  often  overrun  by  ene- 
mies, and  had  fent  abroad  and  received  colonies,  could, 
for  many  ages,  preferve,  by  oral  tradition,  their  laws  and 
hiflories  uncorrupted,  it  is  much  more  probable  that  the 
ancient  Scots,  a  people  fo  free  of  intermixture  with  fo- 
reigners, and  fo  ftrongly  attached  to  the  memory  of  their 
anceftors,  had  the  works  of  their  bards  handed  down  with 
great  purity. 

What  is  advanced,  in  this  fliort  DiiTertation,  it  mufl 
be  confefled,  is  mere  conjecture.  Beyond  the  reach  of  re- 
cords, is  fettled  a  gloom,  which  no  ingenuity  can  pene- . 
trate.  The  manners  defcribed,  in  thefe  poems,  fuit  the 
ancient  Celtic  times,  and  no  other  period,  that  is  known 
in  hiftory.  We  muft,  therefore,  place  the  heroes  far  back 
in  antiquity ;  and  it  matters  little,  who  were  their  cotem- 
poraries  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  If  we  have  placed 
Fingal  in  his  proper  period,  we  do  honour  to  the  manners 
of  barbarous  times.  He  exercifed  every  manly  virtue  in 
Caledonia,  while  Heliogabalus  difgraced  human  nature  at 
Rome. 


i 


DISSERTATION 


CONCERNING    THE 


POEMS  OF  OSS  I  AN. 


t 


Ccc 


DISSERTATION 


CONCERNING     THE 


P    O    E    M    S    OF     O    S    S    I    A    N. 


THE  hlftory  of  thofe  nations,  who  originally  poiTeiTecl 
the  north  of  Europe,  is  lefs  known  than  their  man- 
ners. Deftitute  of  the  ufe  of  letters,  they  themfelves  had 
not  the  means  of  tranfmitting  their  great  actions  to  re- 
mote pofterity.  Foreign  writers  faw  them  only  at  a  dif- 
tance,  and  defcribed  them  as  they  found  them.  The  va- 
nity of  the  Romans  induced  them  to  confider  the  nations 
beyond  the  pale  of  their  empire  as  barbarians  ;  and  con- 
fequently  their  hiftory  unworthy  of  being  invefligated. 
Their  manners  and  nngular  character  were  matters  of  cu- 
riofity,  as  they  committed  them  to  record.  Some  men, 
otherwife  of  great  merit  among  ourfelves,  give  into  con- 
fined ideas  on  this  fubje6t.  Having  early  imbibed  their 
idea  of  exalted  manners  from  the  Greek  and  R.oman  wri- 
ters, they  fcarcely  ever  afterwards  have  the  fortitude  to  al- 
low any  dignity  of  character  to  any  nation  deftitute  of  the 
ufe  of  letters. 

Without  derogating  from  the  fame  of  Greece  and 
Rome,  we  may  confider  antiquity  beyond  the  pale  of  their 
empire  worthy  of  fome  attention.  The  nobler  paffions  of 
the  mind  never  (hoot  forth  more  free  and  unreftrained 
than  in  the  times  we  call  barbarous.  That  irregular  man- 
ner of  life,  and  thofe  manly  purfuits  from  which  barbarity 
takes  its  name,  are  highly  favourable  to  a  ftrength  of  mind 
unknown  in  poliihed  times.  In  advanced  fociety  the  cha- 
racters of  men  are  more  uniform  and  difguifed.  The  hu- 
man pafiions  lie  in  fome  degree  concealed  behind  forms, 
and  artificial  manners ;  and  the  powers  of  the  foul,  with- 
out an  opportunity  of  exerting  them,  lofe  vigour.  The 
times  of  regular  government,  and  poliflied  manners,  are 

therefore 


383      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

therefore  to  be  wiflied  for  by  the  feeble  and  weak  in  mind. 
An  unfetiled  ftate,  and  thofe  conviilfions  which  attend  it, 
is  the  proper  field  for  an  exalted  character.,  and  the  exer- 
tion of  great  parts.  Merit,  there,  rifes  always  iuperior ; 
no  fortuitous  event  can  raife  the  timid  and  mean  into  pow- 
er. To  thofe  who  look  upon  antiquity  in  this  light,  it  is 
i.ii  agreeable  profpe£l:;  and  they  alone  can  have  real  plea- 
fare  in  tracing  nations  to  their  fource. 

The  feltabliilimcnt  of  the  Celtic  dates,  in  the  north  of 
Europe,  is  beyond  the  reach  of  written  annals.  The  tra- 
ditions and  fongs,  to  which  they  trufted  their  hiftory,  were 
loll,  or  altogether  corrupted,  in  their  revolutions  and  mi- 
grations ;  which  \vere  fo  frequent  and  univerfal,  that  no 
kingdom  in  Europe  is  now  poireiTed  by  its  original  inha- 
bitants. Societies  were  formed,  and  kingdoms  ereded, 
from  a  mixture  of  nations,  who,  in  procefs  of  time,  lofi 
ail  knowle.lge  of  their  own  origin.  If  tradition  could  .be 
depended  upon,"  it  is  only'among  a  people,  from  all  time, 
free  from  intermixture  with  foreigners.  We  are  to  look 
for  ihefe  among  the  mountains  and  inacceflible  pans  of  a 
country:  pLces,  on  account  of  their  barrennefs,  uninviting 
to  an  enemy,  or  whofe  natural  (Irength  enabled  the  natives 
to  repel  invafions.  Such  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  moun- 
tains of  Scotland.  We,  accordingly,  find,  that  they  diller 
materiallv  from  thofe  who  poffefs  the  low  and  m.ore  fertile 
part  of  the  kingdom.  Their  language  is  pure  and  original, 
and  their  manners  are  thofe  of  the  ancient  and  unmixed  race 
of  men.  Confcious  of  their  own  antiquity,  ihey  long  def- 
pifed  the  others,  as  a  new  and  mixed  people.  As  they  lived 
in  a  country  only  fit  for  pafnure,  they  were  free  from  that 
toil  and  buuncfs,  which  engrofs  the  attention  of  a  commer- 
cial people.  Their  amufement  confided  in  hearing  or  re- 
peating their  fongs  and  traditions,  and  thefe  entirely  turned 
on  the  antiquity  of  their  nation,  and  the  exploits  of  their 
forefathers.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  there  are  more 
remains  of  antiquity  among  them,  than  among  any  other 
people  in  Europe.  Traditions,  however,  concerning  re- 
mote periods,  are  only  to  be  regarded,  in  fo  far  as  they 
coincide  with  coteraporary  writers  of  undoubted  credit  and 
veracity. 

No 


THE  POEiMS  oi^  OSSIAN.        389 

No  writers  began  their  accounts  from  a  more  early  pe- 
riod, than  the  hillorians  of  the  Scots  nation.  Without 
records,  or  even  tradition  itfelf,  they  give  a  long  lift  of 
ancient  kings,  and  a  detail  of  their  tranfadions,  with  a 
fcrupulous  exadnefs.  One  .might  naturally  fuppofe,  that, 
when  they  had  no  authentic  annals,  they  fhould,  at  leaft, 
have  recourfe  to  the  traditions  of  their  country,  and  have 
reduced  them  into  a  regular  fyftem  of  hiilory.  Of  both 
thev  feem  to  have  been  equally  deftitute.  Born  in  the  low 
country,  and  ftrangers  to  the  ancient  language  of  their 
nation,  they  contented  themfelves  with  copying  from  one 
another,  and  retailing  the  fame  fxclions,  in  a  new  colour 
and  drefs. 

John  Fordun  was  the  firft  who  colleded  thofe  frag- 
ments of  the  Scots  hiftory,  w^hich  had  efcaped  the  brutal 
policy  of  Edward  I.  and  reduced  them  into  order.  Hi? 
accounts,  in  fo  far  as  they  concerned  recent  tranfadions, 
deferved  credit :  beyond  a  certain  period,  they  were  fabu- 
lous and  unfatisfadory.  Some  time  before  Fordun  wrote, 
the  king  of  England,  in  a  letter  to  the  pope,  had  run  up 
the  antiquity  of  his  nation  to  a  very  remote  a^ra.  Fordun, 
pofTeiTed  of  all  the  national  prejudice  of  the  age,  was  un- 
willing that  his  country  Ihould  yield,  in  point  of  antiquity, 
to  a  people  then  its  rivals  and  enemies.  Deftitute  of  an- 
nals in  Scotland,  he  had  recourfe  to  Ireland,  which,  ac- 
cording to  the  vulgar  errors  of  the  times,  was  reckoned 
the  firlc  habitation  of  the  Scots.  He  found,  there,  that 
the  Irifh  bards  had  carried  their  pretenfions  to  antiquity  as 
high,  if  not  beyond  any  nation  in  Europe.  It  was  from 
them  he  took  thofe  improbable  fidions,  which  form  the 
firfl  part  of  his  hiftory. 

The  writers  that  fucceed  Fordun  implicitly  followed  his 
fyftem,  though  they  fometimes  varied  from  him  in  their 
relations  of  particular  tranfadions,  and  the  order  of  fuc- 
ceflion  of  their  kings.  As  they  had  no  new  lights,  and 
were,  equally  with  him,  unacquainted  with  the  traditions 
of  their  country,  their  hiftories  contain  little  information 
concerning  the  origin  of  the  Scots.  Even  Buchannan 
himfelf,  except  the  elegance  and  vigour  of  his  ftile,  has 
very  little  to  recommend  him.  Blinded  with  political  pre- 
judices, 


390      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

judices,  he  feemed  more  anxious  to  turn  the  fidions  of 
his  prcdeceffors  to  his  own  purpofes,  than  to  deteft  their 
mifreprefentations,  or  inveftigate  truth  amidtl  the  darknefs 
which  they  had  thrown  round  it.  It  therefore  appears, 
that  Httle  can  be  colleded  from  their  own  hiftorians,  con- 
cerning the  firft  mfgration  of  the  Scots  into  Britain. 

That  this  ifland  was  peopled  from  Gaul  admits  of  no 
doubt.  Whether  colonies  came  afterwards  from  the  north 
of  Europe  is  a  matter  of  mere  fpeculation.  When  South- 
Britain  yielded  to  the  power  of  the  Romans,  the  un- 
conquered  nations  to  the  north  of  the  province  were  dif- 
tinguifhed  by  the  name  of  Caledonians.  From  their  very 
name,  it  appears,  that  they  were  of  thofe  Gauls,  who  poffef- 
fed  themfelves  originally  of  Britain.  It  is  compounded  of 
two  Celtic  words,  Cai^l  fignifying  Celts,  or  Gauls,  and  Dim 
or  Don,  a  hill;  fo  that  Cael-don,  or  Caledonians,  is  as  much 
as  to  fay,  the  Celts  of  the  hill  country.  The  Highlanders, 
to  this  day,  call  themfelves  Gael,  their  language  Gaelic,  or 
Galic,  and  their  country  Caeldoch,  which  the  Romans  foft- 
ened  into  Caledonia.  This,  of  itfelf,  is  fufficient  to  demon- 
ftrate,  they  are  the  genuine  defcendents  of  the  ancient  Ca- 
ledonians, and  not  a  pretended  colony  of  Scots,  who  fet- 
tled firft  in  the  north,  in  the  third  or  fourth  century. 

From  the  double  meaning  of  the  word  Gael,  which  fig- 
nifies  Jlrangers,  as  well  as  Gauls,  or  Celts,  fome  have  ima- 
gined that  the  anceftors  of  the  Caledonians  were  of  a  dif- 
ferent race  from  the  reft  of  the  Britons,  and  that  they 
received  their  name  upon  that  account.  This  opinion,  fay 
they,  is  fupported  by  Tacitus,  who,  from  feveral  circum- 
ftances,  concludes,  that  the  Caledonians  were  of  German 
extradion.  A  difcuffion  of  a  point  fo  intricate,  at  this  dif- 
tance  of  time,  could  neither  be  fatisfactory  nor  important. 

Towards  the  latter  end  of  the  third,  and  beginning  of 
the  fourth' century,  we  meet  with  the  Scots  in  the  north. 
Porphyrius  *  makes  the  firft  mention  of  them  about  that 
time.  As  the  Scots  were  not  heard  of  before  that  period, 
nioft  writers  fuppofed  them  to  have  been  a  colony,  newly 
come  to  Britain,  and  that  the  PiBs  were  the  only  genuine 
defcendents  of  the  ancient  Caledonians.    This  miftake  is 

eafily 

*  St,  Ilicrom.  ad  CtcfiDhon. 


THE  POEMS  oi.  OSSIAN.  391 

.  afily  removed.  The  Caledonians,  in  procefs  of  time, 
liccame  natm-ally  divided  into  two  diflinft  nations,  as  pof- 
klfing  parts  of  the  country,  entirely  different  in  their  na- 
lure  and  foil.  The  wellern  coail  of  Scotland  is  hilly  and 
barren  ;  towards  the  eaft  the  country  is  plain,  and  fit  for 
tillage.  The  inhabitants  of  the  mountains,  a  roving  and 
uncontrouled  race  of  men,  lived  by  feeding  of  cattle,  and 
what  they  killed  in  hunnng.  Their  employment  did  not 
fix  them  to  one  place.  They  removed  from  one  heath  to 
another,  as  fuited  bed  with  their  convenience  and  inclina- 
tion. They  were  not,  therefore,  improperly  called,  by 
their  neighbours,  Scuite,  or  the  wandering  nation ;  which 
is  evidently  the  origin  of  the  Roman  name  of  Scoti. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Caledonians,  who  polTeiTed  the 
eafl  coaft  of  Scotland,  as  their  divifion  of  the  country  was 
plain  and  fertile,  applied  themfelves  to  agriculture,  and 
raifmg  of  corn.  It  was  from  this,  that  the  Galic  name  of 
the  Picis  proceeded;  for  they  are  called,  in  that  language, 
Criiithnich^  i.  e.  the  ivheat  or  corn-eaters.  As  the  Pids  lived 
in  a  country  fo  different  in  its  nature  from  that  pofieffed  by 
the  Scots,  fo  their  national  charafter  fuffered  a  material 
change.  Unobftrucled  by  mountains,  or  lakes,  their  com- 
munication with  one  another  was  free  and  frequent.  So- 
ciety, therefore,  became  fooner  eftablifhed  among  them, 
than  among  the  Scots,  and  consequently,  they  were 
much  fooner  governed  by  civil  magiftrates  and  laws. 
This,  at  lad,  produced  fo  great  a  difference  in  the  manners 
of  the  two  nations,  that  they  began  to  forget  their  com- 
mon origin,  and  almoft  continual  quarrels  and  animofities 
fubfifted  betw^een  them.  Thefe  animofities,  after  fome 
ages,  ended  in  the  fubverfion  of  the  Piclifh  kingdom,  but 
not  in  the  total  extirpation  of  the  nation,  according  to 
moil  of  the  Scots  writers,  who  feemed  to  think  it  more 
for  the  honour  of  their  countrymen  to  annihilate,  than 
reduce  a  rival  people  under  their  obedience.  It  is  certaiv: 
however,  that  the  very  name  of  the  Pifts  was  loft,  ai- 
thofe  that  remained  were  fo  completely  incorporated  vvi'h 
their  conquerors,  that  they  foon  loft  all  memory  ox  their 
own  oridn. 

o 

Tin- 


392     A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

The  end  of  the  Piftifli  government  is  placed  fo  near 
that  period,  to  which  authentic  annals  reach,  that  it  is 
matter  of  wonder,  that  we  have  no  monuments  of  their 
language  or  hiftory  remaining.  This  favours  the  fyftem 
I  have  laid  down.  Had  they  originally  been  of  a  differ- 
ent race  from  the  Scots,  their  language  of  courfe  would 
be  different.  The  contrary  is  the  cafe.  The  names  of 
places  in  the  Picllfli  dominions,  and  the  very  names  of 
their  kings,  which  are  handed  down  to  us,  are  of  Galic 
original,  which  is  a  convincing  proof,  that  the  two  nati- 
ons were,  of  old,  one  and  the  fame,  and  only  divided  into 
two  governments,  by  the  effect  which  their  fituation  had 
upon  the  genius  of  the  people. 

The  name  of  Pids  is  faid  to  have  been  given  by  the  Ro- 
mans to  the  Caledonians,  who  poffeffed  the  eaft  coaft  of 
Scotland,  from  their  painting  their  bodies.  The  (lory  is 
filly,  and  the  argument  abfurd.  But  let  us  revere  anti- 
quity in  her  very  follies.  This  circumftance  made  fome 
imagine,  that  the  Picls  were  of  Britifh  extraft,  and  a  dif- 
ferent race  of  men  from  the  Scots.  That  more  of  the  Bri- 
tons, who  fled  northward  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Ro- 
mans, fettled  in  the  low  country  of  Scotland,  than  among 
the  Scots  of  the  mountains,  may  be  eafily  imagined,  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  country.  It  was  ihey  who  introduced 
painting  among  the  Picts.  From  this  circumftance,  alHrm 
fome  antiquaries,  proceeded  the  name  of  the  latter,  to  dif- 
tinguiOi  them  from  the  Scots,  who  never  had  that  art 
among  them,  and  from  the  Britons,  who  difcontinued  it 
after  the  Roman  conqueft. 

The  Caledonians,  mod  certainly,  acquired  a  confider- 
able  knowledge  in  navigation,  by  their  living  on  a  coafl 
intcrfected  with  many  arms  of  the  fea,  and  in  illands,  di« 
vided,  one  from  another,  by  wide  and  dangerous  firths. 
It  is,  therefore,  highly  probable,  that  they,  very  early, 
found  their  way  to  the  north  of  Ireland,  which  is  within 
fight  of  their  own  country.  That  Ireland  was  firft  peopled 
from  Britain  is,  at  length,  a  matter  that  admits  ot  no 
doubt.  The  vicinity  of  the  tv/o  iflands  ;  the  exact  corref- 
pondence  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  both,  in  point  of 
manners  and  language,  are  fufficient  proofs,  even  if  we 

had 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.        393 

j^ad  not  the  teftimony  of  *  authors  of  undoubted  veracity 
to  confirm  it.  The  abettors  of  the  moft  romantic  fyftems 
-of  Irifti  antiquities  allow  it;  but  they  place  the  colony  from 
Britain  in  an  improbable  and  remote  sera.  I  Ihall  eafily 
admit,  that  the  colony  of  the  Firbolg,  confeffedly  the  Belga 
of  Britain,  fettled  in  the  fouth  of  Ireland,  before  the  Caef^ 
or  Caledonians,  difcovered  the  north :  but  it  is  not  at  all 
likely,  that  the  migration  of  the  Firbolg  to  Ireland  hap- 
pened many  centuries  before  the  Chriftian  aera. 

The  poem  of  Temora  throws  confidcrable  light  on  this 
fubjedt.  The  accounts  given  in  it  agree  fo  well  with  what 
the  ancients  have  delivered,  concerning  the  firft  population 
and  inhabitants  of  Ireland,  that  every  unbiaffed  perfon 
will  confefs  them  more  probable,  than  the  legends  handed 
down,  by  tradition,  in  that  country.  It  appears,  that,  in 
the  days  of  Trathal,  grandfather  to  Fingal,  Ireland  was  pof- 
felfed  by  two  nations  ;  the  Firbolg  or  Belgcz  of  Britain,  who 
inhabited  the  fouth,  and  the  Cae'l,  who  palled  over  from 
Caledonia  and  the  Hebrides  to  Ulfter.  The  two  nations, 
as  is  ufual  among  an  unpolifhed  and  lately  fettled  people, 
were  divided  into  fmall  dynafties,  fubjedl  to  petty  kings, 
or  chiefs,  independent  of  one  another.  In  this  fituation, 
it  is  probable,  they  continued  long,  without  any  material 
revolution  in  the  Hate  of  the  ifland,  until  Crothar,  Lord 
of  Atha,  a  country  in  Connaught,  the  moft  potent  chief 
of  the  Firbolg,  carried  away  Conlama,  the  daughter  of 
Cathmin,  a  chief  of  the  Gael,  who  poffefled  Ulfter. 

Conlama  had  been  betrothed  fome  time  before  to  Tur- 
loch,  a  chief  of  their  own  nation.  Turloch  refented  the 
affront  offered  him  by  Crothar,  made  an  irruption  into 
Connaught,  and  killed  Cormul,  the  brother  of  Crothar, 
who  came  to  oppofe  his  progrefs.  Crothar  himfelf  then 
took  arms,  and  either  killed  or  expelled  Turloch.  The 
war,  upon  this,  became  general,  between  the  two  nations; 
and  the  Cael  were  reduced  to  the  laft  extremity.  In  this 
fituation,  they  applied,  for  aid,  to  Trathal  king  of  Morven, 
who  fent  his  brother  Conar,  already  famous  for  his  great 
exploits,  to  their  relief.  Conar,  upon  his  arrival  in  Ul- 
fter, was  chofen  king,  by  the  unanimous  confent  of  the 
D  d  d  Cale- 

*  Diod.  Sic.  1.  J, 


394      A  DISSERTyrnON  concernixNg 

Ca^edpiiian  tribes,  who  poiiefled  that  country.  The  war 
was  renewed  with  vigour  and  lliccefs  ;  but  the  Firbolg  ap. 
pear  to  have  been  rather  repelled  than  |abdued.  In  fuc- 
ceeding  reigns,  we  learn,  from  epifodes  in  the  fame  poem, 
thiit  the  chiefs  of  Atha  made  feveral  efforts  to  become  mo- 
narchs  -"n  Ireland,  and  to  expel  the  race  of  Conar. 

.  To  Conar  fucceeded  his  fon  Cormac,  who  appears  to 
have  reigned  long..  In  his  latter  days  he  feems  to  have 
been  driven  to  the  hill  extremity,  by  an  infurreftion  of  the 
Firbolg^  who  fupported  the  pretenfions  cf  the  chiefs  of  A- 
tha  to  the  Irilli  throne.  Fingal,  who  then  was  very  young, 
came  to  the  aid  of  Cormac,  totally  defeated  Colc-ulla, 
chief  pf  Atha,  and  re-eftabiiihed  Cormac  in  the  fole  pof- 
fellion  of  all  Ireland.  It  was  then  he  fell  in  love  with,  and 
took  to  _w  ife  Ros-crana,  the  daughter  of  Cormac,  who  was. 
thje.  mother  of  Offian. 

Cop^MAC  was  fucceeded  in  the  Iriili  throne  by  his  fon^ 
Cairbr.e  ;  Cairbre  by  Artho,  his  fon,  who  was  the  father 
of  J:hat  Cormac,  ;in  vv-hofe  minority  the  invafion  of  Swaran 
happened,  which  is  the  fubjecl  of  the  poem  of  Fingal.  The 
family  of  Atha,  who  had  not  relinquillied  their  pretenfi- 
ons to  the  Irifli  throne,  rebelled  in  the  minority  of  Cor- 
mac, defeated  his-  adherents,  and  murdered  him  in  the 
palace  pf  Temora.  .  Cairbar,  lord  of  Atha,  upon  this, 
mounted  the  throne.  His  ufurpation  foon  ended  with  his 
life  ;  for  Fingal  made  an  expedition  into  Ireland,  and  re- 
iiored,  after  various  viciilitudes  of  fortune,  the  family  af 
Conar  to  the  jpolleririon  of  xhe  kingdom.  This  war  is  the 
fubject  QL,Temcra,  The  events,  though  certainly  heighi- 
^nod  aad  er^ibellillied  by  poetry,  feem,  nptwithilanding, 
tothay.f^-^heiir  fpmiifiation  in  true  hiflbry. 

,  TpMpKA  contains  ^ot  only  the  hiilory  of  the  firil  mi- 
gration of  the  Caletjpiila^s  into  Ireland,  it  alfo  preferves 
fpme  ii^wor^taiit ,  fatls,  concerning  the  fird  fettlement  of 
ii\Qj'irboIgyQX.Belg^-^of  Britain,  in  that  kingdom,  under 
their  leader  Larthon,,  who  was  ancefior  to  Cairbar  and 
QithniQFp  \vho  fucceffively  mounted  the  Irifli  throne,  after 
the  death  of  Cori)^ac,  the  fon  cf  Artho.  I  forbear  to 
tranfcribe  the  paiVage,  on  account  of  its  length.  It  is  tlie 
fpng  pf  Fonar,  the  bard,  towards  the  latter  end  of  the 

feventh 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  S95 

feventh  book  of  Temora.  As  the  generations  from  Lar- 
thon  to  Cathmor,  to  whom  the  epifode  is  addreffed,  are 
not  marked,  as  are  thofe  of  the  family  of  Contir,  the  firfl 
king  of  Ireland,  we  can  form  no  judgment  of  the  time  of 
the  fettlcment  of  the  Firbolg-.-  It  is,  however,  probable, 
it  was  fome  ihrte  before  the  Cael,  or  Caledonians,  fettled 
in'  Ul%r.  One  important  fafl:  may  be  gathered  from  this 
hifcory,  that  the  Itrifli  had  no  king  before  the  latter  end 
of  the  firfi;  cenrury.  Fingal  lived,  it  is  fiippofed,  in  the 
third  century;  fo  Conar,  the  fivft  moimreh  of  the  Irrfli, 
who  was  his  grand-uncle,  cannot  be  placed  farther  back 
than  the  clofe  of  the  firft.  To  ellabliih  this  faci,  is  to  lay, 
at  once,  afide  the  pretended  antiquities  of  the  Sects  and 
Iriih,  and  to  get  quit  of  the  long  lift  of  kings  v/hich  the 
lat1"er  give  u^  for  a  millennium  before. 

Op  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  it  is  certain,  nothing  can  be 
depended  upon,  prior  to  the  reign  of  Fergus,  the  fon  of 
Ere,  who  lived  in  the  fifth  century.  The  true  hiftory  of 
Ireland  begins  foraewhat  later  than  that  period.  Sir  James 
Ware*,  who  was  indefatig-able  in  his  refearches  after  the 
a-ntiquities  of  his  country,  rejects,  as  mere  ficiion  and 
idle  romance,  all  that  is  related  of  the  ancient  IriHi,  before 
the  time  of  St.  Patrick,  and  the  reign  of  Leogairc.  It  is 
from  this  confideration,  that  he  begins  his  hiiicry  at  the 
introduction  of  Chriflianity,  remarking,  that  all  that  is 
delivered  down,  concerning  the  times  of  paganifm,  were 
tales  of  late  invention,  ftrangely  mixed  with  anachron- 
ifms  and  inconfiitencies.  Such  being  the  opinion  of 
Ware,  who  had  collefted,  with  uncommon  induftry  and 
zeal,  all  the  real  and  pretendedly  antient  manufcripts, 
concerning  the  hiftory  of  his  country,  we  may,  on  his 
authority,  reject  the  improbable  and  felf-condemned  tales 
of  Keating  and  O'Flaherty.  Credulous  and  puerile  to  the 
laft  degree,  they  have  difgraced  the  antiquities  they  meant 
to  eftablifh.  It  is  to  be  wifhcd,  that  fome  able  Irifhman, 
who  underftands  the  language  and  records  of  his  country, 
may  redeem,  ere  it  is  too  late,  the  genuine  antiquities  of 
Ireland,  from  the  hands  of  thefe  idle  fabulifts. 

By  comparing  the  hiiiory  in  thefe  poems  with  the  le- 

.gends 

*  Warede  ?ntjq.  Hybern.  pr?e.  p.  i. 


396      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

gends  of  the  Scots  and  Irifh  writers,  and,  by  afterwards 
examining  both  by  the  teft  of  the  Roman  authors,  it  is 
eafy  to  difcover  which  is  the  mofl  probable.  Probability 
is  all  that  can  be  eftablifhed  on  the  authority  of  tradition, 
ever  dubious  and  uncertain.  But  when  it  favours  the 
hypothecs  laid  down  by  cotemporary  writers  of  undoubt- 
ed veracity,  and,  as  it  were,  finifhes  the  figure  of  which 
they  only  drew  the  out-lines,  it  ought,  in  the  judgment 
of  iober  reafon,  to  be  preferred  to  accounts  framed  in 
dark  and  diflant  periods,  with  little  judgment,  and  upon 
no  authority. 

Concerning  the  period  of  more  than  a  century,  which 
intervenes  between  Fingal  and  the  reign  of  Fergus,  the  fon 
of  Ere  or  Arcath,  tradition  is  dark  and  contradidory. 
Some  trace  up  the  family  of  Fergus  to  a  fon  of  Fingal  of 
that  name,  who  makes  a  confiderable  figure  in  Oflian's 
poems.  The  three  elder  fons  of  Fingal,  Offian,  Fil- 
lan,  and  Ryno,  dying  without  ilTue,  the  fucceflion,  of 
courfe,  devolved  upon  Fergus,  the  fourth  fon,  and  his  pof- 
terity.  This  Fergus,  fay  fome  traditions,  was  the  father 
of  Congal,  whofe  fon  was  Arcath,  the  father  of  Fergus, 
properly  called  the  firfl  king  of  Scots,  as  it  was  in  his  time 
the  Gael,  who  poffefled  the  weftern  coaft  of  Scotland,  be- 
gan to  be  diftinguifhed,  by  foreigners,  by  the  name  of 
S.cots.  From  thenceforward,  the  Scots  and  Pifts,  as  dif- 
tindt  nations,  became  objeds  of  attention  to  the  biflorians 
of  other  countries.  The  internal  ftc^te  of  the  two  Cale- 
donian kingdoms  has  always  continued,  and  ever  n:\uft 
remain,  in  obfcurity  and  fable. 

It  is  in  this  epoch  we  muft  fix  the  beginning  of  the  de- 
cay of  that  fpecies  of  heroifm,  which  fubfifted  in  the  days 
of  Fingal.  There  are  three  ftages  in  human  fociety.  The 
firft  is  the  refult  of  confanguinity,  and  the  natural  affedion 
of  the  members  of  a  family  to  one  another.  The  fecond 
begins  when  property  is  eftablifhed,  and  men  enter  into 
aflbciations  for  mutual  defence,  againft  the  invafions  and 
injuflice  of  neighbours.  Mankind  fubmit,  in  the  third, 
to  certain  laws  and  fubordinations  of  government,  to 
which  they  trult  the  fafety  of  their  perfons  and  property. 
As  the  fiiit  is  formed  on  nature,  fo,  of  courfe,  it  is  the 

mofl 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         397 

moft  difmterefted  and  noble.  Men,  in  the  laft,  have  lei- 
fure  to  cultivate  the  mind,  and  to  reitore  it,  with  reflec- 
tion, to  a  primaeval  dignity  of  fentiment.  The  middle 
ftate  is  the  region  of  complete  barbarifm  and  ignorance. 
About  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  the  Scots  and 
Pi£ts  were  advanced  into  the  fecond  ftage,  and,  confe- 
quently,  into  thofe  circumfcribed  fentiments,  which  al- 
ways diftinguifli  barbarity.  The  events  which  foon  after 
happened  did  not  at  all  contribute  to  enlarge  their  ideas, 
or  mend  their  national  charader. 

About  the  year  426,  the  Romans,  on  account  of  do- 
meftic  commotions,  entirely  forfook  Britain,  finding  it  im- 
poflible  to  defend  fo  diftant  a  frontier.  The  Pi£ls  and 
Scots,  feizing  this  favourable  opportunity,  made  incurfi- 
ons  into  the  deferted  province.  The  Britons,  enervated 
by  the  flavery  of  feveral  centuries,  and  thofe  vices,  which 
are  infeparable  from  an  advanced  ftate  of  civility,  were 
not  able  to  udthftand  the  impetuous,  though  irregular,  at- 
tacks of  a  barbarous  enemy.  In  the  utmoft  diftrefs,  they 
applied  to  their  old  mafters,  the  Romans,  and  (after  the 
unfortunate  ftate  of  the  Empire  could  not  fpare  aid)  to  the 
Saxons,  a  nation  equally  barbarous  and  brave,  with  the 
enemies  of  whom  they  were  fo  much  afraid.  Though  the 
bravery  of  the  Saxons  repelled  the  Caledonian  nations  for 
a.  time,  yet  the  latter  found  means  to  extend  themfelves, 
confiderably,  towards  the  fouth.  It  is  in  this  period,  we 
muft  place  the  origin  of  the  arts  of  civil  life  among  the 
Scots.  The  feat  of  government  was  removed  from  the 
mountains  to  the  plain  and  more  fertile  provinces  of 
the  South,  to  be  near  the  common  enemy,  in  cafe  of  fud- 
den  incurfions.  Inftead  of  roving  through  unfrequented 
wilds,  in  fearch  of  fubfiftence,  by  means  of  hunting,  men 
applied  to  agriculture,  and  raifing  of  corn.  This  manner 
of  life  was  the  firft  means  of  changing  the  national  cha- 
rader.  The  next  thing  which  contributed  to  it,  was  their 
mixture  with  ftrangers. 

In  the  countries  which  the  Scots  had  conquered  from 
the  Britons,  it  is  probable  the  moft  of  the  old  inhabitants 
remained.  Thefe  incorporating  with  the  conquerors, 
taught  them  agriculture,  and  other  arts,  which  they  them- 

felves 


398      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

felves  had  received  from  the  Romans.  The  Scots,  how- 
ever, in  number  as  well  as  power,  being  the  moft  predo- 
minant, retained  dill  their  language,  and  as  many  of  the 
cuftoms  of  their  ancefliors,  as  fuited  with  the  nature  of 
the  country  they  poffefled.  Even  the  union  of  the  two 
Caledonian  kingdoms  did  not  much  affeft  the  national 
charader.  Being  originally  defcended  from  the  fame 
flock,  the  manners  of  the  Pi6ls  and  Scots  'were  as  fimijar 
as  the  different  natures  of  the  countries  they  poffeffed  per- 
mitted. 

What  brought  about  a  total  change  in  the  genius  of 
the  Scots  nation,  was  their  wars,  and  other  tranfadionaj, 
with  the  Saxons.  Several  counties  in  the  fouth  of  Scot- 
land were  alternately  poffeffed  by  the  two  nations.  They 
were  ceded,  in  the  ninth  age,  to  the  Sc6ts,  and,  it  is  pro- 
bable, that  mofl  of  the  Saxon  inhabitants  remained  in  the 
poffeilion  of  their  lands.  During  the  feveral  conquefts  and 
revolutions  in  England,  many  lied,  for  refuge,  into  Scot- 
land, to  avoid  the  oppreffion  of  foreigners,  or  the  tyranny 
of  domeftic  ufurpers  ;  in  fo  much,  that  the  Saxon  race 
formed  perhaps  near  one  half  of  the  Scottifh  kingdom. 
The  Saxon  manners  and  language  daily  gained  ground, 
on  the  tongue  and  cuiloms  of  the  ancient  Caledonians,  till, 
at  laft,  the  latter  were  entirely  relegated  to  inhabitants  of 
the  mountains,  who  were  Hill  unmixed  with  Grangers. 

It  Vv-as  after  the  acccffion  of  territory  which  the  Scots 
received,  upon  the  retreat  of  the  Romans  from  Britain, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Highlands  were  divided  into 
clans.  The  king,  when  he  kept  his  court  in  the  moun- 
tains, was  confidered,  by  the  whole  nation,  as  the  chief  of 
their  blood.  Their  fmall  number,  as  well  as  the  prefence 
of  their  prince,  prevented  thofe  divifions,  which,  after- 
wards, fprung  forth  into  fo  many  feparate  tribes.  When 
the  feat  of  government  was  removed  to  the  fouth,  thofe 
who  remained  in  the  Highlands  were,  of  courfe,  negleded. 
They  naturally  form.ed  themfelves  into  fmall  focieties,  in- 
dependent of  one  another.  Each  fociety  had  its  ov*^n  re- 
gtihis,  who  either  v/as,  or  in  the  fucceffion  of  a  few  gene- 
rations, was  regarded  as  chief  of  their  blood.  The  nature 
of  the  country  favoured  an  inftitution  of  this  fort.    A  few 

vallevf. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         399 

valleys,  divided  from  one  another  by  extenfive  heaths  and 
impalTabie  mountains,  form  the  face  of  the  Highlands.  In 
thele  valleys  the  chiefs  fixed  their  refidence.  Round  them, 
and  almoft  within  fight  of  their  dwellings,  were  the  habi- 
tations of  their  relations  and  dependents. 

The  feats  of  the  Highland  chiefs  were  neither  difagree- 
able  nor  inconvenient.  Surrounded  with  mountains  and 
hanging  woods,  they  were  covered  from  the  inclemency 
of  the  weather.  Near  them  generally  ran  a  pretty  large 
ri-ver,  which,  difcharging  itfelf  not  far  off,  into  an  arm  of 
the  fea,  or  extenfive  lake,  fwarmed  with  variety  of  fifli. 
The  woods  were  flocked  with  wild-fowl ;  and  the  heaths 
and  mountains  behind  them  were  the  natural  feat  of  the 
red  deer  and. roe.  If  we  make  allowance  for  the  backward 
flate  of  agriculture,  the  valleys  were  not  unfertile  ;  afford- 
ing, if  not  all  the  conveniencies,  at  leall  the  neceflaries,  of 
life.  Here  the  chief  lived,  the  fupreme  judge  and  law-giver 
of  his  own  people ;  but  his  fway  was  neither  fevere  nor 
unjuft*  As  the  populace  regarded  him  as  the  chief  of  their 
blood,  fo  he,  in  return,  confidered  them  as  members  of 
his  family.  His  commands,  therefore,  though  abfolute  and 
decifive,  partook  m.ore  of  the  authority  of  a  father,  than 
of  the  rigour  of  a  judge.  Though  the  whole  territory  of 
the  tribe  was  confidered  as  the  property  of  the  chief,  yet 
his  vaifals  made  him  no  other  confideratian  for  their  lands 
than  fervices,  neither  burdenfome  nor  frequent.  As  he 
feldom  went  from  home,  he  was  at  no  expence.  His  ta- 
ble was  fupplied  by  his  own  herds,  and  what  his  nume- 
rous attendants  killed  in  hunting. 

In  this  rural  kind  of  m.agnincence,  the  Highland  chiefs 
lived,  for  many  ages.  At  a  diftance  from  the  feat  of  go- 
vernment, and  fecured,  by  the  inacceffiblenefs  of  their 
country,  they  were  free  and  independent.  As  they  had 
little  communication  with  fhrangers,  the  cuftoms  of  their 
anceilors  remained  among  them,  and  their  language  retain- 
ed its  original  purity.  Naturally  fond  of  military  fame,  and 
remarkably  attached  to  the  memory  of  their  anceiiors,  they 
delighted  in  traditions  and  fongc,  concerning  the  exploits 
of  their  nation,  and  efpecially  of  their  own  particular  fa- 
milies.    A  fucceliion  of  bard,-;  v,  .xs  rctciined  in  every  clan, 

to 


400     A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

to  hand  down  the  memorable  ?.6lions  of  their  forefathers. 
As  Fingal  and  his  chiefs  were  the  moll  renowned  names  in 
tradition,  the  bards  took  care  to  place  them  in  the  genea- 
logy of  every  great  family.  They  became  famous  among 
the  people,  and  an  objed  of  fidion  and  poetry  to  the 
bards. 

The  bards  eredted  their  immediate  patrons  into  heroes, 
and  celebrated  them  in  their  fongs.  As  the  circle  of  theii' 
knowledge  was  narrow,  their  ideas  were  confined  in  pro- 
portion. A  few  happy  expreffions,  and  the  manners  they 
reprefent,  may  pleafe  thofe  who  underftand  the  language; 
their  obfcurity  and  inaccuracy  would  difgufl  in  a  tranfla- 
tion.  It  was  chiefly  for  this  reafon,  that  I  have  rejefted 
wholly  the  works  of  the  bards  in  my  publications.  Oflian 
acted  in  a  more  extenfive  fphere,  and  his  ideas  ought  to 
be  more  noble  and  univerfal;  neither  gives  he,  I  prefume, 
fo  many  of  thofe  peculiarities,  which  are  only  underftood 
in  a  certain  period  or  country.  The  other  bards  have 
their  beauties,  but  not  in  this  fpecies  of  compofition. 
Their  rhimes,  only  calculated  to  kindle  a  martial  fpirit 
among  the  vulgar,  afford  very  little  pleafure  to  genuine 
tafte.  This  observation  only  regards  their  poems  of  the 
heroic  kind ;  in  every  inferior  fpecies  of  poetry  they  are 
more  fuccefsful.  They  exprefs  the  tender  melancholy  of 
defponding  love,  with  fimplicity  and  nature.  So  well 
adapted  are  the  founds  of  the  words  to  the  fentiments, 
that,  even  without  any  knowledge  of  the  language,  they 
pierce  and  dilfolve  the  heart.  Succefsful  love  is  exprefled 
with  peculiar  tendernefs  and  elegance.  In  all  their  com- 
poikions,  except  the  heroic,  which  was  folely  calculated  to 
animate  the  vulgar,  they  give  us  the  genuine  language  of 
rhe  heart,  without  any  of  thofe  aft'eded  ornaments  of 
phrafeology,  which,  though  intended  to  beautify  fenti- 
ments, diveft  them  of  their  natural  force.  The  ideas,  it  is 
confefled,  are  too  local,  to  be  admired,  in  another  lan- 
guage ;  to  thofe  who  are  acquainted  with  the  manners  they 
reprefent,  and  the  fcenes  they  defcribe,  they  muft  afford 
pleafure  and  fatisfadtion. 

It  was  the  locality  of  their  defcription  and  fentiment, 
that,  probably,  h^s  kept  them  hitherto  in  the  obfcurity  of 

aa 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  40X 

an  almoiL  lofl  language.  The  ideas  of  an  unpolifhed  pe- 
riod are  fo  contrary  to  the  prefent  advanced  ftate  of  foci- 
ety,  that  more  than  a  common  mediocrity  of  tafte  is  re- 
quired, to  reliili  them  as  they  deferve.  Thofe  who  alone 
are  capable  of  transferring  ancient  poetry  into  a  modern 
language,  might  be  better  employed  in  giving  originals  of 
their  ov/n,  were  it  not  for  that  wretched  envy  and  mean- 
nefs  which  affetts  to  defpife  cotemporary  genius.  My  firft 
publication  was  merely  accidental.  Had  I  then  met  with 
lefs  approbation,  my  after-purluits  would  have  been  more 
profitable;  at  lead  I  might  have  continued  to  be  ftupidj 
without  being  branded  with  dulnefs. 

Thj:S£  poems  may  furnirh  light  to  antlquraies,  as  well 
as  fome  pleafure  to  the  lovers  of  poetry.  The  firll  popu- 
lation of  Ireland,  its  firft  kings,  and  feveral  circumftances, 
which  regards  its  connexion  of  old  with  the  fouth  and 
north  of  Britain,  are  prefented  in  feveral  epifodes.  The 
fubjecl  and  cataftrophe  of  the  poem  are  founded  upon 
facls,  which  regarded  the  firft  peopling  of  that  country, 
and  the  contefts  between  the  two  Britifli  nations,  who  ori- 
ginally inhabited  that  ifland.  In  a  preceding  part  of  this 
Differtation,  I  have  fliewn  how  fuperior  the  probability  of 
this  fyftem  is,  to  the  undigefted  fiftions  of  the  Irifh  bards, 
and  the  more  recent  and  regular  legends  of  both  Irilh  and 
Scottifh  hiftorians.  I  mean  not  to  give  offence  to  the  abet- 
tors of  the  high  antiquities  of  the  two  nations,  though  I 
have  all  along  exprelTed  my  doubts,  concerning  the  vera- 
city and  abilities  of  thofe  v.'ho  deliver  down  their  antient 
hiftory.  For  my  own  part,  I  prefer  the  national  fame, . 
arifmg  from  a  few  certain  fafts,  to  the  legendary  and  un- 
certain annals  of  ages  of  remote  and  obfcure  antiquitv. 
No  kingdom  now  eftabliflied  in  Europe  can  pretend  to 
equal  antiquities  with  that  of  the  Scots,  inconfiderable  as 
it  may  appear  in  other  refpects,  even  according  to  my  fyf- 
tem, fo  that  it  is  altogether  needlefs  to  lix  its  origin  a  fic- 
titious millenium  before. 

Since  the  firft  publication  of  thefe  poems,  many  infmu- 

ations  have  been   made,  and  doubts  arifen,  concerning 

their  authenticity.    Whether  thefe  fufpicions  are  fuggefted 

by  prejudice,  or  are  only  the  effectc  of  malice,  I  neither 

E  e  e  know 


402      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

know  nor  care.  Thofe  who  have  doubted  my  veracity- 
have  paid  a  compliment  to  my  genius ;  and  were  even  the 
allegation  true,  my  felf- denial  might  have  atoned  for  my 
fault.  Without  vanity  I  fay  it,  I  think  I  could  write  to- 
lerable poetry ;  and  I  affure  my  antagonifts,  that  I  fhould 
not  tranfiate  what  I  could  not  imitate. 

As  prejudice  is  the  elfed  of  ignorance,  I  am  not  fur- 
prifed  at  its  being  general.  An  age,  that  produces  few 
marks  of  genius,  ought  to  be  fparing  of  admiration.  The 
truth  is,  the  bulk  of  mankind  have  ever  been  led  by  re- 
putation, more  than  tafte,  in  articles  of  literature.  If  all 
the  Romans,  who  admired  Virgil,  underftood  his  beauties, 
he  would  fcarce  have  deferved  to  come  down  to  us,  thro' 
fo  many  centuries.  Unlefs  genius  were  in  fafliion.  Homer 
himfelf  might  have  written  in  vain.  He  that  wiiTies  to 
come  with  weight,  on  the  fuperficial,  mud  (kim  the  fur- 
face,  in  their  own  fhallow  way.  Were  my  aim  to  gain 
the  many,  I  would  write  a  madrigal  fooner  than  an  heroic 
poem.  Laberius  himfelf  would  be  always  fure  of  more  fol- 
lowers than  Sophocles. 

—  Some,  who  doubt  the  authenticity  of  this  Vi^ork,  with 
peculiar  acutencfs  appropriate  them  to  the  Irifh  nation. 
Though  it  is  not  eafy  to  conceive  how  thefe  poem>s  can 
belong  to  Ireland  and  to  me,  at  once,  I  lliall  examine  the 
fubjed,  without  further  animadverfion  on  the  blunder. 

Of  all  the  nations  defcended  from  the  ancient  Celta^  the 
Scots  and  Iriili  are  the  mod  fimilar  in  language,  cuftoms, 
and  manners.  This  argues  a  more  intimate  connexion 
between  them,  than  a  remote  defcent  from  the  great  Celtic 
flock.  It  is  evident,  in  fliort,  that  at  fome  one  period  or 
other,  they  formed  one  fociety,  were  fubject  to  the  fame 
government,  and  were,  in  all  refpedls,  one  and  the  fame 
people.  How  they  became  divided,  which  the  colony,  or 
which  rlie  mother  nation,  I  have  in  another  work  amply 
difculfed.  The  firfl  circumflance  that  induced  me  to  dif- 
regar.!  the  vulgarly-received  opinion  of  the  Hibernian  ex- 
traftion  of  the  Scottifh  nation,  was  my  obfervations  on 
their  ancient  language.  That  dialed  of  the  Celtic  tongue, 
fpoken  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  is  much  more  pure,  more 
agreeable  to  its  mother  language,  and  more  abounding 

with 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  403 

with  primitives,  than  that  now  fpoken,  or  even  that  which 
has  been  written  for  fome  centuries  back,  amongfl  the 
mofl  unmixed  part  of  the  Irifh  nation.  A  Scotchman,*  to- 
lerably converfant  in  his  own  language,  underftands  an 
Iriih  compofition,  from  that  derivative  analogy  which  it 
has  to  the  Galic  of  North  Britain.  An  Irifhman,  on  the 
other  hand,  without  the  aid  of  ftudy,  can  never  underftand 
a  compofition  in  the  Galic  tongue.  This  affords  a  proof, 
that  the  Scotch  Galic  is  the  mod  original,  and,  confequent- 
ly,  the  language  of  a  more  ancient  and  unmixed  people. 
The  Irifli,  however  backward  they  may  be  to  allow  any 
thing  to  the  prejudice  of  their  antiquity,  feem  inadver- 
tently to  acknowledge  it,  by  the  very  appellation  they  give 
to  the  dialed  they  fpeak.  They  call  their  own  language 
Gaelic  Eirinach,  i.  e.  Caledonian  Jrijlo.  when,  on  the  contra- 
ry, they  call  the  dialect  of  North-Britain  a  Cbaelic,  or  the" 
Caledonian  tongue,  emphatically.  A  circumft ance  of  this 
nature  tends  more  to  decide  which  is  the  mofl  ancient  na-. 
tion,  than  the  united  teflimonies  of  a  whole  legion  of  ig- 
norant bards  and  fenachies,  who,  perhaps,  never  dreamed 
of  bringing  the  Scots  from  Spain  to  Ireland,  till  fome  one 
of  them,  more  learned  than  the  reft,  difcovered,  that  the 
Romans  called  the  firfl  Iberia,  and  the  latter  Hibernia.  On 
fuch  a  night  foundation  were  probably  built  the  romantic 
fidions,  concei-ning  the  Milefians  of  Ireland. 

From  internal  proofs  it  fufliciently  appears  that  the 
poems  publiflied  under  the  name  of  OfTian,  are  not  of  Irifli 
compofition.  The  favourite  chimera,  that  Ireland  is  the 
mother-country  of  the  Scots,  is  totally  fubverted  and  ruin- 
ed. The  fittions  concerning  the  antiquities  of  that  coun- 
try, which  were  forming  for  ages,  and  growing  as  they 
came  down,  on  the  hands  of  {xicztiiwe.  fenachies  ■d^.n.d.Ji'eas, 
are  found,  at  lalt,  to  be  the  fpurious  brood  of  modern  aiid 
ignorant  ages.  To  thofe  who  know  how  tenacious  the 
Irifli  are,  of  their  pretended  Iberian  defcent,  this,  alone,  is 
proof  fufficient,  that  poems,  fo  fubverfive  of  their  fyfiem, 
could  never  be  produced  by  an  Hibernian  bard.  But  v/hen 
we  look  to  the  language,  it  is  fo  different  from  the  Irifli 
dialed,  that  it  would  be  as  ridiculous  to  think,  that  Mil- 
ton's 


404      A  DISSERTATION  coNCERNiNCi 

ton's  Paradife  Lofl  could  be  wrote  by  a  Scottifh  peafant, 
as  to  fuppofe,  that  the  poems  afcribed  to  Offian  were  writ 
in  Ireland. 

The  pretenfions  of  Ireland  to  Offian  proceed  from  ano- 
ther quarter.  There  are  handed  down,  in  that  country, 
traditional  poems,  concerning  the  Fiona.,  or  the  heroes  of 
Fion  Mac  Comnal.  This  Fion.,  fay  the  Irifh  annalifts,  was 
general  of  the  militia  of  Ireland,  in  the  reign  of  Cormac, 
in  the  third  century.  Where  Keating  and  OTlaherty 
learned,  that  Ireland  had  an  embodied  militia  fo  early,  is 
not  eafy  for  me  to  determine.  Their  information  certainly 
did  not  come  from  the  Irifh  poems,  concerning  Fion.  I 
have  jufl  now,  in  my  hands,  all  that  remain,  of  thofe  com- 
pofitions ;  but,  unluckily  for  the  antiquities  of  Ireland, 
they  appear  to  be  the  work  of  a  very  modern  period.  Eve- 
ry llanza,  nay  almoft  every  line,  affords  (triking  proofs, 
that  they  cannot  be  three  centuries  old.  Their  allufions  to 
the  manners  and  cufloms  of  the  fifteenth  century,  are  fo 
many,  that  it  is  matter  of  wonder  to  me,  how  any  one  could 
dream  of  their  antiquity.  They  are  entirely  writ  in  that 
romantic  tafte  vv^hich  prevailed  tv/o  ages  ago.  Giants,  en- 
chanted caftles,  dwarfs,  palfreys,  witches  and  magicians, 
form  the  circle  of  the  poet's  invention.  The  celebrated 
Fion  could  fcarcely  move  from  one  hillock  to  another, 
without  encountering  a  giant,  or  being  entangled  in  the 
circles  of  a  magician.  Witches,  on  broomfticks,  were 
continually  hovering  round  him,  like  crows  \  and  he  had 
freed  enchanted  virgins  in  every  valley  in  Ireland.  In 
fnort,  Fion^  great  as  he  was,  paiTed  a  difagreeable  life. 
Not  only  had  he  to  engage  all  the  mifchiefs  in  his  ovm 
country,  foreign  armies  invaded  him,  affifted  by  magici- 
ans and  witc'«]es,  and  headed  by  kings,  as  tall  as  the  main- 
mail  of  a  lirit  rate.  It  mull  be  owned,  however,  that 
Fion  was  not  inferior  to  them  in  height. 

A  chos  air  Crondeoch,  druim-ard, 
Chos  eile  air  Crom-meal  dubh, 
Thoga  Fion  le  lamh  m.hoir 


An  d'uifge  o  Litbbair  na  fruth. 


With 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.        405 

With  one  foot  on  Cromleach  his  brow, 
The  other  on  Crommal  the  dark, 
Fion  took  up  with  his  large  hand 
The  water  from  Liibar  of  the  dreams. 

Cromleach  and  Crommal  were  two  mountains  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  one  another,  in  IJlfter,  and  the  river  Lubar 
ran  through  the  intermediate  valley.  The  property  of 
fuch  a  monller  as  this  Fion^  I  (Irould  never  have  difputed 
with  any  nation.  But  the  bard  himfelf,  in  the  poem,  from 
which  the  above  quotation  is  taken,  cedes  him  to  Scotland. 

FioN  o  Albin,  fiol  nan  laoich ! 

Fion  from  Albion,  race  of  heroes  ! 

Were  it  allowable  to  contradidl  the  authority  of  a  bard, 
at  this  diftance  of  time,  I  Ihould  have  given  as  my  opinion, 
that  this  enormous  Fion  was  of  the  race  of  the  Hibernian 
giants,  of  Ruanus,  or  fome  other  celebrated  name,  ra- 
ther than  a  native  of  Caledonia,  whofe  inhabitants,  nov/, 
at  lead,  are  not  remarkable  for  their  ftaturc.  As  for  the 
poetry,  I  leave  it  to  the  reader. 

If  Fion  was  fo  remaikable  for  his  ftature,  his  heroes  had 
alfo  other  extraordinary  properties.  In  iveight  all  the  fons 
of  Jh angers  yielded  to  the  celebrated  Ton-iofal ;  and  for 
hardne's  of  fkull,  and,  perhaps,  for  thicknefs  too,  the  va- 
liant Ofcar  ftood  unrivalled  and  alone.  Offian  himfelf  had 
many  fmgular,  and  lefs  delicate,  qualifications,  than  play- 
ing on  the  harp ;  and  the  brave  CuthuUin  was  of  fo  dimi- 
nutive a  fize,  as  to  be  taken  for  a  child  of  two  years  of  age, 
by  the  gigantic  Swaran.  To  illuftrate  this  fubjed,  I  fliali 
here  lay  before  the  reader,  the  hiftory  of  fome  of  the  Irifli 
poems,  concerning  Fion  Mac  Comnal.  A  tranllation  of 
thefe  pieces,  if  well  executed,  might  afford  fatisfadion,  in 
an  uncommon  way,  to  the  Public.  But  this  ought  to  be 
the  work  of  a  native  of  Ireland.  To  draw  forth,  from  ob- 
fcurity,  the  poems  of  my  own  country,  has  wafted  all  the 
time  I  had  allotted  for  the  mufes ;  befides  I  am  too  diffi- 
dent of  my  own  abilities,  to  vmdertake  fuch  a  work.  A 
gentleman  in  Dublin  accufed  me  to  the  public,  of  com- 
mitting blunders  and  abfurdities,  in  tranflating  the  lan- 
guage 


4o6      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

guage  of  my  own  country,  and  that  before  any  tranflation 
of  mine  appeared  *.  How  the  gentleman  came  to  fee  my 
blunders  before  I  committed  them,  is  not  eafy  to  deter- 
mine ;  if  he  did  not  conclude,  that,  as  a  Scotfman,  and, 
of  courfe  defcended  of  the  Milefian  race,  I  might  have 
committed  fome  of  thofe  overfights,  which,  perhaps  very 
unjuftly,  are  faid  to  be  peculiar  to  them. 

From  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Irifli  poems,  concerning 
the  Fiona,  it  appears,  that  Fion  Mac  Comnal  flourifhed  in 
the  reign  of  Cormac,  which  is  placed,  by  the  univerfal 
confent  of  the  fenachies,  in  the  third  century.  They  even 
fix  the  death  of  Fingal  in  the  year  286,  yet  his  fon  Offian 
is  made  cotemporary  with  St.  Patrick,  who  preached  the 
gofpei  in  Ireland  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth  age.  Offian, 
though,  at  that  time,  he  muft  have  been  two  hundred  and 
fifty  years  of  age,  had  a  daughter  young  enough  to  be- 
come wife  to  the  faint.  On  account  of  this  family  connec- 
tion, Patrick  of  the  Pfalms,  for  fo  the  apoftle  of  Ireland  is 
emphatically  called  in  the  poems,  took  great  delight  in  the 
company  of  Offian,  and  in  hearing  the  great  aftlons  of  his 
family.  The  faint  fometimes  threw  off  the  auflerity  of  his 
profeffion,  drunk  freely,  and  had  his  foul  properly  warmed 
with  wine,  to  receive,  with  becoming  enthufiafm,  the 
poems  of  his  father-in-law.  One  of  the  poems  begins 
with  this  piece  of  ufeful  information. 

Lo  don  rabh  Padric  na  mhur. 
Gun  Sailm  air  uidh,  ach  a  gol, 
Ghluais  e  thigh  OJian  mhic  Fhion, 
O  fan  leis  bu  bhinn  a  ghloir. 

The 

*  lii  Faulknei's  Dublin  Journal,  of  the  id  December,  1761,  appeared  the  follow- 
ing Adveitifement;  two  weeks  before  my  firft  publication  appeared  in  London, 

"  Speedily  will  be  publilhed,  by  a  gentlen-.an  of  this  kingdom,  who  bath  been, 
I'T  fo'.ne  time  pall,  employed  in  tranflating  and  wiiting  hiftorical  Notes  to 

F     I     N     G     A     L,      A    Poem, 

Oripnally  wrote  in  the  Irilh  or  Erfe  language.  In  the  .preface  to  which,  the 
tranflator,  who  is  a  perfect  mafler  ot  the  Tn'h 'oU'iUc,  will  eivc  an  account  cf  the 
manners  and  cufiomsof  the  ancient  Lifh  o  Scotch  ;  and,  therefore,  moft  humbly 
iutreats  the  public,  10  wait  for  his  edition,  which  n'lll  appear  in  a  (hort  time,  as  he 
will  fet  forth  all  the  blunders  and  abfu  duies  in  the  edition  now  printing  in  Lon- 
'loii,  andflicw  the  ignorance  of  the  En  Jifii  tranflator,  in  his  knowledge  of  Irilh 
■  .'-.v.aiar,  not  undeiflandir;g  any  part  of  that  accidence." 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  407 

The  title  of  this  poem  is  Teantach  mor  na  Fiona.  It  ap- 
pears to  have  been  founded  on  the  fame  ftory  with  the  bat- 
tle of  Lcra.  The  circumflances  and  cataflrophe  in  both 
are  much  the  fame ;  but  the  Irijh  Ojf-an  diicovers  the  age 
in  which  he  lived,  by  an  unlucky  anachronifm.  Af*^er 
defcribing  the  total  rout  of  Erragon,  he  very  gravely  con- 
cludes with  this  remarkable  anecdote,  that  none  of  the  foe 
efcaped,  but  a  few,  who  were  permitted  to  go  on  a  pilgri- 
mage to  the  Holy  Land.  This  circumflance  fixes  the  date 
of  the  compofition  oi  the  piece  fome  centuries  after  the 
famous  croifade ;  for,  it  is  evident,  that  the  poet  thought 
the  time  of  the  croifade  fo  ancient,  that  he  confounds  it 
with  the  age  of  Fingal.  Erragon,  in  the  courfe  of  this 
poem,  is  often  called, 

•Riogh  Lochlin  an  do  fiiloigh. 
King  cf  Demnark  of  two  nations, 

which  alludes  to  the  union  of  the  kingdoms  of  Norway  and 
Denmark,  a  circumftance  which  happened  under  Marga- 
ret de  Waldemar,  in  the  clofe  of  the  fourteenth  age.  Mo- 
dern, however,  as  this  pretended  Oflian  was,  it  is  certain, 
he  lived  before  the  Irifh  had  dreamed  of  appropriating  Fi- 
m,  or  Fingal,  to  themfelves.  Ele  concludes  the  poem, 
with  this  reflection, 

Na  fagha  fe  comhthrom  nan  n'  arm, 
Erragon  Mac  Annir  nan  linn  glas 
'San  n'  Albin  ni  n'  abairtair  Triath 
Agus  ghlaoite  an  n'  Fhicna  as. 

''  Had  Erragon,  fon  of  Annir  of  gleaming  fwords,  avoid- 
ed the  equal  conteft  of  arms  (fmgle  combat),  no  chief 
fhould  have  afterwards  been  numbered  in  Albion,  and 
the  heroes  of  Fion  ihould  no  more  be  named." 

The  next  poem  that  falls  under  our  obfervation  is 
Cath-cahhra,  or  The  death  of  Of  car.  This  piece  is  found- 
ed on  the  fame  ftory  which  we  have  in  the  firfl  book  of 
Temora.  So  little  thought  the  author  of  Cath-cahhra  of 
making  Ofcar  his  countryman,  that,  in  the  courfe  of  two 
hundred  lines,  of  which  the  poem  confifls,  he  puts  the 
follovving  expreflion  thrice  in  the  mouth  of  the  hero  : 

Alein 


4o8     A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

Albin,  an  fa  d'  roina  m'  arach. 

Albion,  where  I  was  born  and  bred. 

The  poem  contains  almoft  all  the  incidents  in  the  firfl 
book  of  Temora.  In  one  circumftance  the  bard  differs 
materially  from  Offian.  Ofcar,  after  he  was  mortally 
wounded  by  Cairbar,  was  carried  by  his  people  to  a  neigh- 
bouring hill,  which  commanded  a  profpefl;  of  the  fea. 
A  fleet  appeared  at  a  dillance,  and  the  hero  exclaims, 
with  joy, 

Loingeas  mo  (liean-athair  at  an  . 

'S  iad  a  tlachd  le  cabhair  chugain, 
O  A1.BIN  na  n'  ioma  ftuagh. 

*'  It  is  the  fleet  of  my  grandfather,  coming  with  aid  to 

our  field,  from  Albion  of  many  waves." The  tefti- 

mony  of  this  bard  is  fufficient  to  confute  the  idle  fidions 
of  Keating  and  O 'Flaherty  ;  for,  though  he  is  far  from 
being  ancient,  it  is  probable  he  flourifhed  a  full  century 
before  thefe  hiilorians.  He  appears,  however,  to  have 
been  a  much  better  chriftian  than  cnronologer  ;  for  Fion, 
though  he  is  placed  two  centuries  before  St.  Patrick,  very 
devoutly  recommends  the  foul  of  his  grandfon  to  his  Re- 
deemer. 

Duan  a  Garibh  Mac-Star?!  is  another  Irifli  poem  in  high 
repute.  The  grandeur  of  its  images,  and  its  propriety  of 
fentiraent,  might  have  induced  me  to  give  a  translation  of 
it,  had  not  I  had  fome  expedations,  which  are  now  over, 
of  feeing  it  in  the  collection  of  the  Irifli  OlTian's  poems, 
promifed  twelve  years  fmce,  to  the  public.  The  author 
defcends  fometimes  from  the  region  of  the  fublim.e  to  low 
and  indecent  defcription  ;  the  laft  of  which,  the  Irifh  tran- 
flator,  no  doubt,  will  choofe  to  leave  in  the  obfcurity  of 
the  original.  In  this  piece,  Cuthullin  is  ufed  with  very 
little  ceremony,  for  he  is  oft  called  the  dog  of  Tara,  in 
the  county  of  Meath.  This  fevere  title  of  the  redoubtable 
Cutbidihi,  the  moil  renowned  of  Irifli  champions,  proceed- 
ed from  the  poet's  ignorance  of  etymology.  Cu,  voice,  or 
commander,  fignifies  alfo  a  dcg.  The  poet  chofe  the  laft, 
as  the  mofl:  noble  appellation  for  his  hero. 

The 


i 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


409 


The  fubje£l  of  the  poem  is  the  fame  with  that  of  the 
epic  poem  of  Fingal.  Caribh  Mac-Stani  is  the  fame  with 
Oflian's  Swaran,  the  fon  of  Starno.  His  fingle  combats 
with,  and  his  victory  over  all  the  heroes  of  Ireland,  ex- 
cepting the  celebrated  dog  of  Tara,  i.  e.  Cuthullin,  afford 
matter  for  two  hundred  lines  of  tolerable  poetry.  Caribh' s 
progrefs  in  fearch  of  Cuthullin,  and  his  intrigue  with  the 
gigantic  Emir-bragal,  that  hero's  wife,  enables  the  poet 
to  extend  his  piece  to  four  hundred  lines.  This  author, 
it  is  true,  makes  Cuthullin  a  native  of  Ireland  ;  the  gi- 
gantic Emir-bragal  he  calls  the  guiding  Jiar  of  the  zvomejz  of 
Ireland.  The  property  of  this  enormous  lady  I  Ihall  not 
difpute  with  him,  or  any  other.  But  as  he  fpeaks  with 
great  tendernefs  of  the  daughters  of  the  convent^  and  throws 
out  fome  hints  againft  the  Englifh  nation,  it  is  probable 
he  lived  in  too  modern  a  period  to  be  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  genealogy  of  Cuthullin. 

Another  Irifh  Oflian,  for  there  were  many,  as  appears 
from  their  difference  in  language  and  fentiment,  fpeaks 
very  dogmatically  of  Fwn  Mac  Comnal,  as  an  Irifhman. 
Little  can  be  faid  for  the  judgment  of  this  poet,  and  lef? 
for  his  delicacy  of  fentiment.  The  hiflory  of  one  of  his 
epifodes  may,  at  once.  Hand  as  a  fpecimen  of  his  want  of 
both.  Ireland,  in  the  days  of  Fion^  happened  to  be  threa- 
tened with  an  invafion,  by  three  great  potentates,  the  kings 
of  Lochlin,  Sweden,  and  France.  It  is  needlefs  to  infift 
upon  the  impropriety  of  a  French  invafion  of  Ireland  ;  it 
is  fufficient  for  me  to  be  faithful  to  the  language  of  my 
author.  Fion^  upon  receiving  intelligence  of  the  intended 
invafion,  fent  Ca-olt,  Oflian,  and  Ofcar,  to  watch  the  bay, 
in  which,  it  was  apprehended,  the  enemy  was  to  land. 
Ofcar  was  the  worft  choice  of  a  fcout  that  could  be  made, 
for,  brave  as  he  was,  he  had  the  bad  property  of  falling- 
very  often  afleep  on  his  pofl;,  nor  was  it  poflible  to  awake 
him,  without  cutting  off  one  of  his  fingers,  or  dafhing  a 
large  flone  againft  his  head.  When  the  enemy  appeared, 
Ofcar,  very  unfortunately,  was  afleep.  Oflian  and  Ca-olt 
confulted  about  the  method  of  wakening  him,  and  they, 
at  laft,  fixed  on  the  flone,  as  the  lefs  dangerous  expedient. 

Fff.  Gun 


I 


410     A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

Gun  thog  Caoille  a  clach,  nach  gan, 
Agus  a  n'  aighai'  chieaii  gun  bhuail ; 
Tri  mil  an  tulloch  gun  chri',  &c. 

"  Ca-olt  took  up  a  heavy  ftone,  and  ftruck  it  againft  the 
hero's  head.  The  hill  iliook  for  three  miles,  as  the  ftone 
rebounded  and  rolled  away."  Ofcar  rofe  in  wrath,  and 
his  father  gravely  defired  him  to  fpend  his  rage  on  his 
enemies,  which  he  did  to  fo  good  purpofe,  that  he  fmgly 
routed  a  whole  wing  of  their  army.  The  confederate 
kings  advanced,  notwithftanding,  till  they  came  to  a  nar- 
row pafs,  pofleiled  by  the  celebrated  Ton-iofal.  This 
name  is  very  fignificant  of  the  fmgular  property  of  the  he- 
ro ^who  bore  it.  Ton-iofal,  though  brave,  was  fo  heavy 
and  unwieldy,  that  when  he  fat  down,  it  took  the  whole 
force  of  an  hundred  men  to  fet  him  upright  on  his  feet 
again.  Luckily  for  the  prefervation  of  Ireland,  the  hero 
happened  to  be  Handing  when,  the  enemy  appeared,  and 
he  gave  fo  good  an  account  of  them,  that  Fion,  upon  his 
arrival,  found  little  to  do,  but  to  divide  the  fpoil  among 
his  foldiers. 

All  thefe  extraordinary  heroes,  Fion,  Offian,  Ofcar, 
and  C^-olt,  fays  the  poet,  were 

Siol  Erin  na  gorm  Linn. 
The  Jons  of  Yu^y^  of  blue  fie  el. 

Neither  fliall  I  much  difpute  the  matter  with  him  :  He 
has  my  confent  alfo  to  appropriate  to  Ireland  the  celebrat- 
ed Ton-iofal.  I  Ihall  only  fay,  that  they  are  different  per- 
fons  from  thofe  of  the  fame  name,  in  the  Scotch  poems ; 
and  that,  though  the  ilupendous  valour  of  the  firfl  is  fo 
remarkable,  they  have  not  been  equally  lucky  with  the 
latter,  in  their  poet.  It  is  fomewhat  extraordinary,  that 
Fion,  who  lived  fome  ages  before  St.  Patrick,  fwears  like 
a  very  good  chrillian  : 

Air  an  Dia  do  chum  gach  cafe. 
By  God,  ivhof  japed  every  cafe. 

It  is  vv'orthy  of  being  remarked,  that,  in  the  line  quoted, 
Offian,  who  lived  in  St.  Patrick's  days,  feems  to  have  un- 

derjdood 


T4IE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         411 

derftood  fomethiiifij  of  the  Englifli,  a  janguage  not  then 
fubfifting.  A  perion,  more  fanguine  for  the  honour  of 
his  country  than  I  am,  might  argue,  that  this  pretendedly 
Irifli  OiTian  was  a  native  of  Scotland  ;  for  my  country- 
men are  univerfally  allowed  to  have  an  exclufive  right  to 
the  fecond-fight. 

From  the  inftanccs  given,  the  reader  may  form  a  com- 
plete idea  of  the  Irifh  compohtions  concerning  the  Fiona, 
The  greatcfl  part  of  them  make  the  heroes  of  Fion, 

Siol  Albin  a  n'nioma  caoiie. 

The  race  of  Albion  of  many  firths. 
The  reft  make  them  natives  of  Ireland.  But,  the  truth  is, 
that  their  authority  is  of  little  confequence  on  either  fide. 
From  the  inftances  I  have  given,  they  appear  to  have  been 
the  work  of  a  very  modern  period.  The  pious  ejaculati- 
ons they  contain,  their  allufions  to  the  manners  of  the 
times,  fix  them  to  the  fifteenth  century.  Had  even  the 
authors  of  thefe  pieces  avoided  all  allufions  to  their  own 
times,  it  is  impoilible  that  the  poems  could  pafs  for 
ancient,  in  the  eyes  of  any  perfon  tolerably  converfant 
with  the  Irifii  tongue.  The  idiom  is  fo  corrupted,  and  fo 
many  words  borrowed  from  the  Englifh,  that  the  language 
mud  have  made  confiderable  progreis  in  Ireland  before 
the  poems  were  written. 

It  remains  now  to  iliew,  how  the  Iriili  bards  began  to 
appropriate  the  Scottiih  Offian  and  his  heroes  to  their  own- 
country.  After  the  Englifh  conquefl,  many  of  the  natives 
of  Ireland,  averfe  to  a  foreign  yoke,  either  aftually  were  in 
a  ftate  of  hoftility  with  the  conquerors,  or  at  leafl,  paid 
little  regard  to  their  government.  The  Scots,  in  thofe  ages, 
were  often  in  open  war,  and  never  in  cordial  friendfnip 
with  the  Englifh.  The  fimilarity  of  manners  and  lan- 
guage, the  traditions  concerning  their  common  origin,  and 
above  all,  their  having  to  do  wirh  the  fame  enemy,  creat- 
ed a  free  and  friendly  intercourfe  between  the  Scottifli  and 
Irifli  nations.  As  the  cuftoDi  of  retaining  bards  and  fena- 
chies  was  common  to  both  ;  fo  each,  no  doubt,  had  form- 
ed a  fyftem  of  hiftory,  it  matters  not  how  muchfoever  fa- 
bulous, concerning  their  refpective  origin.  It  was  the  na- 
tural 


412      A  DISSERTATION  concerning 

tural  policy  of  the  times,  to  reconcile  the  traditions  of 
both  nations  together,  and,  if  poffible,  to  deduce  them 
from  the  fame  original  ilock. 

The  Saxon  manners  and  language  had,  at  that  time, 
made  great  progrefs  in  the  fouth  of  Scotland.  The  ancient 
language,  and  the  traditional  hiftory  of  the  nation,  became 
confined  entirely  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Highlands,  then 
fallen,  from  feveral  concurring  circumftances,  into  the 
laft  degree  of  ignorance  and  barbarifm.  The  Irifh,  who, 
for  fome  ages  before  the  conqueft,  had  poffefl'ed  a  compe- 
tent fnare  of  that  kind  of  learning,  which  then  prevailed 
in  Europe,  found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  impofe  their  own 
fiftions  on  the  ignorant  Highland  fenachies.  By  flattering 
the  vanity  of  the  Highlanders,  with  their  long  lift  of  He- 
remonian  kings  and  heroes,  they,  without  contradidion, 
affumed  to  themfelves  the  character  of  being  the  mother- 
nation  of  the  Scots  of  Britain.  At  this  time,  certainly,  was 
efLablilhed  that  Hibernian  fyftem  of  the  original  of  the 
Scots,  which  afterwards,  for  want  of  any  other,  v/as  uni- 
verfally  received.  The  Scots  of  the  low-country,  who,  by 
lofmg  the  language  of  their  anceftors,  loft,  together  with 
it,  their  national  traditions,  received,  implicitly,  the  hif- 
tory of  their  country,  from  Irifli  refugees,  or  from  High- 
land fenachies,  perfuaded  over  into  the  Hibernian  fyftem. 

These  circumftances  are  far  from  being  ideal.  We 
have,  remaining,  many  particular  tiaditions,  which  bear 
teftimony  to  a  fact,  of  itfelf  abundantly  probable.  What 
makes  the  matter  inconteftible  is,  that  the  ancient  traditi- 
onal accounts  of  the  genuine  origin  of  the  Scots,  have 
been  handed  down  without  interruption.  Though  a  few 
ignorant  fenachies  might  be  perfuaded  out  of  their  own 
opinion,  by  the  fmoothnefs  of  an  Irilh  tale,  it  was  impof- 
fible  to  eradicate,  from  among  the  bulk  of  the  people, 
their  own  national  traditions.  Thefe  traditions  afterwards 
fo  much  prevailed,  that  the  Highlanders  continue  totally 
unacquainted  with  the  pretended  Hibernian  extract  of  the 
Scots  nation.  Ignorant  chronicle  writers,  ftrangers  to  the 
ancient  language  of  their  country,  preferved  only  from 
falling  to  the  ground,  fo  improbable  a  ftory. 

This 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  413 

This  fubjed,  perhaps,  is  purfued  further  than  it  de- 
ferves  ;  but  a  difculTion  of  the  pretenfions  of  Ireland,  was 
become  in  fome  meafure  neceffary.  If  the  Irifh  poems, 
concerning  the  Fiona,  fliould  appear  ridiculous,  it  is  but 
juflice  to  obferve,  that  they  are  fcarcely  more  fo,  than  the 
poems  of  other  nations,  at  that  period.  On  other  fubjeds, 
the  bards  of  Ireland  have  difplayed  a  genius  for  poetry. 
It  was,  alone,  in  matters  of  antiquity,  that  they  were  mon- 
Itrous  in  their  fables.  Their  love-fonnets,  and  their  ele- 
gies on  the  death  of  perfons  worthy  or  renowned,  abound 
with  fimplicity,  and  a  wild  harmony  of  numbers.  They 
become  more  than  an  atonement  for  their  errors,  in  every 
other  fpecies  of  poetry.  But  the  beauty  of  thefe  pieces, 
depends  fo  much  on  a  certain  curiofa  felicitas  of  exprellion 
in  the  original,  that  they  muft  appear  much  to  difadvant- 
age  in  another  language. 


A    CRITICAL 


DISSERTATION 


ON    THE 


POEMS  OF  OSS  I  AN. 


T  jH  E 


SON    OF    FINGAL. 


By     HUGH      B    L    A    I    R,     D.  D. 

•  KE    OF     THE    MINISTERS    OF     THE    HIGH    CHURCHj    AND   PROFESSOR   OF    RHETC 
RICK   AND    BILL£S-I,ETTERS,  IN   THK   UNIVERSITY  OF    SDINBURSH, 


A    CRITICAL 

DISSERTATION 


ON      THE 


POEMSoF    OSSIAN, 

THE 

SON     OF     FINGAL. 


AMONG  the  monuments  remaining  of  the  ancient 
ftate  of  nations,  few  are  more  valuable  than  their 
poems  or  fongs.  Hiftory,  when  it  treats  of  remote  and 
dark  ages,  is  feldom  very  inflruftive.  The  beginnings 
of  fociety,  in  every  country,  are  involved  in  fabulous 
confufion  ;  and  though  they  were  not,  they  would  fur- 
nifh  few  events  worth  recording.  But,  in  every  period 
of  fociety,  human  manners  are  a  curious  fpeftacle  ;  and 
the  moft  natural  pictures  of  ancient  manners  are  exhibit- 
ed in  the  ancient  poems  of  nations.  Thefe  prefent  ta 
us,  what  is  much  more  valuable  than  the  hiftory  of  fuch 
tranfaftions  as  a  rude  age  can  aiford,  The  hiftory  of  hu-^ 
man  imagination  and  paflion.  They  make  us  acquainted 
with  the  notions  and  feelings  of  our  fellow-creatures  in 
the  moft  artlefs  ages  ;  difcovering  what  objefts  they  ad- 
mired, and  what  pleafures  they  purfued,  before  thofe  re- 
finements of  fociety  had  taken  place,  which  enlarge  in- 
deed, and  diverfify  the  tranfaclions,  but  difguife  the  man- 
ners of  mankind. 

Besides  this  merit,  which  ancient  poems  have  with 
philoibphical  obfervers  of  human  nature,  they  have  an- 
other with  perfons  of  tafte.  They  promife  fome  of  the 
higheft  beauties  of  poetical  writing.  Irregular  and  un- 
poliftied  we  may  exped  the  productions  of  uncultivated 
ages  to  be  ;  but  abounding,  at  the  fame  time,  with  that 
G  g  g  enthu- 


4i8     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

enthufiafm,  that  vehemence  and  fire,  which  are  the  foul 
of  poetry  :  For  many  circumflances  of  thofe  times  which 
we  call  barbarous,  are  favourable  to  the  poetical  fpirit. 
That  ftate,  in  which  human  nature  fhoots  wild  and  free, 
though  unfit  for  other  improvements,  certainly  encou- 
rages the  high  exertions  of  fancy  and  paffion. 

In  the  infancy  of  focieties,  men  live  fcattered  and  dif- 
perfed,  in  the  midft  of  folitary  rural  fcenes,  where  the 
beauties  of  nature  are  their  chief  entertainment.  Thev 
meet  with  many  objeds,  to  them  new  and  ftrange  ;  their 
wonder  and  furprize  are  frequently  excited  ;  and,  by  the 
fudden  changes  of  fortune  occurring  in  their  unfettled 
flate  of  life,  their  pafTions  are  raifed  to  the  utmoft  :  their 
paliions  have  nothing  to  reilrain  them,  their  imagination 
has  nothing  to  check  it.  They  difplay  themfelves  to  one 
another  without  difguife ;  and  converfe  and  act  in  the 
uncovered  fimplicity  of  nature.  As  their  feelings  are 
ftrong,  fo  their  language,  of  itfelf,  affumes  a  poetical  turn. 
Prone  to  exaggerate,  they  defcribe  every  thing  in  the 
fbongeft:  colours  ;  which  of  courfe  renders  their  fpeech 
pifturefque  and  figurative.  Figurative  language  owes  its 
rile  chiefly  to  two  caufes  ;  to  the  want  of  proper  names 
for  objects,  and  to  the  Influence  of  imagination  and  paf- 
fion over  the  form  of  expreflion.  Both  thefe  caufes  con- 
cur in  the  infancy  of  fociety.  Figures  are  commonly  con- 
fidered  as  artificial  modes  of  fpeech,  devifed  by  orators 
and  poets,  after  the  world  had  advanced  to  a  refined  flate. 
The  contrary  of  this  is  the  truth.  Men  never  have  ufed 
fo  m.any  figures  of  flyle,  as  in  thofe  rude  ages,  when, 
befides  the  power  of  a  warm  imagination  to  fuggeft  lively 
Images,  the  want  of  proper  and  preclfe  terms  for  the  Ideas 
they  would  exprefs,  obliged  them  to  have  recourfe  to  cir- 
cumlocution, metaphor,  comparifon,  and  all  thofe  fubfli- 
tuted  forms  of  expreflion, -which  give  a  poetical  air  to 
language.  An  American  chief,  at  this  day,  harangues  at 
the  head  of  his  tribe,  in  a  more  bold  metaphorical  ftyle, 
than  a  modern  European  would  adventure  to  ufe  in  an 
epic  poem.  . 

In  the  progreii>  of  fociety,  the  genius  and  manners  of 
men  undergo  a  change  more  favourable  to  accuracy  than 

to 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIx\N. 


419 


to  fprightlinefs  and  fubllmity.  As  the  world  advances, 
the  underilanding  gains  ground  upon  the  imagmation  : 
the  underltanding  is  more  exercifed  ;  the  imagination, 
lefs.  Fewer  objeds  occur  that  are  new  or  llriking.  Men 
apply  themfelves  to  trace  the  caufes  of  things ;  they  cor- 
real: and  refine  one  another  ;  they  fubdue  or  difguife  their 
paflions  ;  they  form  their  exterior  manners  upon  one  uni- 
form ftandard  of  politenefs  and  civility.  Human  nature  is 
pruned  according  to  method  and  rule.  Language  ad- 
vances from  llerility  to  copioufnefs,  and,  at  the  fame  time, 
from  fervour  and  enthufiafm,  to  corre<5lnefs  and  precifion. 
Style  becomes  more  chafte  ;  but  lefs  animated.  The  pro- 
grefs  of  the  world  in  this  rcfpect  refenibles  the  progrefs  of 
age  in  man.  The  powers  of  imagination  are  moft  vigo- 
rous and  predominant  in  youth  ;  thofe  of  the  underiliand- 
ing  ripen  more  flowly,  and  often  attain  not  to  their  ma- 
turity, till  the  imagination  begin  to  flag.  Hence,  poetry, 
which  is  the  child  of  imagination,  is  frequently  mod 
glowing  and  animated  in  the  firfl  ages  of  fociety.  As 
the  ideas  of  our  youth  are  remembered  with  a  peculiar 
pleafure  on  account  of  their  iivelinefs  and  vivacity  ;  ■  - 
the  mofl  ancient  poems  have  often  proved  the  greateii. 
favourites  of  nations." 

Poetry  has  been  faid  to  be  more  ancient  than  profe : 
and  however  paradoxical  fuch  an  affertion  may  feem,  yet, 
in  a  qualified  fenfe,  it  is  true.  Men  certainly  never  converf- 
ed  together  in  regular  numbers ;  but  even  their  ordinarv 
language  would,  in  ancient  times,  for  the  reafons  before  af- 
figned,  approach  to  a  poetical  ftyle  ;  ,and  the  tirfl  compofiti- 
ons  tranfmitted  to  pofterity,  beyond  doubt,  were,  in  a  lite- 
ral fenfe,  poems  ;  that  is,  compohtions  in  which  imagina- 
tion had  the  chief  hand,  formed  into  fome  kind  of  num- 
bers, and  pronounced  with  a  mufical  modulation  or  tone. 
Mufic  or  fong  has  been  found  coeval  with  fociety  among 
the  mofl  barbarous  nations.  The  only  fubjeds  which 
could  prompt  men,  in  their  firfl  rude  ftate,  to  utter  their 
thoughts  in  compofitions  of  any  length,  were  fuch  as  na- 
turally affumed  the  tone  of  poetry  ;  praifes  of  their  gods, 
or  of  their  anceftors;  commemorations  of  their  own  war- 
like exploits;  or  lamentations  over  their  misfortunes.    And 

before 


420     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION' ON 

before  writing  was  invented,  no  other  compofitions,  ex- 
cept fongs  or  poems,  could  take  fuch  hold  of  the  imagina- 
tion and  memory,  as  to  be  preferved  by  oral  tradition, 
and  handed  down  from  one  race  to  another. 

Hence  we  may  expecl  to  find  poems  among  the  anti- 
quities of  all  nations.  It  is  probable  too,  that  an  extenfive 
fearch  would  difcover  a  certain  degree  of  refemblance 
among  all  the  moil  ancient  poetical  produdlions,  from 
whatever  country  they  have  proceeded.  In  a  fimilar  ftate 
of  manners,  fimilar  objeds  and  pafiions  operating  upon 
the  imaginations  of  men,  will  (lamp  their  produ6tions  with 
the  fame  general  character.  Some  diverfity  will,  no 
doubt,  be  occafioned  by  climate  and  genius.  But  man- 
kind never  bear  fuch  refembling  features,  as  they  do  in 
the  beginnings  of  fociety.  Its  fubfequent  revolutions  give 
rife  to  the  principal  diftinctions  among  nations;  and  divert, 
into  channels  widely  feparated,  that  current  of  human  ge- 
nius and  manners,  which  defcends  originally  from  one 
fpring.  What  we  have  been  long  accuflomed  to  call  the 
oriental  vein  of  poetry,  becaufe  fome '  of  the  earlieft 
poetical  productions  have  come  to  us  from  the  eaft,  is 
probably  no  more  oriental  than  occidental ;  it  is  charac- 
teriftical  of  an  age  rather  than  a  country  ;  and  belongs,  in 
fome  meafuie,  to  all  nations  at  a  certain  period.  Of  thi. 
the  works  of  Offian  feem  to  furnifn  a  remarkable  proof. 

Our  prefent  fubjeQ  leads  us  to  inveftigate  the  ancient 
poetical  remains,  not  fo  much  of  the  eaft,  or  of  the  Greeks 
iind  Romans,  as  of  the  northern  nations-;  in  order  to  dif- 
cover whether  the  Gothic  poetry  has  any  refemblance  to 
the  Celtic  or  Galic,  which  we  are  about  to  confider. 
Though  the  Goths,  under  which  name  we  ufually  com- 
prehend all  the  Scandinavian  tribes,  were  a  people  alto- 
gether fierce  and  martial,  and  noted,  to  a  proverb,  for 
their  ignorance  of  the  liberal  arts,  yet  they,  too,  from  the 
earliell  times  had  their  poets  and  their  fongs.  Their  poets 
were  diftinguifhed  by  the  title  of  Scalders,  and  their  fongs 
w^ere  termed  Vyjh^'.    Saxo  Grammaticus,  a  Danifli  hifto- 

rian 

*  Olaus  WormJus,  in  tlie  appendix  to  bis  Treatife  de  Liteiatura  Runica,  Ins 
given  a  particular  account  of  the;  Gothic  pocnry,  commonly  called  Runic,  from  Ru- 
■^les,  which  lignifies  the  Gothic  letters.     Jic  informs  us  that  theie  were  no  fewer 

than 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  421 

rian  of  confiderable  note  who  flourlflied  in  the  thirteenth 
century,  informs  us  that  very  many  of  thefe  fongs,  con- 
taining the  ancient  traditionary  ftories  of  the  country, 
were  found  engraven  upon  rocks  in  the  old  Runic  charac- 
ter ;  feveral  of  which  he  has  tranflated  into  Latin,  and  in- 
ferted  into  his  Hiftory.  But  his  verfions  are  phvinly  fo 
paraphraftical,  and  forced  into  fuch  an  imitation  of  the 
f!:yle  and  the  meafures  of  the  Roman  poets,  thrit  one  can 
form  no  judgment  from  them  of  the  native  fpirlt  of  the 
original.  A  more  curious  monument  of  the  true  Gothic 
poetry  is  preferved  by  Glaus  Wormius  in  his  book  de  Li^ 
teratura  Runica.  It  is  an  Epicedium,  or  funeral  fong, 
compofed  by  Regner  Lodbrog  ;  and  tranflated  by  Olaus, 
word  for  word,  from  the  original.  This  Lodbrog  was  a 
king  of  Denmark,  who  lived  in  the  eighth  century,  fa- 
mous for  his  v/ars  and  victories  ;  and  at  the  fame  time  an 
eminent  Scaldcr  or  poet.  It  was  his  misfortune  to  fall  at 
lait  into  the  hands  of  one  of  his  enemies,  by  whom  he  was 

thrown 

than  136  different  kinds  of  iiieafure  or  veife  ufed  in  their  V^fts;  and  though  we  arc 
accaflonied  to  call  rhyme  a  Gothic  invention,  he  fays  exprefsly,  that  among  all 
thefe  meafures,  rhyme,  or  correfpondence  of  final  fyllables,  was  nevtr  employed. 
He  analyfcs  the  ftruclure  of  one  of  thefe  kinds  of  verfe,  that  in  which  the  poem 
ofLodbiog,  afterwards  quoted,  is  written;  which  exhibits  a  very  fingular  fpecies 
of  harmony,  if  it  can  be  allowed  that  name,  depending  neither  upon  rhyme  nor  up- 
on metrical  feet,  or  quantity  of  fyllables,  but  chiefly  upon  the  number  of  the  I'ylla- 
bles,  and  the  difpofition  of  the  letters.  In  every  ftanza  was  an  equal  number  of 
lines  :  in  everv  line  fix  fyllables.  In  each  diflich,  it  was  requifite  that  three  words 
(hould  begin  with  the  fame  letter;  two  of  the  correfponding  woids  placed  in  the  firft 
line  of  the  diftich,  the  third,  in  the  fecond  line.  In  each  li.?e  were  alfo  required 
two  fyllables,  but  never  the  final  ones,  formed  either  of  the  fame  confonants,  or 
fame  vowels.  As  an  example  of  this  meafure,  Olaus  gives  us  thefe  two  Latin  lines, 
conftruclcd  exactly  according  to  the  above  rules  of  Runic  verTe  ; 

Chriflus  caput  nofiiuin 

Coronet  te  bonis. 
The  initial  letters  of  Chriftus,  Caput,  and  Coronet,  make  the  three  correfponding 
letters  of  the  diftich.  In  the  firft  line,  the  lirft  fyllables  of  Chriftus  and  of  noftrum  ; 
in  the  fecond  line,  the  on  in  coronet  and  in  bonis  make  the  requifite  correfpondence 
of  fyllables.  Fiequent  inverfions  and  tranfpofitions  were  permitted  in  this  poetry  ; 
which  would  naturally  follow  fiom  fuch  laborious  attention  to  the  cpllocation  of 
words. 

The  curious  on  this  fubjeft  may  confult  likewife  Dr.  Hicks's  Thefaurus  I,in- 
guarum  Septcntrionalium  ;  particularly  the  S3d  chanter  of  his  Grammatica  Anglo 
Saxonica  &  Mifo  Gothica;  where  they  will  find  a  full  account  of  the  ftrufiure  of 
the  Anglo  Saxon  verfe,  which  nearly  lefembled  the  Gothic.  They  will  find  alfo 
fomc  fpecimens  both  of  Gothic  and  Saxon  poetry.  An  extraft,  which  Dr.  Hicks 
has  given  from  the  work  of  one  of  the  Danifti  Scalde;s,  eiitiiled,  Hervarei  Saga, 
■  containing  an  evocation  fiom  the  dead,  may  be  ft^und  in  the  6ih  volume  ofMlfcel- 
iany  Poems,  publifiied  by  Mr.  Dryden. 


422     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

thrown  into  prifon,  and  condemned  to  be  deflroyed  by 
ferpents.  In  this  fituation  he  folaced  himfelf  with  rehear- 
fing  all  the  exploits  of  his  life.  The  poem  is  divided  in- 
to twenty-nine  ftanzas,  of  ten  lines  each  ;  and  every  flan- 
ZR  begins  with  thefe  words,  Pugnavimus  Enfibus,  "  We 
have  fought  with  our  fwords."  Olaus's  verfion  is  in  ma- 
ny places  fo  obfcure  as  to  be  hardly  intelligible.  I  have 
iubjoined  the  whole  below,  exactly  as  he  has  pubUfhed 
it  ;  and  fhall  tranllate  as  much  as  may  give  the  Englifh 
reader  an  idea  of  the  fpirit  and  ftrain  of  this  kind  of 
poetry*. 

"  Wk 


Pugnavimus  Enfibus 
Haud  poft  longum  tempus 
Cum  in  Gotlandia  acceflimus 
Ad  ferpentis  immenfi  necem 
'I'ur.c  impetravimus  Thoram 
Ex  hoc  vocarunt  me  virum 
Ciuod  ferpentem  tiansfodi 
Hirfutam  braccam  ob  illam  cedem 
Cufpide  i£lum  inculi  in  colubruin 
Feno  lucidorum  ftupendiorum. 

2. 

Mulcum  juvenis  fui  quando  acquifivimus 
Orientem  verfus  in  Oreonico  fieto 
Vulncrum  amnes  avidsE  ieiss 

Et  flavipedi  avi 

Accepiraus  ibidem  fonuerun: 

Ad  ful)limes  galeas 

Dura  fena  magnarn  efcam 

Omnii  erac  oceanus  vulnus 

Vadavit  corvus  in  fanguine  Cseforum 

3- 
Alte  tulimus  tunc  lanceas 
Quando  viginti  annos  numeravimus 
Etcelcbrem  laudem  comparavimus  paflim 
Vicimus  odlo  barones 
In  oiiente  ante  Dimjni  portum 
Aquila;  impetravimus  tunc  fufficisnttm 
Holpitii  fumptum  in  ilia  ft;age 
Sudor  decidit  in  vuinerum 
Oceano  perdidic  exercitus  cetatem 

"J- 
Pugnse  fafta  copia 

Cum  Hellingianos  pollulavimus 

Ad  aulam  Odini 

Naves  diieximus  in  oftium  Vifiuls 

Mucro  potuit  turn  mordere 

Omnis  erat  vulnus  unda 

Terra  rubefadla  Calldo 

Frcndebat  gladius  in  loricas 

Giadius  iindebat  Clypcos.. 


Memini  neminem  tunc  fugifle 
Priufquam  in  navibus 
Heraudus  in  bello  caderet 
Non  findit  navibus 
Alius  baro  ptaellantior 
Mare  ad  portum 
In  navibus  longis  poft  ilium 
Sic  attulit  priaceps  paHim 
Alacre  in  beilum  cor. 

6. 
Exercitus  abjecit  clypeos 
Cum  harta  volavit 
Ardua  ad  virorum  peflora 
Momordit  Scaiforum  cautes 
Gladius  in  pugna 
Sanguineus  erat  Clypeus 
Antequam  Rafno  rex  caJeret 
Fluxit  ex  virorum  capitibus 
Calidus  in  loricas  fudor. 

7- 
Habere  potuerunt  turn  corvi 
Ante  Indirorum  inful-s 
Sufficientem  pixdam  dilaniandam 
Acquifivimus  t'eris  carnivoris 
Plenum  prandium  unico  adu 
Difficile  erat  unius  facere  mentionem 
Oriente  fole 
Spicuia  vidi  pungere 
Propulerunc  arcus  ex  ft  ferra. 

8. 
Altum  mugierunt  enfes 
Antequam  in  Laneo  campo 
Eiflinus  rex  cecidit 
Proceffimus  auro  ditati 
Ad  terram  proftratorum  dimicanduiw 
Gladiu5  fecuit  Clypeorum 
Pifturas  in  galeorum  conventu 
Cervicum  muftum  ex  vulnerlbus 
Diffufum  per  cerebrum  fillum. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


423 


"  We  have  fought  with  our  fworJs.  I  was  young, 
when,  towards  the  eaft,  in  the  bay  of  Oreon,  we  made 
torrents  of  blood  flow,  to  gorge  the  ravenous  bead  of 
prey,  and  the  yellow-footed  bird.  There  refounded 
the  hard  fleel  upon  the  lofty  helmets  of  men.  The 
whole  ocean  was  one  wound.    The  crow  waded  in  the 

"  blood 


Tenuimus  Clypeos  in  fjr^uine 

Cum  hsftam  unximus 

Ante  Boring  holmum 

Teiorum  nubes  difrumpunt  clypeum 

Extrufit  arcus  ex  fe  metallum 

Volnir  cecidil  in  conflidu 

Non  er?.t  illo  rex  major 

Casfi  difperfi  late  per  littora 

Fers  ampledebantur  efcam. 

ic. 
Pugna  manifefte  crcfcebat 
Antequam  Frejr  rex  caderec 
In  Flandrorum  terra 
Cxpit  creruleus  ad  incidendura 
Sanguine  illitus  in  auream 
Loricam  in  pugna 
Durus  armorum  mucro  dim 
Virgo  deploravit  matutinam  lanienam 
Multa  prada  dabatur  teris. 

Centies  centenos  vidi  jacere 

In  navibus 

Ubi  ^nglanes  vocatur 

Navigavimus  ad  pugnam 

Per  fex  dies  antequam  exercltus  caderet 

Tranfegimus  mucronum  miiTann 

In  exortu  foils 

CoacSlus  eft  pro  noftrls  gladiis 

ValdioJ'ur  in  beilo  occumbere. 

12. 
Ruit  pliu'ia  fanguinis  de  gladiis 
Prjeceps  in  Bardafryde 
Pallidum  corpus  pro  accipitribus 
Murmuravit  arcus  ubi  mucro 
Acriter  mordebat  Loricas 
In  confliclu 
Odini  Pileus  Galea 
Cucurrit  arcus  ad  vulnus 
Venenate   acutus  confperfus  fudore  fan- 

13.  guineo. 

Tenuimus  magica  fcuta 
Alte  in  Pugns  ludo 
Ante  Hiadningum  finurn 
Videre  licuit  turn  viros 
Qui  gladiis  lacerarunt  Clypeos 
In  gladiatorio  murmure 
Galex  attrita;  virorum 
Erat  ficut  fplendidam  virginera 
In  kifto  juxta  fe  c«lloca;e. 


Dura  venit  tempeftas  Clypeis 

Cadaver  cecidit  in  terram 

In  Nortumbria 

Erat  circa  matutinum  tempus 

Hominibus  necefium  erat  fugere 

Ex  paeiio  ubi  acute 

Callidus  campob  mordebant  gladii 

Erat  hoc  veluti  Juvenem  viduam 

In  primaria  fede  ofculaii. 

Herthiofe  evafit  fortunatus 
Jn  Aullralibus  Orcadibus  ipfe 
Viftorix  in  noftris  hominibus 
Cogcbatur  in  armorum  nimbo 
Rogvaldus  occumbere 
Ifte  venir  fummus  fuper  accipitres 
Ludus  in  gladiorum  ludo 
Stienue  jadtabat  concullor 
Gaiese  fanguinis  teli. 
16. 
Quilibet  jacebat  tranfverfim  fupra  aliun*. 
Graudebat  pugna  lastus 
Accipiter  ob  gladiorum  ludum 
Non  fecit  aliquam  auc  aprum 
Qu^i  Irlandiam  gubernavit 
Conventus  fiebat  ferri  &  Clypei 
Marftanus  rex  jejunis 
Fiebat  in  vebrss  iinu.  , 
Prsda  data  corvis. 

17- 
Bellatorem  multum  vidi  cadere 
Mane  ante  machoeram 
Virum  in  mucronum  dlfiidio 
Filio  meo  incldic  mature 
Gladius  juxta  cor 
Egillus  fecit  Agnerum  fpoliatum 
Impertertitum  virum  vita  ^ 

Sonuit  lancea  prope  Hamoi 
Grifeam  loricam  fplendebant  vexilla. 

18. 
Verborum  tenaces  vidi  diffecare 
Haut  minutim  pro  lupis 
Endili  maris  enfibus 
Erat  per  Hebdomadse  fpaclum 
Quafi  mulieres  vinum  apj'ortarent 
Rubefadtx  erant  naves 
Valde  in  ftrepitu  armorum 
Sciffa  erat  lorica 
In  Scioldungorum  prselio. 

Pukbricomui 


424     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  blood  of  the  flaiii.     When  we  had  numbered  twenty 

"  years,  we  Hfted  our  fpears  on  high,   and  every  where 

"  fpread  our  renown.     Eight  barons  we  overcame  in  the 

"  eafl,  before  the  port  of  Biminum  ;  and  plentifully  we 

"  feafted  the  eagle  in  that  llaughter.     The  warm  ilream 

"  of  wounds  ran  into  the  ocean.     The  army  fell  before 

"  us. 


PiilchricomMm  vidi  crepufculafcere 
Virginis  amatorem  circa  maturinom 
Et  LOii'abulationis  amicum  viduarum 
Erat  fjcut  calidum  balneum 
Vinei  vafis  nympha  portaiet 
No3  in  11k  freto 
Anciquatn  Orn  lex  caderet 
Sanguineum  Clypeum  vidi  ruptum 
Hoc  invertit  virorum  vitam. 

20. 
Egimus  gladiorum  ad  caedem 
Ludum  in  Lindis  infuU 
Cum  regibus  tribas 
Pauci  potuerunt  inde  Ixtari 
Cecidit  tnultus  in  liftum  forarum 
Accipiter  diianiavit  carnem  cum  lupo 
Uc  fatur  inde  dilcederet 
Hybeinorum  fanguis  in  oceanum 
Copiofe  decidit  per  madationis  tempus. 

ai. 
Alte  gladius  mordcbat  Clypeos 
Tunc  cum  aurei  coloris 
Hafta  fiicabat  loricas 
Viderc  licuit  in  Onlugs  infu-la 
Per  fccuia  irultum  port 
Ibi  fuit  ad  gladiorum  ludos 
Regcs  proceflerunt 
Rubicundum  erat  circa  infulam 
Ar  volans  Draco  ^ulnerum. 


Hoc  vjdetur  miiii  re  vera 

Quod  fata  fequimur 

Rarus  tranfgreditur  fata  Parcarum 

Non  dertinavi  Eilaj 

D?  vitas  exitu  meas 

Cum  ego  fanguinem  femimortuus  tegerera 

Et  naves  in  aquas  protrufi 

PafTim  impetiavimus  tum  feris 

Efcam  in  Scotias  linibus. 

Hoc  ridere  me  tacit  temper 

Quod  Balderi  pauis  fcamna 

Parata  Icio  in  aula 

Bibemus  cerevifiam  brevi 

Ex  co'ncavis  crateribus  craniorum 

Non  gemit  vir  fortis  contra  mortem 

Magnirici  in  Odini  domibus 

Non  vcnio  difperabunJis 

Verbis  ad  Odini  aulam. 

26. 
Hie  vellent  nvinc  omnes 
Fiiii  Aflaugas  gladiis 
Amarum  bcllum  excitare 
Si  exafte  fcircnt 
Calamitates  noftras 
Quem  non  pauci  angues 
Vcnenati  me  difcerpunt 
Matrem  accepi  meis 
Filiis  ita  ut  corda  valeant. 


Quid  eft  viro  forti  morte  certius 
Etli  ipfe  in  armorum-nimbo 
Advcrfus  coliocatus  fit 
Saepe  oepiorat  statem 
Qui  nunquam  premitur 
Malum  lerunt  tiniidam  incitave 
Aquilam  ad  gladiorum  ludum 
Menculofus  vcnit  nufpiam 
Ccrdi  fuo  ufui. 

Hoc  nui-pcro  asquum  ut  procedat 

In  conta£lu  gladiorum 

Juvenis  unus  contra  alterum 

Non  retrocedat  vir  a  viro. 

Hoc  fuit  vi;i  fortis  nobilitas  diu 

Semper  debet  armoris  amicus  virginum 

Audas  efie  in  fiemitu  arjHorum. 


Vdlde  inciinatur  ad  haEreditatem 

Crudcle  ftat  nocumcntum  a  vipsra 

Anguis  inhabitat  aulam  cordis 

Speramus  alterius  ad  Othini 

Virgam  in  E!)s;  fanguine 

Filiis  meis  livefcec 

Sua  ira  rubefcet 

Non  acres  juvenis 

Seflionem  Cranquillam  facient. 

2S. 
Habeo  quinquagles 
Prcelia  fub  fignis  faifla 
Ex  belli  invitatione  &  femel 
Min'.me  putavic  hominum 
Qucd  me  futurus  ellet 
Juvenis  didici  mucronem  rubefacere 
Alius  rex  jirseftantlor 
Nos  Afsi  invitabunt 
Non  ell  lu^enil*  mors. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  425 

us.     When  we  fleered  our  fliips  into  the  mouth  of  the 
Viftula,  we  fent  the  Helfnigians  to  the  Hall  of  Odin. 
Then  did  the  fword  bite.     The  waters  were  all  one 
wound.    The  earth  was  dyed  red  with  the  warm  ftream. 
The  fword  rung  upon  the  coats  of  mail,  and  clove  the 
bucklers  in  twain.     None  fled  on  that  day,  till  amon^ 
his  fliips  Heraudus  fell.     Than  him  no  braver  baron 
cleaves  the  fea  with  fhips  ;  a  chearful  heart  did  he  ever 
bring  to  the  combat.     Then  the  hoft  threw  away  their 
fliielcis,  when  the  uplifted  fpear  flew  at  the  breafls  of 
heroes.    The  fword  bit  the  Scarnan  rocks  ;  bloody  was 
the  fhield  in  battle,  until  Rafno  the  king  was  flain. 
From  the  heads  of  warriors  the  warm  fweat  ff reamed 
down  their  armour.     The  crows  around  the  Indirian 
iflands  had  an  ample  prey.    It  v/ere  difncult  to  fmgle  out 
one  among  fo  many  deaths.     At  the  rifmg  of  the  fun 
I  beheld  the  fpears  piercing  the  bodies  of  foes,  and  the 
bows  throwing  forth  their  fteel-pointed  arrows.     Loud 
roared  the  fwords  in  the  plains  of  Lane. — The  virgin 
long  bewailed  the  llaughter  of  that  morning."     In  this 
flrain  the  poet  continues  to  defcribe  feveral  other  military 
exploits.     The  images  are  not  much  varied  :    the  noife  ot 
arms,  the  flreaming  of  blood,  and  the  feafling  the  birds 
of  prey,  often  recurring.     He  mentions  the  death  of  two 
of  his  fons  in  battle  ;  and  the  lamentation  he  defcribes 
as  made  for  one  of  them  is  very  fmgular.     A  Grecian  or 
Roman  poet  would  have  introduced  the  virgins  or  nymphs 
of  the^wood,  bewailing  the  untimely  fall  of  a  young  hero. 
But,  fays  our  Gothic  poet,  ''•  When  Rogvaldus  was  flain, 
**  for  him  mourned  all  the  hawks  of  heaven,"  as  lament- 
ing a  benefactor  who  had  fo  liberally  fupplied  them  with 
prey  ;  "  for  boldly,"  as  he  adds,  "  in  the  ftrife  of  fwords, 
"  did  the  breaker  of  helmets  throw^  the  fpear  of  blood." 
The  poem  concludes  with   fentiments  of  the  highefl 
bravery  and  contempt  of  death.    "  What  is  more  certain 
"  to  the  brave  man  than  death,  though  amidfl  the  florm 
H  h  h  "  of 

29.  Lnetus  cereviiiam  cum  Afis 

Fert  animus  finirc  In  fumma  fcdu  bib.un 

Iiivitant  me  Dvfae  Vitae  elaprae  funt  hoi« 

<inas  ex  Othini  aula  Ridens  moriai'. 
Othinus  mihi  mifit 


426    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  of  fwords,  he  (lands  always  ready  to  oppofe  it  ?  He 
"  only  regrets  this  life  who  hath  never  known  diftrefs. 
"  The  timorous  man  allures  the  devouring  eagle  to  the 
"  field  of  battle.  The  coward,  wherever  he  comes,  is 
"  ufelefs  to  himfelf.  This  I  efteem  honourable,  that  the 
'*  youth  fhould  advance  to  the  combat  faiily  matched  one 
"  againft  another  ;  nor  man  retreat  from  m.an.  Long 
"  was  this  the  warrior's  higheft  glory.  He  who  afpires 
"  to  the  love  of  virgins,  ought  always  to  be  foremoft  in 
"  the  roar  of  arms.  It  appears  to  me  of  truth,  that  we 
*'  are  led  by  the  Fates.  Seldom  can  any  overcome  the 
"  appointment  of  delliny.  Little  did  I  forefee  that  Ella* 
"  was  to  have  my  life  in  his  hands,  in  that  day  when, 
*'  fainting,  I  concealed  my  blood,  and  pufhed  forth  my 
"  fliips  into  the  waves ;  after  we  had  fpread  a  repaft  for 
"  the  beads  of  prey  throughout  the  Scottifli  bays.  But 
"^  this  makes  me  always  rejoice,  that  in  the  halls  of  our 
*'  father  Balder  [or  Odin]  I  know  there  are  feats  pre- 
"  pared,  where,  in  a  Ihort  time,  we  fliall  be  drinking  ale 
''  out  of  the  hollow  fkulls  of  our  enemies.  In  the  houfe 
'^  of  the  mighty  Odin,  no  brave  man  laments  death.  I 
"  come  not  with  the  voice  of  defpair  to  Odin's  hall. 
*'  How  eagerly  v/ould  all  the  fons  of  Aflauga  novv^  rufli  to 
"  war,  did  they  know  the  dillrefs  of  their  father,  whom 
*'  a  niultitude  of  venomous  ferpents  tear  ! — I  have  given 
*'  to  my  children  a  mother  who  hath  filled  their  hearts 
*'  with  valour.  I  am  fad  approaching  to  my  end.  A  cruel 
"  death  awaits  me  from  the  viper's  bite.  A  fnake  dwells 
*'  in  the  midft  of  my  heart.  I  hope  that  the  fword  of 
"  fome  of  my  fons  Ihall  yet  be  ftained  with  the  blood  ot 
"  Ella.  The  valiant  youths  will  wax  red  with  anger, 
"  and  will  not  fit  in  peace.  Fifty  and  one  times  have  I 
"  reared  the  ftandard  in  battle.  In  my  youth  I  learned 
"  to  dye  the  fword  in  blood  :  my  hope  was  then,  that  no 
"  king  among  men  would  be  more  renowned  than  me. 
"  The  goddeffes  of  death  will  now  foon  call  me  ;  I  mult 
f  ^  not  mourn  my  death.  Now  I  end  my  fong.  The  god- 
'"  deffes  invite  me  away  ;  they  whom  Odin  has  fent^  to 
V*  me  from  his  hall.    I  will  fit  upon  a  lofty  feat,  and  drink 

"  ale 

.:-  Jbis  was  the  name  of  his  enemy,  who  had  condemned  bim  to  death. 


THE  POEiMS  OF  OSSIAN.        427 

''  ale  joyfully  with  the  goddelTes  of  death.  The  hours  of 
"  my  life  are  run  out.     I  will  fmile  when  I  die." 

This  is  fuch  poetry  as  we  might  exped  from  a  barbar- 
ous nation.  It  breathes  a  moll  ferocious  fpirit.  It  is 
wild,  harfli,  and  irregular  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  animat- 
ed and  flrong  ;  the  Ityle,  in  the  original,  full  of  inverfi- 
ons,  and,  as  we  learn  from  fome  of  Olaus's  notes,  highly 
metaphorical  and  figured. 

But  when  we  open  the  works  of  Offian,  a  very  dif- 
ferent fccne  prefents  itfelf.  There  we  find  the  fire  and 
the  enthufiafm  of  the  mod  early  times,  combined  with 
an  amazing  degree  of  regularity  and  art.  We  find 
tendernefs,  and  even  delicacy  of  fentiment,  greatly  pre- 
dominant over  fiercenefs  and  barbarity.  Our  hearts  are 
melted  with  the  foftefl  feelings,  and  at  the  fame  time  ele- 
vated with  the  higheft  ideas  of  magnanimity,  generofity, 
and  true  heroifm^  When  we  turn  from  the  poetry  of 
Lodbrog  to  that  of  Ollian,  it  is  like  pafiing  from  a  favage 
defart,  into  a  fertile  and  cultivated  country.  How  is  this 
to  be  accounted  for  ?  Or  by  what  means  to  be  reconciled 
with  the  remote  antiquity  attributed  to  thefe  poems? — This 
is  a  curious  point  ;  and  requires  to  be  illuftrated. 

That  the  ancient  Scots  were  of  Celtic  original,  is  pafl 
all  doubt.  Their  conformity  v/ith  the  Celtic  nations  in 
language,  manners,  and  religion,  proves  it  to  a  full  de- 
monflration.  The  Celtse,  a  great  and  mighty  people,  al- 
together diftindl  from  the  Goths  and  Teutones,  once  ex- 
tended their  dominion  over  all  the  weft  of  Europe ;  but: 
feem  to  have  had  their  moll  full  and  compleat  eftablifh- 
ment  in  Gaul.  Wherever  the  Celt^  or  Gaul's  are  menti- 
oned by  ancient  writers,  we  feldom  fail  to  hear  of  their 
Druids  and  their  Bards ;  the  inftitution  of  which  two  or- 
ders, was  the  capital  diftinclion  of  their  manners  and  po- 
licy. The  Druids  were  their  philofophers  and  priefts;  the 
Bards,  their  poets  and  recorders  of  heroic  aclions :  And 
both  thefe  orders  of  men,  feem  to  have  fubfifted  among 
them,  as  chief  members  of  the  ftate,  from  time  immemo- 
rial *.    We  muft  not  therefore  imagine  the  Celt£e  to  have 

been 

Bu^^oi /niKvttvijrtai  f^ -xoinrctt,      Strabo,    lib.  iv. 


■VIOCtl. 


428     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

been  altogether  a  grofs  and  rude  nation.  They  polTeffed 
from  very  remote  ages  a  formed  fyftem  of  difcipline  and 
manners,  which  appears  to  have  had  a  deep  and  lafting 
inlluence.  Ammianus  MarcelHnus  gives  them  this  ex- 
prefs  teflimony,  that  there  flourilhed  among  them  the  flu- 
dy  of  the  moll  laudable  arts  ;  introduced  by  the  Bards, 
whofe  office  it  was  to  fmg  in  heroic  verfe,  the  gallant  ac- 
tions of  iiluftrious  men  ;  and  by  the  Druids,  who  lived 
together  in  colleges  or  focieties,  after  the  Pythagorean 
manner,  and  philofophiiing  upon  the  higheft  fubjefts,  af- 
ferted  the  immortality  of  the  human  foul  *.  Though  Ju- 
lius Ox  far,  in  his  account  of  Gaul,  does  notexprefsly  men- 
tion the  Bards,  yet  it  is  plain  that  under  the  title  of  Druids, 
he  comprehends  that  whole  college  or  order ;  of  which 
the  BarJs,  who,  it  is  probable,  were  the  difciples  of  the 
Druids,  unrl  jubtedly  made  a  part.  It  deferves  remark, 
that,  according  to  his  account,  the  Druidical  infcitution 
firfl  took  rife  in  Britain,  and  paffed  from  thence  into  Gaul ; 
fo  that  they  v/ho  afpired  to  be  thorough  mafters  of  that 
learning  were  wont  to  refort  to  Britain.  He  adds  too,  that 
fuch  as  were  to  be  initiated  among  the  Druids,  v/ere  obli- 
ged to  commit  to  their  memory  a  great  number  of  verfes, 
infomuch  that  fome  employed  twenty  years  in  this  courfe 
of  education  ;  and  that  they  did  not  think  it  lawful  to  re- 
cord thefe  poems  in  writing,  but  facredly  handed  them 
down  by  tradition  from  race  to  race  f. 

So  ftrong  was  the  attachment  of  the  Celtic  nations  to 
their  poelry  and  their  bards,  that  amidft  all  the  changes 
of  their  government  and  manners,  even  long  after  the  or- 
der 

iL\(ri     TTXp     KVTo'i?     HCi(    "TTClViTCit  f^i'j>.Z<J,     iff    Bci^on?    OVClf.»^ii<riV ,    S?TO<    OS   f^lT 

i^yuvAi'j,    7cui  Xvgaii    oficicov,    s/j  ^csv    v^tiyaas,    isg  ^=  fi>.et<r(p-/iy^iS(rt-      Liiodor. 

Sic.  1.  5. 

T  a  Oi  KKHB-^ueiTcc  avTOiv  unr  0;  ;;«>.:;, tjjvof  /3»^poi.  TrofnrcJ  d  aroi  rvf- 
^xviitri  y.ir  uor.g  iTro!.ivig  Xiycvn;.      Poiidonajus  ap.  Athensur,   1.  6. 

*  Per  h£EC  loca  (fpeaking  ot'Gaul)  hominibus  paubtim  excuUis,  vigittre  f.udia 
laudabilimi  docirinanm-,  inchoata  per  Eardcs  &  Euhages  &  Druidas,  Et  Bardi 
ijuidem  i'oitia  viroiuni  illuftrium  fafta  iieroicis  compofita  verfibus  cum  dulcibus  ly- 
I3S  modulis  cantitarunt,  Euhages  vcro  Icrutantes  feriem  &  (ubliinia  natura?  pan- 
derc  conabantur.  Inter  hos,  Dsuidr;  ingeniis  celfiores,  ut  auftoriias  Pythagorx 
decrcvit,  fodalitiis  adflricli  confortiis,  <]ua;flioriibiis  altarum  occultarumque  rerum 
creftlfunt;  &  defpeftantes  humr.nii  prcnuntiarimt  animas  iinmortales,  Amiu. 
IJarcelliuus,  1.  15.  cap.  5. 

t  Vid.  Celar  dc  belio  Gall.  Lb.  6. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  429 

dcr  of  the  Druids  was  extln£t,  and  the  national  religion 
altered,  the  bards  continued  to  flourlfli;  not  as  a  let  of 
ilrolling  fongllers,  like  the  Greek  'aoiIoi  or  Raphfodifts,  In 
Homer's  time,  but  as  an  order  of  men  highly  refpe6tcd  In 
the  ftate,  and  fupported  by  a  public  eftabliftiment.  We 
find  them,  according  to  the  teftimonles  of  Strabo  and  Dio- 
dorus,  before  the  age  of  Augullus  Casfar ;  and  we  find 
them  remaining  under  the  fame  name,  and  exercifing  the 
fame  funftions  as  of  old,  in  Ireland,  and  in  the  north  of 
Scotland,  almofl  down  to  our  own  times.  It  is  well  known 
that  in  both  thefe  countries,  every  Regiilus  or  chief  had  his 
own  bard,  who  was  confidered  as  an  officer  of  rank  In  his 
court;  and  had  lands  afligned  him,  which  defcended 
to  his  family.  Of  the  honour  In  which  the  bards  were 
held,  many  inftances  occur  in  Ofiian's  poems.  On  all 
important  occafions,  they  were  the  ambaifadors  between 
contending  chiefs;  and  their  perfons  were  held  facred. 
"  Calrbar  feared  to  flretch  his  iword  to  the  bards,  though 
"  his  foul  was  dark.  Loofe  the  bards,  faid"  his  brother 
"  Cathmor,  they  are  the  fons  of  other  times.  Their  voice 
"  fliall  be  heard  In  other  ages,  when  the  kings  of  Temora 
"  have  failed." 

From  all  this,  the  Celtic  tribes  clearly  appear  to  have 
been  addicted  in  fo  high  a  degree  to  poetry,  and  to  have 
made  It  fo  much  their  lludy  from  the  earlleft  times,  as  may 
remove  our  wonder  at  meeting  with  a  vein  of  higher  poe- 
tical refinement  among  them,  than  was  at  firft  fight  to  have 
been  expected  among  nations,  whom  we  are  accuftomed 
to  call  barbarous.  Barbarity,  I  mull  obferve,  is  a  very 
equivocal  term  ;  it  admits  of  many  different  forms  and 
degrees  ;  and  though,  in  all  of  them,  It  excludes  poliflied 
manners,  It  is,  however,  not  Inconfiftent  with  generous 
fentiments  and  tender  aifeftions  *.  What  degrees  of 
friendfhip,  love,  and  heroifm,  may  poffibly  be  found  to 
prevail  in  a  rude  ftate  of  fociety,  no  one  can  fay.  Afto- 
nHhing  inftances  of  them  we  know,  from  hiftory,  have 

fometimes 

*  Surely  amon^r  the  wild  Laplanders,  if  any  where,  barbarity  is  in  its  nioft  per- 
feft  fiate.  Yet  their  love  longs,  which  Schetfer  has  given  us  in  his  Lapponia,  are 
3  proof  that  natural  lendernefs  of  fentiment  may  be  found  in  a  country,  into  which 
the  kaft  glimmeiiiig  of  fcier.ce  has  never  penetrated.     To  uiofl  Enolifu  readers 

thefc 


430     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

.fometimes  appeared  :  and  a  few  charafliers  diflingulfiied 
by  thofe  high  qualities,  might  lay  a  foundation  for  a  fet 
of  manners  being  introduced  into  the  fongs  of  the  bards, 
more  refined,  it  is  probable,  and  exalted,  according  to  the 
iifual  poetical  licence,  than  the  real  manners  of  the  coun- 
try. In  particular,  with  refpeft  to  heroifm  ;  the  great 
employment  of  the  Celtic  bards,  was  to  delineate  the  cha- 
raders,  and  fing  the  pralfes,  of  heroes.     So  Luean  ; 

Vos  quoque  qui  fortes  animos,  belloque  peremptos, 
Laudibus  in  longum  vates  diffunditis  aevum 
Plurima  fecuri  fudiftis  carmina  bardi. 

Pharf.  1.  I. 

Now,  when  we  confider  a  college  or  order  of  men, 
who,  cultivating  poetry  throughout  a  long  feries  of  ages, 
had  their  imaginations  continually  employed  on  the  ideas 
of  heroifm  ;  who  had  all  the  poems  and  panegyricks, 
which  were  compofed  by  their  predecelfors,  handed  down 
to  them  with  care  ;  who  rivalled  and  endeavoured  to  out- 
firip  thofe  who  had  gone  before  them,  each  in  the  cele- 
bration of  his  ovm  particular  hero  ;  is  it. not  natural  to 
think,  that  at  length  the  chaiader  of  a  hero  would  ap- 
pear in  their  fongs  with  the  higheft  luilre,  and  be  adorned 
with  qualities  truly  noble  ?  Some  of  the  qualities,  indeed, 
which  diftinguifh  a  Fingal,  moderation,  humanity,  and 
clemency,  would  not  probably  be  the  firft  ideas  of  he- 
roifm occurring  to  a  barbarous  people  :    But  no  fooner 

had 

t'lcfe  fongs  are  well  known  by  the  elegant  tranOations  of  them  in  the  Spefiator, 
No.  366  and  403.  I  fhall  fubjoin  SchcfFer's  Latin  verfion  of  one  of  them,  which 
lias  tlie  appearance  of  being  firicily  literal. 

Sol,  ciariffimuiTi  emitte  lumen  in  paludcm  Orra.  Si  enifiis  in  fumma  picearum 
cacamina  fcirem  me  vifurum  Orra  paludcm,  in  ea  eniterer,  ut  viderem  inter  quos 
omica,  mea  eflet  flores :  omnes  fufcinderem  frutices  ibi  enatos,  omnes  ramos  prae- 
f'jcarem,  hos  ^.-irentes  ramos.  Curfum  nubium  cfTera  fecutus,  quae  iter  fuum  infli- 
fiiunt  verfus  paludem  Orra,  fi  ad  te  volare  pofTtim  alls,  cornicum  alis.  Sed  mihi 
defunt  alar,  als  querquedulae,  pedefque,  anl'frum  pedes  plantasve  bona:,  qua:  de- 
ftrre  m.e  valeant  ad  te.  Satis  expettalH  diu  ;  per  tot  dies,  tot  dies  luos  optiraos, 
oculis  tuis  jucundifTimis,  corde  tuo  amiciOimo.  Quod  fi  longiffime  velles  effugcre, 
rito  tamen  te  confcquercr.  Quid  flrmius  va'.idiulve  elTe  potcft  quam  contorti  ner- 
vi,  catenseve  f-rrea?,  qua:  durilTime  ligant  ?  Sic  amcr  controquct  caput  noftrum, 
inutat  cogitatioiies  &  fententias.  Puerorum  voluntas,  voluntas  venti;  juvenum 
rogitationes,  longa:  cogitationes.  Ouos  fi  audircm  omnes,  a  via,  a  viaijuOa  decli- 
r^^rem.  Unum  eft  conlilium  quod  capiam  ;  v.i.  fcio  viam  leftiorcm  ine  reperta- 
lum,     Scbcfferi  Lapponia^  Cap.  t;^. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


431 


had  fuch  ideas  begun  to  dawn  on  the  minds  of  poets, 
than,  as  the  human  mind  eafily  opens  to  the  native  repre- 
I'eiitations  of  human  perfection,  they  would  be  feized  and 
embraced  ;  they  would  enter  into  their  panegyricks ;  they 
would  afford  materials  for  fuccceding  bards  to  work  upon, 
and  improve  ;  they  would  contribute  not  a  little  to  exak 
|he  public  manners.  For  fuch  fongs  as  thefe,  familiar  to 
the  Celtic  warriors  from  their  childhood,  and  throughouc 
their  whole  life,  both  in  war  and  in  peace,  their  princi- 
pal entertainment,  mult  have  had  a  very  confiderable  in- 
fluence in  propagating  among  them  real  manners,  nearly 
approaching  to  the  poetical  ;  and  in  forming  even  fuch  a 
hero  as  Fingal  :  Efpecially  when  we  confider,  that,  among 
their  limited  objedfs  of  ambition,  among  the  few  advant- 
ages which,  in  a  lavage  Hate,  man  could  obtain  over  man, 
the  chief  was  Fame,  and  that  Im.mortality  which  they  ex-- 
pefted  to  receive  from  their  virtues  and  exploits,  in  the 
fongs  of  bards  *. 

Having  made  thefe  remarks  on  the  Celtic  poetry  and 
bards  in  general,  I  fl:iall  next  coniider  the  particular  ad- 
vantages which  Offian  poffefled.  He  appears  clearly  to 
have  lived  in  a  period  which  enjoyed  all  the  benefit  I  iufc 
now  mentioned  of  traditionary  poetry.  The  exploits  of 
Trathal,  Trenmor,  and  the  other  anceftors  of  Fingal,  are 
fpoken  of  as  familiarly  known.  Ancient  bards  are  fre^ 
quently  alluded  to.  In  one  remarkable  pallage,  Oilian 
defcribes  himfelf  as  living  in  a  fort  of  claffical  age,  en- 
lightened by  the  meuiorials  of  former  times,  wiiich  were 
conveyed  in  the  fongS  of  bards  ;  and  points  at  a  period  of 
darknefs  and  ignorance  which  lay  beyond  the  reach  of 
tradition.  "  His  words,"  fays  he,  "  came  only  by  halves 
"  to  our  ears  ;  they  were  dark  as  the  tales  of  other  times, 
"  before  the  light  of  the  fong  arofe."  Oman,  himl'elf, 
appears  to  have  been  endowed  by  nature  with  an  exquifite 
fenfibility  of  heart;  prone  to  that  tender  melancholy  wiiich 
is  lb  often  an  attendant  on  great  genius  ;  and  fufceptible, 

equally, 

*  When  Edwaid  I.  conquered  Wales,  he  put  to  death  all  the  Welch  ban's. 
J'iiis  cruel  policy  plainly  ffiews,  how  great  an  influence  he  imaj,ined  the  lbn.;;5  of 
ihcfe  baids  to  have  over  the  minds  of  the  people  ;  and  of  what  nature  he  judged 
that  inlluencc  to  be.  Thi  Wclfh  bards  were  of  the  fame  Celticiace  with  the  Sco;- 
rifii  and  Irifh. 


432     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

equally,  of  flrong,  and  of  foft,  emotions.  He  was  not 
only  a  profeffed  bard,  educated  with  care,  as  we  may  ea- 
fily  believe,  to  all  the  poetical  art  then  known,  and  con- 
ne^ed,  as  he  fliews  us  himfelf.  In  intimate  friendfhip  with 
the  other  contemporary  bards,  but  a  warrior  alfo,  and  the 
fon  of  the  moil  renowned  hero  and  prince  of  his  age. 
This  formed  a  conjunftion  of  clrcumdances,  uncommon- 
ly favourable  towards  exalting  the  imagination  of  a  poet. 
He  relates  expeditions  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  ; 
he  fmgs  of  battles  in  which  he  had  fought  and  overcome  ; 
he  had  beheld  the  moft  illuflrious  fcenes  which  that  age 
could  exhibit,  both  of  heroifm  in  war,  and  magnificence 
in  peace  :  for,  however  rude  the  magnificence  of  thefe 
times  may  feem  to  us,  we  mud  remember  that  all  ideas 
of  magnificence  are  comparative  ;  and  that  the  age  of 
Fingal  was  an  sera  of  diflinguiflied  fplendor  in  that  part 
of  the  world.  Fingal  reigned  over  a  confiderable  terri- 
tory ;  he  was  enriched  with  the  fpoils  of  the  Roman  pro- 
vince ;  he  v/as  ennobled  by  his  victories  and  great  actions, 
and  was,  in  all  refpecls,  a  perfonage  of  much  higher  dig- 
nity than  any  of  the  chieftains,  or  heads  of  Clans,  %yho 
lived  in  the  fame  country,  after  a  more  cxtenfive  monar- 
chy was  eftabllflied. 

The  manners  of  OiTian's  age,  fo  far  as  we  can  gather 
them  from  his  writings,  w^ere  abundantly  favourable  to  a 
poetical  genius.  The  two  difpiriting  vices,  to  which  Lon- 
glnus  imputes  the  decline  of  poetry,  covetoufnefs  and  ef- 
feminacy, were  as  yet  unknown.  The  cares  of  men  were 
few.  They  lived  a  roving  indolent  life  ;  hunting  and  war 
their  principal  employments  ;  and  their  chief  amufements, 
the  munc  of  bards  and  "  the  feaft  of  fliells."  The  great 
obie<3:  purfued  by  heroic  fpirlts,  was  "  to  receive  their 
"  fame,"  that  is,  to  become  worthy  of  being  celebrated 
in  the  fongs  of  bards  ;  and  "  to  have  their  name  on  the 
"  four  grey  flones."  To  die,'  unlamented  by  a  bard,  was 
deemecl  fo  great  a  misfortune,  as  even  to  difturb  their 
ghoils  in  another  (fate.  "  They  wander  in  thick  mifls  be- 
"  fide  the  reedy  lake ;  but  never  (hall  they  rife,  without 
"  the  fong,  to  the  dwelling  of  winds."  After  death,  they 
expeft^d  to  follow  employments  of  the  fame  nature  with 

thofe 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         433 

thofe  which  had  amufcd  them  on  earth ;  to  fly  with  their 
friends  on  clouds,  to  purfue  airy  deer,  and  to  liflen  to 
their  praife  in  the  mouths  of  bards.  In  fuch  times  as 
thefe,  in  a  country  where  poetry  had  been  fo  long  culti- 
vated, and  fo  highly  honoured,  is  it  any  wonder  that, 
Liniong  the  race  and  fucccefiion  of  bards,  one  Homer  fliould 
arife ;  a  man  who,  endowed  with  a  natural  happy  genius, 
favoured  by  peculiar  advantages  of  birth  and  condition, 
and  meeting,  in  the  courfe  of  his  life,  with  a  variety  of  in- 
cidents proper  to  fire  his  imagination,  and  to  touch  his 
heart,  fliould  attain  a  degree  of  eminence  in  poetry,  wor- 
thy to  draw  the  admiration  of  more  refined  ages  ? 

The  compofitions  of  Oilian.are  fo  flrongly  marked  with 
characters  of  antiquity,  that  although  there  were  no  exter- 
nal proof  to  fupport  that  antiquity,  hardly  any  reader  of 
judgment  and  tafte,  could  helitate  in  referring  them  to  a 
very  remote  cera.  There  are  four  great  ftages  through 
which  men  fuccelFi v ely  pafs  in  the  progrefs  of  fociety.  1  he 
iirll  and  earliefl  is  the  life  of  hunters  ;  pafturage  fucceeds 
to  this,  as  the  ideas  of  property  begin  to  take  root ;  next 
agriculture ;  and  laftly,  commerce.  Throughout  OiTian's 
poems,  we  plainly  find  ourielves  in  the  firfl  of  thefe  peri- 
ods of  fociety  ;  during  which,  hunting  was  the  chief  em- 
ployment of  men,  and  the  principal  method  ot  their  pro- 
curing fubfiflence.  Pafturage  was  not  indeed  wholly  un- 
known ;  for  we  hear  of  dividing  the  herd  in  the  cafe  of  a 
divorce ;  but  the  allufions  to  herds  and  to  cattle  are  not 
many  :  and  of  agriculture  we  find  no  traces.  No  cities 
appear  to  have  been  built  in  the  territories  of  Fingal.  No 
arts  are  mentioned  except  that  of  navigation  and  of  work- 
ing in  iron  *.  Every  thing  prefents  to  us  the  moft  hmple 
I i  i  and 

*  Their  fkill  in  navi'^ation  need  not  at  all  furprize  us.  Living  in  the  wcftern 
iflands,  along  the  coaft,  or  in  a  country  which  is  every  where  interfefted  with  arms 
ofthefea,  one  of  the  firft  objcfts  of  their  attention,  from  the  earlieft  time,  muft 
have  been  how  to  traverle  the  waters.  Hence  that  knowledge  of  the  fiars,  fonecef- 
fary  for  guiding  them  bv  night,  of  which  we  find  fevcral  traces  in  Offian's  works ; 
particularly  in  the  beautiful  delcription  of  Cathrnov's  fliield,  in  the  fcventh  book 
of  Temora.  Among  al!  the  northern  maritime  nations,  navigation  was  very  early 
ftudied.  Piratical  incurfions  were  the  chief  means  thev  employed  for  acquiring 
booty  ;  and  were  among  the  firft  exploits  which  diftinguifhed  them  in  the  world. 
Even  the  lavage  Americans  were  at  their  firft  difcovery  found  to  pollcfs  the  mcft 
furprifing  fkill  and  dexterity  in  navigating  their  immenfe  lakes  and  rivers. 


434      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

and  uDimproved  manners.  At  their  fer.fts,  the  heroes 
prepared  their  own  repiiil ;  they  fat  round  the  light  of  the 
burning  oak ;  the  wind  lifted  their  locks,  and  whililed 
through  their  open  halls.  Whatever  was  beyond  the  ne- 
ceiTaries  of  life  was  known  to  tkem  only  as  the  fpoil  of 
the  Roman  province ;  "  the  gold  of  the  flranger  ;  the 
"  lights  of  the  llranger ;  the  deeds  of  the  ftranger  ;  the, 
"  children  of  the  reign." 

This  reprefentation  of  Offian's  times,  mud  flrike  us  the 
more,  as  genuine  and  authentic,  when  it  is  compared  v^ith 
a  poem  of  later  date,  which  Mr.  Macpherfon  has  preferved 
in  one  of  his  notes.  It  is  that  wherein  five  bards  are  re- 
prefented  as  palling  the  evening  in  the  houfe  of  a  chief, 
and  each  of  them  feparately  giving  his  defcription  of  the 
nighu.  The  night-fcenery  Is  beautiful ;  and  the  author 
has  plainly  imitated  the  ftyk  and  manner  of  Offian  :  But 
he  has  allowed  forae  images  to  appear  which  betray  a 
later  period  of  fociety.  For  we  meet  with  windows  clap- 
ping, the  herds  of  goats  and  cows  feeking  ihelter,  the 
fhepherd  wandering,  corn  on  the  plain,  and  the  wakeful 
hind  rebuilding  the  iliocks  of  corn  which  had  been  over- 
turned by  the  temped.  Whereas  in  Ofiian's  works,  from 
beginning  to  end, all  is  confident:  no  modern  allufion  drops 
from  him  ;  but  every  where,  the  fame  face  of  rude  nature 
appears  ;  a  country  wholly  uncultivated,  thinly  inhabited, 
and  recently  peopled.  The  grafs  of  the  rock,  the  flower 
of  the  heath,  the  thidle  with  its  beard,  are  the  chief  or- 
naments of  his  landfcapes.  "  The  defart,"  fays  Fingal, 
"  is  enough  to  me,  v/Ith  all  its  woods  and  deer.'* 

The  circle  of  ideas  and  tranfaclions,  is  no  wider  than 
fuits  fuch  an  age  ;  nor  any  greater  diverfity  introduced 
into  characters,  than  the  events  of  that  period  vvould  na- 
turally difplay.  Valour  and  bodily  drength  are  the  ad- 
mired qualities.  Contentions  arife,  as  is  ufual  among  fa- 
va^c  nations,  from  the  flighted  caufes.  To  be  affronted 
2t  a  tournament,  or  to  be  omitted  in  the  invitation  to  a 

fead, 

Tbs  derciiption  of  Cuthurtin's  chariot,  m  the  ift  book  of  Fin;;al,  has  beon  ohjcfl- 
fid  to  by  fome,  as  reprefcntinc^  greater  magnificence  than  is  confiOent  with  the  fup- 
pcled  poverty  of  that  as;e.  But  this  chariot  is  plainly  only  a  horfe-litter ;  and  thir 
gems  iircntioned  ip  the  defcription,  arc  no  other  than  the  f]iinin<^  Hones  orpchblef, 
Itnoj^fB  to  l3a  frf-tjueiitly,  found  along  the  wcfiern  coaft  ot  Scotland. 


THE  POEMS  Of  OSSIAN,  435 

feufl:,  kindles  a  war.  Women  are  often  carried  away  by 
force  ;  and  the  whole  tribe,  as  in  the  Homeric  times,  rife 
to  avenp-e  the  wrong.  The  heroes  fliow  refinement  of 
fentiment,  indeed,  on  feveral  occafions,  but  none  of  man- 
ners. They  fpeak  of  their  pad  actions  with  freedom,  boaft 
of  their  exploits,  and  fmg  their  own  praife.  In  their  bat- 
ties,  it  is  evident  that  drams,  trumpets,  or  bagpipes,  were 
not  known  or  ufed.  They  had  no  expedient  for  giving 
the  military  alarms  but  llriking  a  fhield,  or  raifing  a  loud 
cry  :  And  hence  the  loud  and  terrible  voice  -of  Fingal  i* 
often  mentioned,  as  a  neceflary  qualification  of  a  great  ge- 
neral ;  like  the  /S^i.  iyccSc?  Minxuc^  of  Homer.  Of  military 
difciplineor  fkill,  they  appear  to  have  been  entirely  defti- 
tute.  Their  armies,  feem  not  to  have  been  numerous ; 
their  battles  were  diforderly  ;  and  terminated,  for  the 
nio(L  part,  by  a  perfonal  combat,  or  wreftling  of  the  two 
chiefs  j  after>wdiich,  "  the  bard  fung  the  fong  of  peace, 
"  and  the  battle  ceafed  along  the  field." 

The  manner  of  compofition  bears  all  the  marks  of  the 
greateil  antiquity.  No  artful  tranfitions  ;  nor  full  and 
extended  connexion  of  parts  ;  fuch  as  w^e  find  among  the 
poets  of  later  times,  when  order  and  regularity  of  compo- 
fition were  more  ftudied  and  known ;  but  a  ftyle  always 
rapid  and  vehement ;  in  narration  concife,  even  to  abrupt- 
nefs,  and  leaving  feveral  circumftances  to  be  fupplied  by 
the  reader's  imagination.  The  language  has  all  that  figu- 
rative cafl,  which,  as  I  before  lliewed,  partly  it  glowing 
and  undifciplined  imagination,  partly  the  iferility  of  lan- 
guage, and  the  want  of  proper  terms,  have  always  intrc^ 
duced  into  the  early  fpeech  of  nations  ;  and,  in  feveral 
refpecls,  it  carries  a  remarkable  refemblance  to  the  flyle 
of  the  Old  Teftament.  It  deferves.  particular  notice,  as 
one  of  the  mod  genuine  and  decinve  charaders  of  anti- 
quity, that  very  few  general  terms  or  abftraO:  ideas,  are 
to  be  met  with  in  the  whole  collection  of  Oflian's  works. 
The-  ideas  of  men,  at  firft,  were  all  particular.  They  had 
not  words  to  exprefs  general  conceptions.  Thefe  were  the 
confequence  of  more  profound  reflection,  and  longer  ac- 
quaintance with  the  arts  of  thought  and  of  fpeech.  Ofiian, 
accordingly,  almod  never  expreffes  himfelf  in  the  abftradt. 

His 


436      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

His  ideas  extended  little  further  than  to  the  objefts  he  faw 
around  him.  A  public,  a  community,  the  univerfe,  were 
conceptions  beyond  his  fphere.  Even  a  mountain,  a  fea, 
or  a  lake,  which  he  has  occafion  to  mention,  though  only 
in  a  fimile,  are  for  the  mod  part  particularized  ;  it  is  the 
hill  of  Cromla,  the  ftorm  of  the  fea  of  Malmor,  or  the 
reeds  of  the  lake  of  Lego.  A  mode  of  enpreifion  which, 
whilfl  it  is  charaderiftical  of  ancient  ages,  is  at  the  fame 
time  highly  favourable  to  defcrlptive  poetry.  For  the 
fame  reafons,  perfonification  is  a  poetical  figure  not  very 
common  wdth  OlTian.  Inanimate  objefts,  fuch  as  winds, 
trees,  flowers,  he  fometimes  perfonifies  with  great  beauty. 
But  the  perfonifications  which  are  fo  famJliar  to  later  poets, 
of  Fame,  Time,  Terror,  Virtue,  and  the  reft  of  that  clafs, 
"were  unknown  to  our  Celtic  bard.  Thefe  were  modes  of 
conception  too  abftrafl:  for  his  age. 

All  thefe  are  marks  fo  undoubted,  and  fome  of  them,, 
too,  fo  nice  and  delicate,  of  the  moft  early  tim^es,  as  put 
the  high  antiquity  of  thefe  poems  out  of  queftion.  Efpe- 
cially  when  we  confider,  that  if  there  had  been  any  im- 
pofture  in  this  cafe,  it  muft  have  been  contrived  and  exe- 
cuted in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  two  or  three  centu- 
ries ago  ;  as  up  to  this  period,  both  by  m.anufcripts,  and 
by  the  teftim.ony  or  a  multitude  of  living  witneifes,  con- 
cerning the  uncontrovertible  tradition  of  thefe  poems,  they 
can  clearly  be  traced.  Now,  this  is  a  period  when  that 
country  enjoyed  no  advantages  for  a  compofition  of  this 
kind,  which  it  may  not  be  fuppofed  to  have  enjoyed  in  as 
great,  if  not  in  a  greater  degree,  a  thoufand  years  before. 
To  fuppofe  that  two  or  three  hundred  years  ago,  when  we 
well  know  the  Highlands  to  have  been  in  a  itate  of'  grofs 
ignorance  and  barbarity,  there  fhould  have  arifen  in  that 
country  a  poet,  of  fuch  exquilite  genius,  and  of  fuch  deep 
knowledge  of  mankind,  and  of  hiftory,  as  to  diveft  him- 
iclf  of  the  ideas  and  manners  of  his  own  age,  and  to  give 
us  a  juft  and  natural  pidure  of  a  llate  of  fociety  ancienter 
by  a  thoufand  years  ;  one  who  could  fupport  this  counter- 
feited antiquity  through  fuch  a  large  coUeclion  of  poems, 
without  the  leaft  inconfiftency ;  and  who,  pofleffed  of  all 
tiiis  genius  and  art,  had  at  the  fame  time  the  felf-denial  of 

concealin.c: 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  437 

concealing  himfelf,  and  of  afcribin;?;  Ills  own  works  to  va\ 
antiquated  bard,  without  the  impoilure  being  dctefied  ; 
is  a  fuppofition  that  tranfcends  all  bounds  of  credibility. 

There  are,  befides,  two  other  circumftances  to  be  at- 
tended to,  Hill  of  greater  weight,  if  poilible,  againfl  this 
hypothefis.  One  is,  the  total  abfence  of  religious  ideas 
from  this  work  ;  for  which  the  tranilator  has,  in  his  pre- 
face, given  a  very  probable  account,  on  the  footing  of  its 
being  the  work  of  Ofiian.  The  druidical  fuperllition  was, 
in  the  days  of  Oifian,  on  the  point  of  its  final  extinction  ; 
and,  for  particular  reafons,  odious  to  the  family  of  Fingal ; 
whilft  the  Chriif  ian  faith  was  not  yet  efiablifaed.  But  had 
it  been  the  work  of  one,  to  whom  the  ideas  of  chriliianily 
were  familiar  from  his  infancy  ;  and  who  had  fuperadded 
to  them  alfo  the  bigotted  fuperriition  of  a  dark  age  and 
country  ;  it  is  impoffible  but,  in  fome  pafiage  or  other, 
the  trace:  of  them  would  have  appeared.  The  other  cir- 
cumllance  is,  the  entire  filence  which  reigns  with  refpecl 
to  all  the  great  clans  or  families,  which  are  now  eftablilh- 
ed  in  th^  Highlands.  The  origin  of  thefe  feveral  clans  is 
known  to  be  very  ancient :  And  it  is  as  well  known,  that 
there  is  no  palFion  by  which  a  native  Highlander  is  more 
diftinguilhed,  than  by  attachment  to  his  cl'an,  and  jcaloufy 
for  its  honour.  That  a  Highland  bard,  in  forging  a  work 
relating  to  the  antiquities  of  his  country,  ftiould  have  in- 
ferted  no  circumftance  which  pointed  out  the  rife  of  his 
own  clan,  which  afcertained  its  antiquity,  or  incrcafed  its 
glory,  is  of  all  fuppoHtions  that  can  be  formed,  the  mofl 
improbable ;  and  the  filence  on  this  head,  amounts  to  a 
demonitration  that  the  author  lived  before  any  of  the  pre- 
feiit  great  clans  v.-ere  formed  or  known. 

Assuming  it  then,  as  we  well  may,  for  certain,  th:  :: 
the  poems  now  under  confideration,  are  genuine  venerab' 
monuments  of  very  remote  antiquity  ;  I  proceed  to  mal: 
fome  remarks  upon  their  general. fpirit  and  ftrain. 

The  two  great  charade  riftics  of  Offian'§  poetry  are, 
tendernefs  and  fublimitv.  It  breathes  nothing  of  the  gr.v 
and  chearful  kind  ;  an  air  of  folemnity  and  feriou-Tief^  is 
difFufed  over  the  whole.  Oilian  is  perhaps  the  only  poet 
who  never  relaxes,  or  lets  himfelf  down,  into  the  li-rht  and 


43-3     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

amurmg  ftrain  ;  which  I  readily  admit  to  be  no  fmali  dif- 
advaiitage  to  him,  with  the  bulk  of  readers.  He  moves 
perpetually  in  the  high  region  of  the  grand  and  the  pa- 
thetick.  One  key  note  is  ilruck  at  the  beginning,  and  fup- 
ported  to  the  end  ;  nor  is  any  ornament  introduced,  but 
what  is  perfectly  concordant  with  the  general  tone  or  me- 
lody. The  events  recorded,  are  all  ierious  and  grave  ; 
the  fcenery  throughout,  wild  and  romantic.  The  extend- 
ed heath  by  the  fea-lhore  ;  the  mountain  ihaded  with  mid  ; 
the  torrent  ruihing  through  a  folitary  valley;  the  fcattered 
onks,  and  the  tombs  of  v/arriors  overgrown  with  mofs ; 
all  produce  a  folemn  attention  in  the  mind,  and  prepare  it 
for  great  and  extraordinary  events.  We  find  not  in  OfTian, 
an  imagination  that  fports  itfelf,  and  drefles  out  gay  trifles 
to  pleafe  the  fancy.  His  poetry,  more,  perhaps,  than  that 
of  any  other  writer,  deferves  to  be  fliled.  The  Poetry  of 
the  Heart.  It  is  a  heart  penetrated  wdth  noble  fentiments, 
and  with  fublime  and  tender  pallions;  a  heart  that  glov/s, 
and  kindles  the  fancy;  a  heart  that  is  full,  and  pours  itfelf 
forth.  Olfian  did  not  write,  like  modern  poets,  to.  pleafe 
readers  and  critics.  He  fung  from  the  love  of  poetry  and 
fong.  His  delight  was  to  think  of  the  heroes  among  whom 
he  had  flouriflicd  ;  to  recall  the  affeding  incidents  of  his 
life ;  to  dwell  upon  his  pad  wars  and  loves  and  fricnd- 
ilups ;  till,  as  he  expreffes  it  himfelf,  "  there  comes  a 
"  voice  to  Oifian  and  awakes  his  foul.  It  is  the  voice  of 
"  years  that  are  gone  ;  they  roll  before  me  w  ith  all  their 
"  deeds  ;"  and,  under  this  true  poetic  infpiration,  giving 
vent  to  his  genius,  no  wonder  we  lliould  fo  often  hear 
and  acknowledge,  in  his  drains,  the  powerful  and  ever- 
pleafmp-  voice  of  nature. 

•Arte,  natura  potentior  om.ni.- 


F.d  Deus  in  nobis,  agitante  calefcimus  illo. 

It  is  neceifary  here  to  obferve,  that  the  beauties  of  Of- 
fian's  writings  cannot  be  felt  by  thofe  who  have  given 
them  only  a  fingle  or  a  hady  perufal.  His  manner  is  fo 
different  from  that  of  the  poets,  to  whom  v/e  are  mod  ac- 
cudomed  ;  his  dyle  is  fo  concife,  and  fo  much  crouded 
wdth  imagery;  the  mind  is  kept  in  fuch  a  dretch  in  accom- 
panying 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


439 


panying  the  author  ;  that  an  ordinary  reader  Is  at  firll  apt 
to  be  dazzled  and  fatigued  rather  than  pleafed.  His  poems 
require  to  be  taken  up  at  intervals,  and  to  be  frequently 
reviewed ;  and  then  it  is  impoflible  but  his  beauties  muil 
open  to  every  reader  vi^ho  is  capable  of  fenfibility.  Thofe 
who  have  the  highcft  degree  of  it,  will  relifli  them  the 
mofh 

As  Homer  is,  of  all  the  great  poets,  the  one  whofe  man- 
ner, and  whofe  times  come  the  neareft  to  Oflian's,  v/e  are 
naturally  led  to  run  a  parallel,  in  feme  inftances,  between 
the  Greek  and  the  Celtic  bard.  For  though  Homer  lived 
more  than  a  thoufand  years  before  Offian,  it  is  not  from 
the  age  of  the  world,  but  from  the  flate  of  fociety,  that 
we  are  to  judge  of  refembling  times.  The  Greek  has,  in 
feveral  points,  a  manifeft  fuperioritv.  He  introduces  a 
greater  variety  of  incidents  ;  he  poifeffes  a  larger  compafs 
of  ideas  ;  has  more  diverfity  in  his  characters  ;  and  a  much 
deeper  knowledge  of  human  nature.  It  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected, that  in  any  of  thefe  particulars,  Offian  could  equal 
Homer.  For  Homer  lived  in  a  country  where  fociety  was 
much  farther  advanced ;  he  had  beheld  many  more  ob- 
jeclis  ;  cities  built  and  tlourifliing ;  laws  inftituted  ;  order, 
difcipline,  and  arts  begun.  His  field  of  obfervation  was 
much  larger  and  more  fplendid;  his  knowledge,  of  courfe, 
more  extenfive ;  his  mind  alfo,  it  fiiall  be  granted,  more 
penetrating.  But  if  Offian's  ideas  and  objects  be  lefs  di- 
yei  fined  than  thofe  of  Homer,  they  are  all,  hov>^ever,  of  the 
kind  fittefl  for  poetry  ;  the  bravery  and  generofity  of  he- 
roes, the  tendernefs  of  lovers,  the  attachments  of  friends, 
parents,  and  children.  In  a  rude  age  and  counti-y,  though 
the  events  that  happen  be  few,  the  undiffipated  mind 
broods  over  them  more  ;  they  ftrike  the  imagination,  and 
fire  the  pafTions  In  a  higher  degree  ;  and  of  confequence 
become  happier  materials  to  a  poetical  genius,  than  the 
fame  events  when  fcattered  through  the  wide  circle  of  more 
varied  adion,  and  cultivated  life. 

Homer  is  a  more  ch earful  and  fprightly  poet  than  Of- 
fian. You  difcern  in  him  all  the  Greek  vivacity  ;  whereas 
Oil) an  uniformly  maintains  the  gravity  aud  folemnity  of  a 
Celtic  hero.  This,  too,  i$  in  a  great  meafare  to  be  accounted 

for 


440     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

for  from  the  clifrerenl  fituatlons  in  which  they  lived,  partly 
perfonal,  and  partly  national.  Oflian  had  furvived  all  his 
friends,  and  was  difpofed  to  melancholy  by  the  incidents 
of  his  life.  But  befides  this,  chearfulncfs  is  one  of  the 
many  bleifm^^^s  which  we  owe  to  formed  fociety.  The  fo- 
litary  wild  llate  is  aKvays  a  ferious  one.  Bating  the  fud- 
den  and  violent  burfls  of  mirth,  which  fomxCtimes  break 
forth  at  their  dances  and  feafis,  the  favage  American  tribes 
have  been  noted  by  all  travellers  for  their  gravity  and  ta- 
citurnity. Somewhat  of  this  taciturnity  may  be  alfo  re- 
marked in  Oiiian.  On  all  occafions  he  is  frugal  of  his 
words  ;  and  never  gives  you  more  of  an  image,  or  a  de- 
fcription,  than  is  juft  fufficient  to  place  it  before  you  in 
one  clear  point  of  view.  It  is  a  blaze  of  lightning,  which 
flaflies  and  vaniftes.  Homer  is  more  extended  in  his  de- 
fcriptions ;  and  fills  them  up  with  a  greater  variety  of  cir- 
cumflances.  Both  the  poets  are  dramatic ;  that  is,  they 
introduce  their  perfonages  frequently  fpeaking  before  us. 
But  Offian  is  concife  and  rapid  in  his  fpeeches,  as  he  is  in 
every  other  thing.  Homer,  with  the  Greek  vivacity,  had 
alfo  fome  portion  of  the  Greek  loquacity.  His  fpeeches  in- 
deed are  highly  charafteriftical  ;  and  to  them  we  are  much 
indebted  for  that  admirable  difplay  he  has  given  of  human 
nature.  Yet  if  he  be  tedious  any  where,  it  is  in  thefe ; 
fome  of  them  trifling ;  and  fome  of  them  plainly  unfea- 
fonable.  Both  poets  are  eminently  fublime  ;  but  a  differ- 
ence may  be  remarked  in  the  fpecies  of  their  fublimity. 
Homer's  fublimity  is  accompanied  with  more  impetuofity 
nnd  fire  :  Oirian's  with  more  of  a  folemn  and  awful  gran- 
deur. Homer  hurries  you  along  ;  Offian  elevates,  and 
fixes  you  in  aftonilbment.  Homer  is  mod  fublime  in  ac- 
'  :  :  nd  battles  ;  Oitian,  in  defcription  and  fentiment. 
.  .  pathetick,  Homer,  when  he  chufes  to  exert  it, 
IS  great  power  ;  but  Ollian  exerts  that  power  much  oft- 
r,  and  has  the  charailer  of  tendernefs  far  more  deeply 
imprinted  on  his  works.  No  poet  knew  better  how 
to  feize  and  melt  the  heart.  Vv^ith  regard  to  dignity  of 
fentiment,  the  pre-eminence  mud  clearly  be  given  to  Of- 
fian. This,  indited,  is  a  furprifrng  circumdance,  that  in 
:  ::nt  of  humanity,  magnanimity,  virtuous  feelings  of  every 

kind, 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  441 

kind,  our  rude  Celtic  bard  fhould  be  diftinguiflied  to  fuch 
a  degree,  that  not  only  the  heroes  of  Homer,  but  even 
thoie  of  the  polite  and  refined  Virgil,  are  left  far  behind 
by  thofe  of  OiTian. 

After  thefe  general  obfervations  on  the  genius  and  fpi- 
rit  of  our  author,  I  now  proceed  to  a  nearer  view,  and 
more  accurate  examination  of  his  works :  and  as  Fingal 
is  the  firft  g^reat  poem  in  this  collection,  it  is  proper  to  be- 
gin with  it.  To  refufe  the  title  of  an  epic  poem  to  Fingal, 
becaufe  it  is  not,  in  every  little  particular,  exactly  conform- 
able to  the  pratlice  of  Homer  and  Virgil,  were  the  mere 
fqueamifhnefs  and  pedantry  of  criticifm.  Examined  even 
according  to  Ariftotle's  rules,  it  v/ill  be  found  to  have  all 
the  eifential  requifites  of  a  true  and  regular  epic  ;  and  to 
have  feveral  of  them  in  fo  high  a  degree,  as  atfirfl  view- 
to  raife  our  ailoniHiment  on  finding  Olfian's  compofition 
fo  agreeable  to  rules  of  which  he  v/as  entirely  ignorant. 
But  our  aftonillmient  will  ceafe,  when  we  confider  from 
what  fource  Ariftotie  drew  thofe  rules.  Homer  knew  no 
more  of  the  lav.s  of  criticifm  than  Oiiian  ;  but  guided  by 
nature,  he  compofed  in  verfe  a  regular  flory,  founded  on 
heroic  actions,  which  all  pofterity  admired.  Arifiotle, 
with  great  fagacity  and  penetration,  traced  the  caufe  of 
this  general  admiration.  He  obferved  what  it  was  in  Ho- 
m.er's  compofition,  and  in  the  conduct  of  his  flory,  which 
gave  it  fuch  power  to  pleafe  ;  from  this  obfervation  he  de- 
duced the  rules  which  poets  ought  to  follow,  v/ho  would 
write  and  pleafe  like  Homer ;  and  to  a  compofition  form- 
ed according  to  fuch  rules,  he  gave  the  name  of  an  epic 
poem.  Hence  his  whole  fyflem  arofe.  Arifiotle  ftudied 
nature  in  Homer.  Homer  and  Oflian  both  wrote  frorii 
nature.  No  wonder  that  among  all  the  three,  there  ffiould 
be  fuch  agreement  and  conformity. 

The  fundamental  rules  delivered  by  Ariitotle  concern- 
ing an  epic  poem,  are  thefe:  That  the  action  which  is  the 
ground  work,  of  the  poem,  fliould  be  one,  complete,  and 
great ;  that  it  fhould  be  feigned,  not  merely  hiflorical  ; 
that  it  fhould  be  enlivened  with  charaders  and  manners  ; 
and  heightened  by  the  marvellous. 

But  before  entering  on  any  of  thefe,  it  mav  perhaps 
Kkk  "  be 


442     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

be  afked,  what  is  the  moral  of  Fingal  ?  For,  according  to 
M.  Boflu,  an  epic  poem  is  no  other  than  an  allegory  con- 
trived to  illuilrate  fome  moral  truth.  The  poet,  fays  this 
critic,  muft  begin  with  fixing  on  fome  maxim,  or  inftruc- 
tion,  which  he  intends  to  inculcate  on  mankind.  He  next 
forms  a  lable,  like  one  of  ^fop's,  wholly  with  a  view  to 
the  moral  ;  and  liaving  thus  fettled  and  arranged  his  plan, 
he  then  looks  into  traditionary  hillory  for  names  and  in- 
cidents, to  give  his  fable  fome  air  of  probability.  Never 
did  a  more  frigid,  pedantic  notion,  enter  into  the  mind  of 
a  critic.  We  may  fafely  pronounce,  that  he  who  fhould 
compofe  an  epic  poem  after  this  manner,  who  fliould 
hrft  lay  down  a  moral  and  contrive  a  plan,  before  he  had 
thought  of  his  perfonages  and  adors,  might  deliver,  in- 
deed, very  found  inftruclion,  but  would  find  few  readers.. 
There  cannot  be  the  leail  doubt,  that  the  firft  objeft  which 
flrikes  an  epic  poet,  which  fires  his  genius,  and  gives  him 
any  idea  of  his  work,  is  the  action  or  fubjeft  he  is  to  cele- 
brate. Hardly  is  there  any  tale,  any  fubjed:  a  poet  can 
chufe  for  fuch  a  w^ork,  but  vt'ill  afford  fome  general  moral 
inftruclion.  An  epic  poem  is,  by  its  nature,  one  of  the 
moft  moral  of  all  poetical  compofitions ;  but  its  moral 
tendency  is  by  no  means  to  be  limited  to  fome  common- 
place maxim,  which  may  be  gathered  from  the  ftory.  It 
arifes  from  the  admiration  of  heroic  actions,  which  fuch 
a  compofition  is  peculiarly  calculated  to  produce  ;  from 
the  virtuous  emotions  which  the  characters  and  incidents 
raife,  whilft  we  read  it ;  from  the  happy  imprefiion  which 
all  the  parts  feparately,  as  well  as  the  whole  taken  toge- 
ther, leave  upon  the  mind.  However,  if  a  general  moral 
be  Itill  infilled  on,  Fingal  obvioully  furnifhes  one,  not  in- 
ferior to  that  of  any  other  poet,  viz.  That  Wifdom  and 
Bravery  always  triumph  over  brutal  force  :  or  another 
nobler  ilill  ;  That  the  moft  compleat  vi£tory  over  an  ene- 
-my  is  obtained  by  that  moderation  and  generofity  which 
coiivert  him  into  a  friend. 

Thl  unity  of  the  epic  action,  Avhich,  of  all  Ariftotle's 
rules,  is  the  chief  and  moft  material,  is  fo  ftrictly  preferv- 
ed  in  Fingal,  that  it  muft  be  perceived  by  every  reader. 
it  is  a  more  compleat  unity  than  wh.at  arifes  from  relating 

the 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  443 

ihe  a«ElJons  of  one  man,  which  the  Greek  critic  juftly  cen- 
fures  as  Imperieft  ;  it  is  the  unity  of  one  enterprizc,  the 
deliverance  of  Ireland  from  the  invafion  of  Swaran  :  an 
enterprize,  which  has  furely  the  full  heroic  dignity.  All 
the  Incidents  recorded  bear  a  conftant  reference  to  one 
end  ;  no  double  plot  Is  carried  on  ;  but  the  parts  unite 
into  a  regular  whole  :  and  as  the  a«9:ion  Is  one  and  great, 
fo  it  is  an  entire  or  compleat  action.  For  we  find,  as  the 
critic  farther  requires,  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end  ; 
a  Nodus,  or  Intrigue,  in  the  poem  ;  difliculties  occurring 
through  Cuthullin's  raihnels  and  bad  fuccefs  ;  thofe  diffi- 
culties gradually  furmounted  ;  and  at  lad  the  work  con- 
duced to  that  happy  conclufion  which  is  held  efiential  to 
Epic  Poetry.  Unity  is  Indeed  obferved  with  greater,  ex- 
adtnefs  In  Fingal,  than  in  almoft  any  other  Epic  compofi- 
tlon;  for,  not  only  Is  unity  of  fubjeft  .m.aintained,  but 
that  of  time  and  place  alfo.  The  Autumn  Is  clearly  point- 
ed out  as  the  feafon  of  the  aftlon  ;  and  from  beginning  to 
end  the  fcsne  is  never  (hlfted  from  the  heath  of  Lena,  along 
the  fea-fliore.  The  duration  of  the  adion  In  Fingal,  is 
much  fhorter  than  In  the  Iliad  or  JEne'id.  But,  aire,  there 
may  be  fhorter  as  well  as  longer  heroic  poems  ;  and  if  the 
authority  of  Ariilotle  be  alfo  required  for  this,  he  fays  ex- 
prefly  that  the  epic  compofition  Is  indefinite  as  to  the  time 
of  Its  duration.  Accordingly,  the  adion  of  the  Iliad  lalfs 
only  forty-feven  days,  whllit  that  of  the  iEneid  is  conti- 
nued for  more  than  a  year. 

Throughout  the  whole  of  Fingal,  there  reigns  ihat 
grandeur  of  fentiment,  ftyle,  and  imagery,  which  ought 
ever  to  diftinguifli  this  high  fpecies  of  poetry.  The  flory 
Is  conduced  with  no  fmail  art.  The  poet  goes  not  back 
to  a  tedious  recital  of  the  beginning  of  the  war  with  Swa- 
ran ;  but  haflening  to  the  main  aftion,  he  falls  in  exaccly, 
by  a  molt  happy  coincidence  of  thought,  with  the  rule 
of  Horace, 

Semper  ad  eventum  feilinat,  &  in  medlas  res, 

Non  fecus  ac  notas,  auditorem  rapit 

Nee  gemino  bellum  Trojnnum  orditur  ab  ovo. 

De  Arte  Pcet. 

He 


444     A  CRITICAL  DISSER.TATION  on 

He  invokes  no  mufe,  for  he  acknowledged  none  ;  bur 
his  occafional  addreffes  to  Malvina,  have  a  finer  effet^ 
than  the  invocation  of  any  mufe.  He  fets  out  with  no 
formal  proportion  of  his  fubject  ;  but  the  fubjecf  natu- 
rally and  eafi'ly  unfolds  itfelf ;  the  poem  opening  in  an  ani- 
m.ated  manner,  with  the  fituation  of  Cuthuliin,  and  the 
arrival  of  a  fcout  who  informs  him  of  Swaran's  landing. 
Mention  is  prefently  made  of  Fingal,  and  of  the  expected, 
ailiftance  from  the  fhips  of  the  lonely  ifle,  in  order  to  give 
further  light  to  the  fabjeft.  For  the  poet  often  fliows  his 
addrefs  in  gradually  preparing  r.s  for  the  events  he  is  to 
introduce  ;  and,  in  particular,  the  preparation  foi  the  ap- 
pearance of  Fingal,  the  previous  expedatlons  that  are 
raifed,  and  the  extreme  magnificence  fully  anfwering  thole 
expedations,  with  which  the  hero  is  at  length  prefented  to 
us,  are  all  worked  up  with  fuch  fKilfal  conduct  as  would 
do  honour  to  any  poet  of  the  mod  refined  times.  Homer's 
art  in  magnifying  the  charafter  of  Achilles  has  been  uni- 
verfally  admired.  Offian  certainly  fiiews  no  lefs  art  in  ag- 
grandizing Fingal.  Nothing  could  be  more  happily  ima- 
gined for  this  purpofe  than  the  whole  management  of  the 
laft  battle,  wherein  Gaul,  the  fon  of  Morni,  had  befought 
Fingal  to  retire,  and  to  leave  to  him  and  his  other  chief; 
the  honour  of  the  day.  The  generofity  of  the  king  in 
agreeing  to  this  propofal  ;  the  majefly  with  which  he  re- 
treats to  the  hill,  from  whence  he  was  to  behold  the  en- 
gagement, attended  by  his  bards,  and  waving  the  light- 
ning of  his  fv/ord  ;  his  perceiving  the  chiefs  overpowered 
by  numbers,  but,  fromunwillingnefs  to  deprive  them  of 
the  glory  of  vitlory  by  coming  in  perfon  to  their  affiit- 
ance,  firil  fending  Ullin,  the  bard,  to  animate  their  cou- 
rage ;  and,  at  lait,  when  the  danger  becomes  more  pref- 
fing,  his  rifing  in  his  might,  and  interpofing,  like  a  divi- 
nity, to  decide  the  doubtful  fate  of  the  day  ;  are  all  cir- 
cumftances  contrived  with  fo  much  art,  as  plainly  difcover 
the  Celtic  bards  to  have  been  not  unpraclifed  in  Heroic 
poetry. 

The  (lory  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  Iliad  is  in  it- 
felf as  fimple  as  that  of  Fingal.  A  quarrel  arifes  between 
Achilles  and  Agamemnon  concerning  a  female  flave ;  on 

which, 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


415 


^vhich,  Achilles,  apprehending  hlmfclf'to  be  injured,  with- 
draws his  affiltancc  from  the^  reit  of  the  Greeks.  The 
Greeks  fall  into  great  diftrefs,  and  befeech  him  to  be  re- 
conciled to  them.  He  refufes  to  fight  for  them  in  perion, 
but  fends  his  friend  Patroclus  ;  and,  upon  his  being  ilain, 
goes  forth  to  revenge  his  death,  and  kills  Heftor.  .The 
fubject  of  Fingal  is  this :  Swaran  comes  to  invade  Ire- 
land :  Cuthullin,  the  guardian  of  the  young  king,  had  ap- 
plied for  ailiitance  to  Fingal,  who  reigned  in  the  oppofite 
coaft  of  Scotland.  But,  before  Fingal's  arrival,  he  is 
hurried  by  rafh  counfel  to  encounter  Swaran.  He  is  de- 
feated ;  he  retreats  ;  and  defponds.  Fingal  arrives  in  this 
conjuncture.  The  battle  is  for  fome  time  dubious  ;  but 
in  the  end  he  conquers  Swaran  ;  and  the  remembrance  of 
Swaran's  being  the  brother  of  Agandecca,  who  had  once 
faved  his  life,  makes  him  difmifs  him  honourably.  Ho- 
mier, it  is  true,  has  nlled  up  his  fiory  with  a  much  greater 
variety  of  particulars  than  Offian  ;  and  in  this  has  ihewn 
a  compafs  of  invention  fuperior  to  that  of  the  other  poet. 
But  it  muft  not  be  forgotten,  that  though  Hoi;iier  be  more 
circumJlantial,  his  incidents  however  are  lefs  diverfified 
in  kind  than  thofe  of  Oflian.  War  and  bloodfhed  reign 
throughout  the  Iliad  ;  and,  notwithftanding  all  the  fcnl- 
lity  of  Homer's  Invention,  there  is  i'o  much  uniformity  iii 
his  fubjeds,  that  there  are  few  readers,  who,  before  the 
clofe,  are  not  tired  -of  perpetual  fighting.  Vv^hereas,  -in 
Ollian,  the  mind  is  relieved  by  a  more  agreeable  diverfity. 
There  is  a  finer  mixture  of  war  and  heroifm,  with  love  and 
friendlhip,  of  martial,  with  tender  fcenes,  than  is  to  be 
met  with,  perhaps,  in  any  other  poet.  The  epifodes,  too, 
have  great  propriety.;  as  natural,  and  proper  to  that  age 
and  country  ;  cpnfiifing  of  the  fongs  of  bards,  which  are 
known  to  have  been  the  great  entertainment  of  the  Celtic 
heroes  in  war,  as  well  as  in  peace.  Thefe  fongs  are  not 
introduced  at  random  ;  if  you  except  the  epifode  of  Du- 
chomar  and  Morna  in  the  firft  book,  which,  tho'  beautiful, 
is  more  unartful  than  any  of  the  reil  ;  they  have  alwa^^ 
fome  particular  relation  to  the  a£ior  who  is  interefLcd,  <:. 
to  the  events  which  are  going  on  ;  and,  whiK.l  they  vary 
the  fcene,  they  preferve  a  fuflicient  connexion  with  the 

ir..  in 


446     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

main  fubject,  by  the  fitnefs  and  propriety  of  their  Intro- 
du£lion. 

As  Fingal's  love  to  Agandecca,  influences  fome  clrcuni- 
flances  of  the  poem,  particularly  the  honourable  difmlifion 
of  Swaran  at  the  end ;  it  was  neceflary  that  we  fhould  be 
let  into  this  part  of  the  hero's  (lory.  But  as  it  lay  without 
the  compafs  of  the  prefent  aftion,  it  could  be  regularly  in- 
troduced no  where,  except  in  an  epifode.  Accordingly 
the  poet,  with  as  much  propriety,  as  if  Ariftotle  himielf 
had  directed  the  plan,  has  contrived  an  epifode  for  this 
purpofe  in  the  fong  of  Carril,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
third  book. 

The  conclufion  of  the  poem  is  ftri£lly  according  to 
rule  ;  and  is  every  way  noble  and  pleafmg.  The  reconci- 
liation of  the  contending  heroes,  the  confolation  of  Cu- 
thullin,  and  the  general  felicity  that  a^owns  the  action, 
footh  the  mind  in  a  very  agreeable  manner,  and  form  that 
palfage  from  agitation  and  trouble,  to  perfect  quiet  and 
repofe,  which  critics  require  as  the  proper  termination  of 
the  epic  work.  "  Thus  they  paffed  the  night  in  fong,  and 
*'  brought  back  the  morning  with  joy.  Fingal  arofe  on 
*'  the  heath  ;  and  (liook  his  glittering  fpear  in  his  hand. 
"  He  moved  firft  towards  the  plains  of  Lena  ;  and  we  fol- 
*'  lowed  like  a  ridge  of  fire.  Spread  the  fail,  faid  the  king 
*'  oF  Morven,  and  catch  the  winds  that  pour  from  Lena. 
"  — We  rofe  on  the  wave  with  fongs ;  and  rufhed  with 
*'  joy  through  the  foam  of  the  ocean." — So  much  for  the 
unitv  and  general  cmiduct  of  the  Epic  aftion  in  Fingal. 

WiTti  regard  to  that  property  of  the  fubject  Vv'hich  Ari- 
ftotie  requires,  that  it  (hould  be  feigned,  not  hlftorical,  he 
mull  not  be  imdcrltood  fo  ilriclly,  as  if  he  meant  to  exclude 
all  fubjects  which  have  any  foundation  in  truth.  For  fuch 
exclufion  would  both  be  unieafonable  in  itfelf ;  and  what 
is  m.ore,  would  be  contrary  to  the  practice  of  Homer,  who 
is  known  to  have  founded  his  Iliad  on  hiftorical  fads  con- 
cerning the  war  of  Troy,  which  was  famous  throughout 
all  Greece.  Ariftotle  means  no  more  than  that  it  is  the 
bufinefs  of  a  poet  not  to  be  a  mere  annalift  of  fads,  but 
to  embelliili  truth  with  beautiful,  probable,  and  ufeful  fic- 
tions ;  to  copy  nature,  as  he  himfeif  explains  it,  like  paint- 
ers. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         447 

crs,  who  preferve  a  likenefs,  but  exhibit  their  objecls  more 
ji^Tand  and  beautiful  than  they  are  in  reaUty.  That  Ofiian 
has  followed  this  courfe,and  building  upon  true  hiftory,has 
fufficiently  adorned  it  with  poetical  fittion  for  aggrandizing 
his  charaders,  and  fads,  will  not,  I  believe,  be  queftioned 
by  mod  readers.  At  the  fame  time,  the  foundation  which 
thofefacls  and  characters  had  in  truth,  and  the  fhare  which 
the  poet  himielf  had  in  the  tranfadions  which  he  records, 
mufl  be  confidered  as  no  fmall  advantage  to  his  work. 
For  truth  makes  an  impreffion  on  the  mind  far  beyond  any 
fiction ;  and  no  man,  let  his  imagination  be  ever  fo  flrong, 
relates  any  events  fo  feelingly  as  thofe  in  which  he  has 
been  interefted;  paints  any  fcene  fo  naturally  as  one  which 
he  has  ieen  ;  or  draws  any  charaders  in  fuch  flrong  co- 
lours as  thofe  which  he  has  perfonally  known.  It  is  con- 
fidered as  an  advantage  of  the  epic  fubject,  to  be  taken 
from  a  period  fo  diftant,  as  by  being  involved  in  the  dark- 
nefs  of  tradition,  may  give  licence  to  fable.  Though  Of- 
fian's  fubject  may  at  firil  view  appear  unfavourable  in  this 
refped,  as  being  taken  from  his  own  times,  yet  when  we 
refled  that  he  lived  to  an  extreme  old  age;  that  he  relates 
what  had  been  tranfacted  in  another  country,  at  the  dif- 
tance  of  many  years,  and  after  all  that  race  of  men  who 
had  been  the  actors  were  gone  off  the  ftage  ;  we  fhali  find 
the  objection  in  a  great  meafure  obviated.  In  fo  rude  an 
age,  when  no  written  records  were  known,  when  tradition 
was  loofe,  and  accuracy  of  any  kind  little  attended  to, 
what  was  great  and  heroic  in  one  generation,  eafily  ripen- 
ed into  the  marvellous  in  the  next. 

The  natural  reprefentation  of  human  characters  in  an 
Epic  Poem  is  highly  eflential  to  its  merit :  And  in  refpecl 
of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  Homer's  excelling  ail  the 
heroic  poets  who  have  ever  wrote.  But  though  Oilian  be 
much  inferior  to  Homer  in  this  article,  he  will  be  found 
to  be  equal  at  leaft,  if  not  fuperior,  to  Virgil ;  and  has  in- 
deed given  all  the  difplay  of  human  nature  which  the  fmiple 
occurrences  of  his  times  could  be  expeded  to  furnifli.  No 
dead  uniformity  of  character  prevails  ii>  Fingal ;  but  on 
the  contrary  the  principal  characters  are  not  only  clearly 
diftineuillied,  but  fomctimes  artfully  contrafted,  fo  as  to 

illutlrare 


448     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

iljuftrr-te  each  other.  OfTian's  heroes  are,  like  Homer's^ 
all  bra'-e ;  but  their  bravery,  like  thofe  of  Homer's  too, 
Is  of  different  kinds.  For  inllance  ;  the  prudent,  the  fe- 
date,  the  modeft  and  circumfpect  Connal,  is  finely  oppofed 
-to  the  prefumptuous,  raili,  overbearing,  but  gallant  and 
generous  Calinar.  Calmar  hurries  Cuthullin  into  adion 
bv  his  temeri'Ly;  and  when  he  fees  the  bad  effect  of  his 
counfels,  he  will  not  furvive  the  difgrace.  Connal,  like 
another  Ulylles,  attends  Cuthullin  to  his  retreat,  counfels, 
and  comforts  him  under  his  misfortune.  The  fierce,  the 
proud,  and  high-fpirited  Swaran  is  admirably  contrafted 
with  the  calm,  the  moderate,  and  generous  Fingjl.  The 
charader  of  Ofcar  is  a  favourite  one  throughout  the  whole 
poems.  The  amiable  warmth  of  the  young  warrior  ;  his 
eager  impetuofity  in  the  day  of  adion  ;  his  pafTion  for 
fame  ;  his  fubmilfion  to  his  father  ;  his  tendernefs  for 
Malvina  ;  are  the  ftrokes  of  a  mafterly  pencil :  the  ftrokes 
are  few  ;  but  it  is  the  hand  of  nature,  and  attracts  the 
heart.  OlTian's  own  character,  the  old  man,  the  hero, 
imd  the  bard,  all  in  one,  prefents  to  us,  through  the  v/hole 
■work,  a  moll  refpectable  and  venerable  figure,  which  we 
always  contemplate  with  pleafure.  Cuthullin  is  a  hero  of 
the  higheft  clafs  ;  daring,  magnanimous,  and  exquifitely 
fenfible  to  honour.  We  become  attached  to  his  intereil, 
and  are  deeply  touched  with  his  diflrefs  ;  and,  after  .the 
admiration  raifed  for  him  in  the  fufl  part  of  the  poem,  it 
is  a  ftrons  proof  of  Ollian's  mafterly  genius  that  he  durfl 
ndventure  to  produce  to  us  another  hero,  compared  with 
liom,  even  the  great  Cuthullin  fnouid  be  only  an  inferior 
.;L;Tonnge-,  and  who  fliould  rife  as  far  above  him,  as  Cu^ 
thniiin  riies  above  the  reft. 

Here,  indeed,  in  the  chara6ter  and  defcription  of  Fin- 
,1,  Oilian  triumphs  almoft  unrivalled :  For  we  may  boldly 
ciciy  all  antiquity  to  fliew  us  any  hero  equal  to  Fingal. 
Homer's  Hedor  poffefTes  feveral  great  and  amiable  quali- 
ties ;  but  Hector  is  a  fecondary  perfonage  in  the  Iliad,  not 
the  hero  of  the  work.  Vfe  fee  him  only  occafionally  ;  we 
know  much  lefs  of  him  than  w^e  do  of  Tingal  ;  who,  not 
only  in  this  Epic  Poem,  but  in  Temora,  and  throughout 
\\c  reft  of  OiTian's  works,  is  prefented  in  all  that  variety 

ot 


tHE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         449 

of  lights,  which  give  the  full  difplay  of  a  character.  And 
though  Hedor  faithfully  difcharges  his  duty  to  his  coun- 
try, his  friends,  and  hi3  family,  he  is  tinftured,  however, 
with  a  degree  of  the  fame  favage  ferocity,  which  prevails 
among  all  the  Homeric  heroes.  For  vv^e  find  him  infulting 
over  the  fallen  Patroclus,  with  the  mod  cruel  taunts,  and 
telling  him,  when  he  lies  in  the  agony  of  death,  that  Achil- 
les cannot  help  him  now  ;  and  that  in  a  (liort  time  his  bo- 
dy, dripped  naked,  and  deprived  of  funeral  honours,  fhall 
be  devoured  by  the  vultures*.  Whereas,  in  the  charader 
of  Fingal,  concur  almoft  all  the  qualities  that  can  ennoble 
human  nature ;  that  can  either  make  us  admire  the  hero, 
or  love  the  man.  He  is  not  only  unconquerable  in  v^■ar, 
but  he  makes  his  people  happy  by  his  wifdom  in  the  days 
of  peace.  He  is  truly  the  father  of  his  people.  He  is 
known  by  the  epithet  of  "  Fingal  of  the  mildeft  look  j" 
and  diftinguiflied,  on  every  occafion,  by  humanity  and 
generofity.  He  is  merciful  to  his  foesf  ;  full  of  aife*5lion 
to  his  children  ;  full  of  concern  about  his  friends  ;  and 
never  mentions  Agandecca,  his  firil  love,  without  the  ut- 
mofh  tendernefs.  He  is  the  univerfal  proted:or  of  the  dif- 
treifed  ;  "  None  ever  went  fad  from  Fingal." — "  O  Of- 
"  car  !  bend  the  flrong  in  arms  ;  but  fpare  the  feeble 
'•  hand.  Be  thou  a  dream  of  many  tides  againft  the  foes 
"  of  thy  people  ;  but  like  the  gale  that  moves  the  grafs, 
"  to  thofe  who  afk  thine  aid.  So  Trenmor  lived  ;  fuch 
"  Trathal  was  ;  and  fuch  has  Fingal  been.  My  arm  was 
"  the  fupport  of  the  injured  ;  the  weak  refted  behind  the 
"  lightning  of  my  fteel." — Thefe  were  the  maxims  of 
true  heroifm,  to  which  he  formed  his  grandfon.  His 
fame  is  leprefented  as  every  where  fpread  ;  the  greateft 
heroes  acknowledge  his  fuperiority  ;  his  enemies  tremble 
at  his  name  ;  and  the  highelt  encomium  that  can  be  be- 
L  1  1  ftowed 

*  Iliad  xvi.  830.  II.  xvii.  127, 

+  When  'ne  commands  his  fons,  after  Swaran  is  taken  prifoner,  to  "  purfue 
"  the  reft  of  Lochlin,  over  thehearh  of  Lenj  ;  that  no  veffel  may  hereafter  bound 
"  on  the  dark-rolling  waves  of  Iniftore  ;"  he  mears  not  affurcdly,  as  !'ome'  hnve 
m  freprefented  him,  to  order  a  general  {lauohte|^)f  the  foes,  and  to  prevent  their 
favinj;  themfelvci  by  flight  ;  but,  like  a  wife  genera],  he  conrraands  'is  chiefs  to 
render  'he  viclory  complete,  by  a  total  rout  of  the  enemy  ;  that  they  might  ad- 
venture no  more,  for  the  future,  to  fit  out  any  fleet  a^^iui]  him  or  his  allies. 


4^o      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

flowed  on  one  whom  the  poet  would  moft  exalt,  is  to  fay, 
that  his  foul  was  like  the  foul  of  Fingal. 

To  do  juflice  to  the  poet's  merit,  in  fupporting  fuch  a 
charafter  as  this,  I  mud  obferve,  what  is  not  commonly  at- 
tended to,  that  there  is  no  part  of  poetical  execution  more 
difficult,  than  to  draw  a  perfect  charafter  in  fuch  a  manner, 
as  to  render  it  diftinci;  and  afFefting  to  the  mind.  Some 
ftrokes  of  human  imperfection  and  frailty,  are  what  ufually 
give  us  the  mod  clear  view,  and  the  mofl  fenfible4fflpref- 
fion  of  a  character  ;  becaufe  they  prefent  to  us  a  man,  fuch 
as  we  have  feen  ;  they  recall  known  features  of  human 
nature.  When  poets  attempt  to  go  beyond  this  range, 
and  defcribe  a  faultlefs  hero,  they,  for  the  mofl  part,  fet 
before  us  a  fort  of  vague  undiftinguifhable  charadler,  fuch 
as  the  imagination  cannot  lay  hold  of,  or  realize  to  itfelf, 
as  the  objecl  of  affeclion.  We  know  how  much  Virgil 
has  failed  in  this  particular.  His  perfeft  hero,  7£neas,  is 
an  unanimated,  infipid  perfonage,  whom  we  may  pretend 
to  admire,  but  whom  no  one  can  heartily  love.  But  what 
Virgil  has  failed  in,  Ollian,  to  our  aflonifliment,  has  fuc- 
cefsfully  executed.  His  Fingal,  though  exhibited  without 
any  of  the  commxon  human  failings,  is  nevcrthel'efs  a  real 
man  ;  a  charafter  which  touches  and  interells  every  rea- 
der. To  this  it  has  much  contributed,  that  the  poet  has 
reprefented  him  as  an  old  man ;  and  by  this  has  gained 
the  advantage  of  throwing  around  him  a  great  many  cir- 
cumftances,  peculiar  to  that  age,  which  paint  him  to  the 
fancy  in  a  more  diftinct  light.  He  is  furrounded  with  his 
family  ;  he  inllruCls  his  children  in  the  principles  of  vir- 
tue ;  he  is  narrative  of  his  paft  exploits  ;  he  is  venerable 
with  the  grey  locks  of  age  ;  he  is  frequently  difpofed  to 
moralize,  like  an  old  man,  on  human  vanity  and  the  prof- 
pe6l  of  death.  There  is  more  art,  at  leaft  more  felicity,  in 
this,  than  may  at  firft  be  imagined.  For  youth  and  old 
age,  are  the  tv/o  ftates  of  human  life,  capable  of  being 
placed  in  the  mofl  pitlurefque  lights.  Middle  age  is  more 
genveral  and  vague  ;  and  has  fewer  circumftances  peculiar 
to  the  idea  of  it.  -Andgivhen  any  objecl  is  in  a  fituation, 
that  adniits  it  to  be  rendered  particular,  and  to  be  clothed 

with 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  451 

with  a  variety  of  circumftances,  it  always  ftands  out  more 
clear  and  full  in  poetical  defcription. 

Besides  human  perfonages,  divine  or  fupeiTiatural  a- 
gents  are  often  introduced  into  epic  poetry  ;  forming  what 
is  called  the  machinery  of  it  ;  which  mxOll:  critics  hold  to 
be  an  effential  part.  The  marvellous,  it  mull  be  admitted, 
has  always  a  great  charm  for  the  bulk  of  readers.  It  gra- 
tifies the  imagination,  and  affords  room  for  flriking  and 
fubiime  defcription.  No  w^onder,  therefore,  that  all  poets 
fhould  have  a  ftrong  propenfity  towards  it.  But  I  muft 
obferve,  that  nothing  is  more  difficult,  than  to  adjufl:  pro- 
perly the  marvellous  with  the  probable.  If  a  poet  facri- 
fice  probability,  and  fill  his  work  with  extravagant  fupcr- 
natural  fcenes,  he  fpreads  over  it  an  appearance  of  romance 
and  childiffi  fiction  ;  he  tranfports  his  readers  from  this 
world,  into  a  fantaffiic,  vifionary  region;  and  lofes  that 
w^eight  and  dignity  which  ffiould  reign  in  epic  poetry. 
No  work,  from  which  probability  is  altogether  baniflied, 
can  make  a  lading  or  deep  imprefiion.  Human  adions 
and  manners,  are  always  the  moft  interefting  objeds  which 
can  be  prefented  to  a  human  mind.  All  machinery,  there- 
fore, is  faulty,  which  withdraws  thefe  too  much  from  view, 
or  obfcures  them  under  a  cloud  of  incredible  fictions.  Be- 
fides  being  temperately  employed,  machinery  ought  al- 
ways to  have  fome  foundation  in  popular  belief.  A  poet 
is  by  no  means  at  liberty  to  invent  what  fyftem  of  the  mar- 
vellous he  pleafes  :  he  muff:  avail  himfelf  either  of  the  re- 
ligious faith,  or  the  fuperftitious  credulity,  of  the  country 
wherein  he  lives ;  fo  as  to  give  an  air  of  probability  to 
events  which  are  moft  contrary  to  the  common  courfe  of 
nature. 

In  thefe  refpecls,  Oflian  appears  to  me  to  have  been  re- 
markably happy.  He  has  indeed  foiiovv  ed  the  fame  courfe 
with  Homer.  For  it  is  perfedly  abfurd  to  iniagine,  as 
fome  critics  have  done,  that  Homer's  mythology  was  in- 
vented by  him,  in  confequence  of  pcrfonal  refletlions  on 
the  benefit  it  would  yield  to  poetry.  Homer  was  no  fuch 
refining  genius.  He  found  the  traditionary  ftories  on 
which  he  built  his  Iliad,  mingled  with  popular  legends, 
concerning  the  intervention  of  the  gods ;  and  he  adopted 

thefe. 


452     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

ihefe,  becaufe  they  amufed  the  fancy.  Offian,  in  like 
manner,  found  the  tales  of  his  country  full  of  ghofts  and 
ipirits  :  it  is  likely  he  believed  them  himfelf ;  and  he  in- 
troduced them,  becaufe  they  gave  his  poems  that  folemn 
and  marvellous  caft,  which  fuited  his  genius.  This  was 
the  only  machinery  he  could  employ  with  propriety  ;  be- 
caufe it  was  the  only  intervention  of  fupernatural  beings, 
which  agreed  with  the  common  belief  of  the  country.  It 
was  happy,  becaufe  it  did  not  interfere  in  the  leafl:  with 
the  proper  difplay  of  luunan  charafters  and  aftions  ;  be- 
caufe it  had  lefs  of  the  incredible,  than  moil  other  kinds 
of  poetical  machinery  ;  and  becaufe  it  ferved  to  diverfify 
the  fcene,  and  to  heighten  the  fubjetl:  by  an  awful  gran- 
deur, which  is  the  great  defign  of  machinery. 

As  Offian's  mythology  is  peculiar  to  himfelf,  and  makes 
a  confiderable  figure  in  his  other  poems,  as  well  as  in 
Fingal,  it  may  be  proper  to  make  fome  obfervations  on 
it,  independent  of  its  fubferviency  to  epic  compofition. 
It  turns  for  the  moft  part  on  the  appearances  of  departed 
fpirits.  Thefe,  confonantly  to  the  notions  of  every,  rude 
age,  are  reprefented  not  as  purely  immaterial,  but  as  thin, 
airy  forms,  which  can  be  vifible  or  invifible  at  pleafure  ; 
their  voice  is  feeble  ;  their  armns  weak  ;  but  they  are  en- 
dowed with  knowledge  more  than  human.  In  a  feparate 
ilate,  they  retain  the  fame  difpofitions  which  animated 
them  in  this  life.  They  ride  on  the  wind  ;  they  bend 
their  airy  bows  ;  and  purfue  deer  formed  of  clouds.  The 
ghofts  oi"  departed  bards  continue  to  fmg.  The  ghofts  of 
departed  heroes  frequent  the  fields  of  their  former  fame. 
"  They  reil  together  in  their  caves,  and  talk  of  mortal 
"  men.  Their  fongs  are  of  other  worlds.  They  come 
"•  fometimes  to  the  ear  of  reft,  and  raife  their  feeble  voice." 
All  this  prefents  to  us  much  the  fame  fet  of  ideas,  con- 
cerning ipirits,  as  we  find  in  the  eleventh  book  of  the 
Odyifey,  where  UlylTes  vifits  the  regions  of  the  dead  : 
And  in  the  twenty-third  book  of  the  Iliad,  the  ghoft  of 
Patrockis,  after  appearing  to  Achilles,  vaniflies  precifely 
like  one  of  Oflian's,  emitting  a  Ihrill,  feeble  cry,  and 
melting  away  like  fmoke. 

But  though  Homer's  and  Offian's  ideas  concerning 

ghofts 


THE  POEIMS  OF  OSSIAN.  453 

cjhofls  were  of  the  fame  nature,  we  cannot  but  obferve, 
that  Offian's  ghofts  arc  drawn  with  much  ftronger  and 
livelier  colours  than  thofe  of  Homer.  Oifian  defcribes 
ghofts  with  all  the  particularity  of  one  who  had  fcen  and 
converfed  with  them,  and  whofe  imagination  was  full  of 
the  impreffion  they  had  left  upon  it.  He  calls  up  thofe 
awful  and  tremendous  ideas  which  the 

Simulacra  modis  pallcntia  mirls, 

are  fitted  to  raife  in  the  human  mind  ;  and  which,  in 
Shakefpear's  ftyle,  "  harrow  up  the  foul.'*  Crugal's  ghoit, 
in  particular,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fecond  book  at  Fin- 
gal,  may  vie  with  any  appearance  of  this  kind,  deicribed 
by  any  epic  or  tragic  poet  whatever.  Moft  poets  would 
have  contented  ihemfelves  with  telling  us,  that  he  refem- 
bled,  in  every  particular,  the  living  Crugal ;  that  his  form 
and  drefs  were  the  fame,  only  his  face  more  pale  and  fad; 
and  that  he  bore  the  mark  of  the  wound  by  which  he  fell. 
But  Oflian  fets  before  our  eyes  a  fpirit  from  the  invifible 
world,  diltinguifhed  by  all  thofe  features,  which  a  {irong 
aftoniflied  imagination  would  give  to  the  ghoft.  "  A 
"  dark-red  fhream  of  fire  comes  down  from  the  hill. 
"  Crugal  fat  upon  the  beam  ;  he  that  lately  fell  by  the 
"  hand  of  Swaran,  llriving  in  the  battle  of  heroes.  His 
"  face  is  like  the  beam  of  the  fetting  moon.  His  robes 
"  are  of  the  clouds  of  the  hill.  His  eyes  are  like  tv\'o 
"  decaying   flames.     Dark  is  the  wound  of  his  bread. 

"  The  liars  dim-twinkled  through  his  form  ;  and 

"  his  voice  was  like  the  found  of  a  diftant  ilream." 
The  circumilance  of  the  ftars  being  beheld,  "  dim-twink- 
"  ling  through  his  form,"  is  wonderfully  pidurefque;  and 
conveys  the  mod  lively  impreiiion  of  his  thin  and  firadowy 
fubftance.  The  attitude  in  which  he  is  afterwards  placed, 
and  the  fpeech  put  into  his  mouth,  are  full  of  that  foieran 
and  awful  fublimity,  which  fults  the  fubjeft.  "  DiiHj  and 
"  in  tears,  he  flood,  and  ftretched  his  pale  hand  over  the 
"  hero.  Faintly  he  raifed  his  feeble  voice,  like  the  gale 
*'  of  the  reedy  Lego. — My  ghoft,  O  Connal !  is  on  my 
"  native  hills ;  but  my  corfe  is  on  the  fands  of  Uliin. 
"  Thou  {halt  never  talk  with  Cruaal,  or  find  his  lone  Heps 

"  in 


454     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  in  the  heath.  I  am  light  as  the  blaft  of  Cronila ;  and 
*'  I  move  like  the  /hadow  of  mift.  Connal,  fon  of  Colgar! 
-'  I  fee  the  dark  cloud  of  death.  It  hovers  over  the  plains 
"  of  Lena.  The  fons  of  green  Erin  fhall  fall.  Remove 
*'  from  the  field  of  ghofts. — Like  the  darkened  moon  he 
"  retired,  in  the  midil  of  the  whililing  blaft." 

Sevsral  other  appearances  of  fpirits  might  be  pointed 
out,  as  among  the  moft  fublime  pafiages  of  Oliian's  poetry. 
The  circumftances  of  them  are  confiderably  diverfified ; 
and  the  fcenery  always  fuited  to  the  occafion.  "  Ofcar 
"  llowly  afcends  the  hill.  The  meteors  of  night  fet  on 
"  the  heath  before  him..  A  diftant  torrent  faintly  roars. 
"  Unfrequent  blafts  rufh  through  aged  oaks.  The  half- 
"  enlightened  moon  fmks  dim  and  red  behind  her  hill. 
"  Feeble  voices  are  heard  on  the  heath.  Ofcar  drevs^  his 
"  fword." Nothing  can  prepare  the  fancy  more  hap- 
pily for  the  awful  fcene  that  is  to  follow.  "  Trenmor 
"  came  from  his  hill,  at  the  voice  of  his  mighty  fon.  A 
"  cloud  like  the  fteed  of  the  ftranger,  fupported  his  airy 
"  limbs.  His  robe  is  of  the  mift  of  Lano,  that  brings 
"  death  to  the  people.  His  fv/ord  is  a  green  meteor,  half- 
"  extinguilhed.  His  face  is  without  form,  and  dark.  He 
"  fighed  thrice  over  the  hero  :  And  thrice,  the  winds  of 
"  the  night  roared  around.    Many  were  his  words  to  Of- 

'^  car He  llowly  vanillTied,  like  a  mift  that  melts  on  the 

"  funny  hill."  To  appearances  of  this  kind,  we  can  find 
HO  parallel  among  the  Greek  or  Roman  poets.  They 
bring  to  mind  that  noble  defcription  in  the  book  of  Job : 
*'  In  thoughts  from  the  vifions  of  the  night,  when  deep 
"  fleep  faileth  on  men,  fear  came  upon  me,  and  trembling, 
"  which  made  all  my  bones  to  (hake.  Then  a  fpirit  palled 
*'  before  my  face.  The  hair  of  my  fiefh  ftood  up.  It 
"  ftood  ftill ;  but  I  could  not  difcern  the  form  thereof. 
"  An  image  was  before  mine  eyes.  There  was  filence  ; 
*'  and  1  heard  a  voice — Shall  mortal  man  be  more  juft 
"  than  God  *  ?" 

As  Oiftan's  fupernatural  beings  are  defcribed  with  a 
furprifmg  force  of  imagination,  fo  they  are  introduced 
with  propriety.     We  have  only  three  ghofts  in  Fingal : 

That 

*  Jobiv.  13—17. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.        455 

That  of  Crugal,  which  comes  to  warn  the  hofl  of  impend- 
ing deflru6lion,  and  to  advife  them  to  fave  themfelves  by- 
retreat  ;  that  of  Everallin,  the  fpoufe  of  Oflian,  which 
calls  him  to  rife  and  refcue  their  fon  from  danger ;  and 
that  of  Agandecca,  which,  juft  before  the  laft  engagement 
with  Swaran,  moves  Fingal  to  pity,  by  mourning  for  the 
approaching  deftrnclion  of  her  kinfmen  and  people.  In 
the  other  poems,  ghofts  fometimes  appear  when  invoked 
to  foretel  futm-ity ;  frequently,  according  to  the  notions 
of  thefe  times,  they  come  as  forerunners  of  misfortunes, 
or  death,  to  thofe  whom  they  vifit;  fometimes  they  inform 
their  friends  at  a  diilance,  of  their  own  death  ;  and  fome- 
times they  are  introduced  to  heighten  the  fcenery  on  lome 
great  and  folemn  occafion.  "  A  hundred  oaks  burn  to 
"  the  wind ;  and  faint  light  gleams  over  the  heath.  The 
"  ghofts  of  Ardven  pafs  through  the  beam  ;  and  fiiew 
"  their  dim  and  diftant  forms.    Comala  is  half-unfeen  on 

"  her  meteor  ;  and  Hidallan  is  fullen  and  dim." 

"  The  awful  faces  of  other  times,  looked  from  the  clouds 
"  of  Crona.'* — "  Fercuth  !  I  faw  the  ghoft  of  night.  Si- 
"  lent  he  ftood  on  that  bank;  his  robe  of  mift  flew  on  the 
''•  wind.  I  could  behold  his  tears.  An  aged  man  he  feem- 
"  ed,  and  full  of  thought." 

The  ghofts  of  ftrangers  mingle  not  with  thofe  of  the 
natives.  "  She  is  feen ;  but  not  like  the  daughters  of 
"  the  hill.  Her  robes  are  from  the  ftranger's  land  ;  and 
"  fhe  is  ftill  alone."  When  the  ghoft  of  one  whom  we 
had  formerly  known  is  introduced,  the  propriety  of  the 
living  charafter  is  ftill  preferved.  This  is  remarkable  in 
the  appearance  of  Calmar's  ghoft,  in  the  poem  entitled 
T/je  Death  of  CuthiilUn.  He  feems  to  forebode  Cuthullin's 
death,  and  to  beckon  him  to  his  cave.  Cuthullin  re- 
proaches him  for  fuppofing  that  he  could  be  intimidated 
by  fuch  prognoftics.  "  Why  doft  thou  bend  thy  dark 
*'  eyes  on  me,  ghoft  of  the  car-borne  Calmar  ?  Would'ft 
"  thou  frighten  me,  O  Matha's  fon !  from  the  battles  of 
"  Cormac  ?  Thy  hand  v/as  not  feeble  in  war  ;  neither  was 
"  thy  voice  for  peace.  How  art  thou  changed,  chief  of 
"  Lara !  if  now  thou  doft  advife  to  fly !  Retire  thou  to 
"  thy  cave :  Th(.^u  art  not  Calmar's  ghoft  ;  he  delighted 

"  in 


4^6    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  in  battle;  and  his  arm  was  like  the  thunder  of  heaven.'* 
Calmar  makes  no  return  to  this  feeming  reproach :  But, 
"  He  retired  in  his  blafl  with  joy  ;  for  he  had  heard  the 
"  voice  of  his  praife."  This  is  precifely  the  ghoft  of  A- 
chilles  in  Homer ;  who,  notwithftanding  all  the  diflatif- 
faction  he  exprefles  with  his  liate  in  the  region  of  the  dead, 
as  foon  as  he  had  heard  his  fbn  Neoptolemus  praifed  for 
his  gallant  behaviour,  ilrode  away  with  filent  joy  to  rejoin 
the  rell  of  the  Ihades  *. 

It  is  a  great  advantage  of  Oflian's  mythology,  that  it 
is  not  local  and  temporary,  like  that  of  moft  other  ancient 
poets ;  which  of  courfe  is  apt  to  feem  ridiculous,  after  the 
fuperltitions  have  paflcd  away  on  which  it  is  founded.  01- 
fian's  mythology  is,  to  fpeak  fo,  the  mythology  of  human 
nature  ;  for  it  is  founded  on  what  has  been  the  popular 
belief,  in  all  ages  and  countries,  and  under  all  forms  of 
religion,  concerning  the  appearance  of  departed  fpirits. 
Homer's  machinery  is  always  lively  and  amufmg ;  but  far 
from  being  always  fupported  with  proper  dignity.  The 
indecent  fquabbles  among  his  gods,  furely  do  no  honour 
to  epic  poetry.  Whereas  Offian's  machinery  has  dignity 
upon  all  occafions.  It  is  indeed  a  dignity  of  the  dark  and 
awful  kind  ;  but  this  is  proper  ;-  becaufe  coincident  with 
the  drain  and  fpirit  of  the  poetry.  A  light  and  gay  my- 
thology, like  Homer's,  would  have  been  perfeftly  unfuit- 
able  to  the  fubjeds  on  which  Offian's  genius  was  employ- 
ed. But  though  his  machinery  be  always  folemn,  it  is  en- 
livened, as  much  as  the  fiibjeft  would  permit,  by  thofe 
pleafant  and  beautiful  appearances,  which  he  fometimes 
introduces  of  the  fpirits  of  the  hill.  Thefe  are  gentle  fpi- 
rits; cefcending  on  fun-beams;  fair-moving  on  the  plain; 
their  forms  bright ;  their  voices  fweet ;  and  their  vifits  to 
men  propitious.  The  grcatefl  praife  that  can  be  given,  to 
the  beauty  of  a  living  woman,  is  to  fay,  "  She  is  fair  as 
"  the  gholt  of  the  hill ;  when  it  moves  in  a  fun-beam  at 
"  neon,  over  the  filence  of  Morven."  "  The  hunter 
"  fhall  hear  my  voice  from  his  booth.  He  fhall  fear,  but 
*'  love  my  voice.  For  fweet  fliall  my  voice  be  ior  my 
"  friends ;  for  pleafant  were  they  to  me." 

^  Besides 

*  OdyfTcy,   Lib.  li. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  457 

Besides  ghofts,  or  the  fpirits  of  departed  men,  we  find 
in  Oflian  feme  inftances  of  other  kinds  of  machinery.  Spi- 
rits of  a  fuperior  nature  to  gholls  are  fometimes  alluded  to, 
which  have  power  to  embroil  the  deep;  to  call  forth  winds 
and  ftorms,  and  pour  them  on  the  land  of  the  llranger  ; 
to  overturn  forefts,  and  to  fend  death  among  the  people. 
We  have  prodigies  too ;  a  fliower  of  blood  ;  and  when 
fome  difafter  is  befalling  at  a  diftance,  the  found  of  death 
heard  on  the  firings  of  Offian's  harp  :  all  perfectly  confo- 
nant,  not  only  to  the  peculiar  ideas  of  northern  nations, 
but  to  the  general  current  of  a  fuperllitious  imagination  in 
all  countries.  The  defcription  of  Fingal's  airy  hall,  in  the 
poem  called  Berrathon,  and  of  the  afccnt  of  Malvina  into 
it,  deferves  particular  notice,  as  remarkably  noble  and 
magnificent.  But,  above  all,  the  engagement  of  Fingal 
with  the  fpirit  of  Loda,  in  Carric-thura,  cannot  be  men- 
tioned without  admiration.  I  forbear  tranfcribing  the 
paffage,  as  it  mull  have  drawn  the  attention  of  every  one 
who  has  read  the  works  of  Ollian.  The  undaunted  cou- 
rage of  Fingal,  oppofed  to  the  terrors  of  the  Scandinavian 
god  ;  the  appearance  a.ndfpeech  of  that  awful  fpirit  ;  the 
wound  which  he  receives,  and  the  fniiek  which  he  fends 
forth,  "  as  rolled  into  himfelf,  he  rofe  upon  the  wind  ;" 
are  full  of  the  mod  amazing  and  terrible  majefly.  I  know 
no  palTage  more  fublime  in  the  writings  of  any  uninfpired 
author.  The  fiction  is  calculated  to  aggrandize  the  he- 
ro ;  which  it  does  to  a  high  degree  ;  nor  is  it  lo  un- 
natural or  wild  a  fiftion,  as  might  at  firft  be  thought. 
According  to  the  notions  of  thofe  times,  fupernat.ural  be- 
ings were  material,  and  confequently  vulnerable.  The 
fpirit  of  Loda  was  not  acknowieJg<:d  as  a  deity  by  Fingal ; 
he  did  not  worfhip  at  the  Itone  of  his  power;  he  plainly 
confidered  him  as  the  god  of  his  enemies  only  ;  as  a  local 
deity,  whofe  dominion  extended  no  farther  than  to  the 
regions  where  he  was  worfliipped  ;  who  had,  therefore, 
no  title  to  threaten  him,  and  no  claim  to  his  fubmiilion. 
We  know  there  are  poetical  precedents,  of  great  authority, 
for  fictions  fully  as  extravagant ;  and  if  Homer  be  forgi- 
ven for  making  Diomed  attack,  and  wound  in  battle,  the 
gods  whom  that  chief  himfelf  wcrfl-.Ipped.  OfTian  furely  is 
M  m  m  par- 


458     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

pardonable  for  making  bis  hero  fuperior  to  the  god  of  a 
foreign  territory  *. 

NoTv/iTHSTANDiNG  the  poetical  advantages  which  I 
have  afcribed  to  OiTian's  machinery,  I  acknowledge  it 
would  have  been  much  more  beautiful  and  perfed,  had 
the  author  difcovered  fome  knowledge  of  a  fupreme  Be- 
ing. Although  his  filence  on  this  head  has  been  accounted 
for  by  the  learned  and  ingenious  tranilator  in  a  very  pro- 
bable manner,  yet  iliil  it  mull  be  held  a  confiderable  dif- 
advantage  to  the  poetry.  For  the  moll  auguft  and  lofty 
ideas  that  can  embellilli  poetry,  are  derived  from  the  belief 
of  a  divine  adminiftration  of  the  univerfe  :  and  hence  the 
invocation  of  a  fupreme  Being,  or  at  leaft  of  fome  fupe- 
rior powers  who  are  conceived  as  prefiding  over  human 
affairs,  the  folemnitles  of  religious  worihip,  prayers  pre- 
ferred, and  aififtance  implored  on  critical  occasions,  appear 
with  great  dignity  in  the  works  of  almoft  all  poets,  as 
chief  ornaments  of  their  compofitions.  The  abfence  of 
all  fuch  religious  ideas  from  Oliian's  poetry,  is  a  fenfible 
blank  in  it  ;  the  more  to  be  regretted,  as  we  can  eafily 
imagine  what  an  illuflrious  figure  they  would  have  made 
under  the  management  of  fuch  a  genius  as  his ;  and  how 
finely  they  would  have  been  adapted  to  many  fituations 
which  occur  in  his  works. 

After  fo  particular  an  examination  of  Fingal,  it  were 
needlefs  to  enter  into  as  full  a  difcuflion  of  the  conduct  of 
Temora^  the  other  epic  poem.  Many  of  the  fame  obfer- 
vations,  efpecially  with  regard  to  the  great  charaderifticks 

of 

*  The  fceneof  this  en:oa;uer  of  Fin;];al  with  thefpiritof  Loda,  is  laid  in  Ini- 
Ooie,  or  the  iflands  of  Oikney  ;  and  in  the  defcription  of  Fingal's  landing  there,  it 
li  faid,  "  A  rock  bends  along  the  coaft,  with  all  its  echoing  wood.  On  the  top 
"  is  fhe  circle  of  Loda,  with  the  molly  (lone  of  power."  In  confirmation  of  Of- 
fian's  topography,  it  is  proper  to  acquaint  the  reader,  that  in  thefe  iHandsjasIhavc 
been  well  informed,  there  are  many  jiillais,  and  circles  of  flones,  Ifill  remaining, 
known  !>v  ,hc  name  of  the  Hones  and  circles  of  Loda,  or  Loden ;  to  which  fome 
dr-i_c  iM  aip.'iiiitious  regard  is  annexed  to  this  day.  Thefe  iflands,  until  the  year 
1400,  made  a  part  of  the  Danii'h  dominions.  Their  ancient  language,  of  which 
tiiere  are  yet  fome  remains  among  the  natives,  is  called  the  Norfe  ;  and  is  a  dia- 
led, not  of  the  Celtic,  but  of  the  Scandinavian  tongue.  The  manners  and  the  lu- 
perftitions  of  the  inhabitants,  are  quite  diftmft  from  thofe  of  the  Highlands  and 
weflern  ifles  of  Scotland.  Their  ancient  fongs  too,  are  of  a  different  (train  and  cha- 
jafter,  turning  upon  magical  incantations  and  evocations  from  the  dead,  which 
were  the  favourite  fubjeds  of  the  old  Runic  poetry.  They  have  many  traditions 
among  them  of  wars  in  former  times  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  weftern  iflands. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN, 


459 


gF  heroic  poetry,  apply  to  both.  The  high  merit,  how- 
ever, of  Temora,  requires  that  we  fliould  not  pafs  it  by 
without  fome  remarks. 

The  fcene  of  Temora,  as  of  Fingal,  is  laid  in  Ireland  ; 
and  the  aftion  is  of  a  poflerior  date.  Tke  fubjecl:  is,'  an 
expedition  of  the  hero,  to  dethrone  and  punifii  a  bloody 
ufurper,  and  to  reftore  the  poffeffion  of  the  kingdom  to 
the  pofterity  of  the  lawful  prince  ;  an  undertaking  worthy 
of  the  juftice  and  heroifm  of  the  great  Fingal.  The  acrion 
is  one,  and  complete.  The  poem  opens  Vvith  the  defcent 
of  Fingal  on  the  coaft,  and  the  confultation  held  among 
the  chiefs  of  the  enemy.  The  murder  of  the  young  prince 
Cormac,  which  was  the  caufe  of  the  war,  being  antecedent 
to  the  epic  action,  is  introduced  .with  great  propriety  as 
an  epifode,  in  the  firft  book.  In  the  progrefs  of  the  poem, 
three  battles  are  defcribed,  which  rife  in  their  importance 
above  one  another  ;  the  fuccefs  is  various,  and  the  iffue  for 
fome  time  doubtful ;  till,  at  laft,  Fingal  brought  into  dif- 
trefs,  by  the  wound  of  his  great  general  Gaul,  and  the 
death  of  his  fonFiIlan,airumes  the  command  himfelf,  and 
having  flain  the  Irifli  king  in  fmgic  combat,  reftores  the 
rightful  heir  to  his  throne. 

Temora  has,  perhaps,  lefs  fire  than  the  other  epic  poem; 
but,  in  return,  it  has  more  variety,  more  tendcrnefs,  and 
more  magnificence.  The  reigning;  idea,  fo  often  prefented 
to  us,  of  "  Fingal  in  the  laft  of  his  fields,"  is  venerable  and 
affecting  ;  nor  could  any  more  noble  conclufion  be  thought 
of,  than  the  aged  hero,  after  fo  many  fuccefsful  atchieve- 
ments,  taking  his  leave  of  battles,  and,  with  all  the  folem- 
nities  of  thofe  times,  refigning  his  fpear  to  his  fon.  The 
events  are  lefs  crouded  in  Temora  than  in  Fingal ;  acfionr. 
and  characters  are  more  particularly  difplayed  ;  we  are  let 
into  the  tranfaclions  of  both  hofts  ;  and  informed  of  the 
adventures  of  the  night  as  well  as  of  the  day.  The  dill 
pathetic,  and  the  romantic  fcenery  of  feveral  of  the  night- 
adventures,  fo  remarkably  fuited  to  Oflian's  genius,  occa- 
fion  a  fine  diverfity  in  the  poem  ;  and  are  happily  con- 
trailed  with  the  military  operations  of  the  day. 

In  moli  of  our  author's  poems,  the  horrors  of  war  are 
foftcned  by  intermixed  fcenes  of  love  and  friendfliip.     In 

Fingal, 


460     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

Fin^al,  thefe  arc  introduced  as  epifodes  ;  in  Temora,  we 
have  an  incident  of  this  nature  wrought  into  the  body  of 
the  piece ;  in  the  adventure  of  Cathmor  and  Sul-malla. 
This  forms  one  of  the  mofl;  confpicuous  beauties  of  that 
poem.  The  diPtrefe  of  Sul-malla,  difguifed  and  unknown 
among  Grangers,  her  tender  and  anxious  concern  for  the 
fafety  of  Cathmor,  her  -dream,  and  her  melting  remem- 
brance of  the  land  of  her  fathers ;  Cathmor's  emotion 
when  he  firft  difcovers  her,  his  flruggles  to  conceal  and 
fupprefs  his  paffion,  leil  it  fhould  unman  him  in  the  midlu 
of  war,  though  "  his  foul  poured  forth  in  fecret,  when 
"  he  beheld  her  fearful  eye ;"  and  the  lad  interview  be- 
tween them,  when,  overcome  by  her  tendernefs,,  he  lets  her 
know  he  had  difcovered  her,  and  confeffes  his  paffion ; 
all  are  wrought  up  with  the  mofl  exquifite  fenfibility  and 
delicacy. 

Besides  the  charafters  which  appeared  in  Fingal,feve- 
ral  new  ones  are  here  introduced  ;  and  though,  as  they 
are  all  the  characters  of  warriors,  braveiy  is  the  predomi- 
nant feature,  they  are  neverthelefs  diverfilied  in  a  fenfible 
and  flrildng  manner.  Foldath,  for  inflance,  the  general 
of  Cathmor,  exhibits  the  perfect  pifture  of  a  lavage  chief- 
tain :  Bold,  and  daring,  but  prefumptuous,  cruel,  and 
overbearing.  He  is  dilfinguiflied,  on  his  firft  appearance, 
as  the  friend  of  the  tyrant  Cairbar  ;  "  his  ftride  is  haugh- 
'•  ty  ;  his  red  eye  rolls  in  wrath."  In  his  perfon  and 
whole  deportment,  he  is  contralled  with  the  mild  and  wife 
Hidalla,  another  leader  of  the  fame  army,  on  whofe  hu- 
manity and  gentlenefs  he  looks  with  great  contempt.  He 
profeffedly  delights  in  llrife  and  blood.  He  infults  over 
the  fallen.  He  is  imperious  in  his  counfels,  and  faftious 
when  they  are  not  followed.  He  is  unrelenting  in  all  his 
fchemes  of  revenge,  even  to  the  length  of  denying  the  fu- 
neral fong  to  the  dead  ;  which,  from  the  injury  thereby 
done  to  their  ghofts,  was,  in  thofe  days,  confidered  as 
the  greateiL  barbarity.  Fierce  to  the  lafl,  he  comforts 
himfelf,  in  his  dying  moments,  with  thinking  that  his 
ghoil  fiiall  often  leave  his  blafl  to  rejoice  over  the  graves 
of  thofe  he  had  ilain.  Yet  Offian,  ever  prone  to  the  pa- 
thetic, has  contrived  to  throw  into  his  account  of  the  death, 

even 


THE  POEMS  OF   OSSIAN.  461- 

even  of  this  man,  Ibme  tender  circumilances ;  by  the 
moving  defcription  of  his  daughter  Dardulena,  the  lait  of 
his  race. 

The  charader  of  Foldath  tends  much  to  exalt  that  cf 
Cathmor,  the  chief  commander,  which  is  diflinguifhed  by 
the  moil  humane  virtues.  He  abhors  all  fraud  and  cruel- 
ty, is  famous  for  his  hofpitaiity  to  llrangers  ;  open  to  eve- 
ry generous  fentiment,  and  to  every  foft  and  compaffionate 
feeling.  He  is  fo  amiable,  as  to  divide  the  reader's  at- 
tachment between  him  and  the  hero  of  the  poem  ;  though 
our  author  has  artfully  managed  it  fo,  as  to  make  Cath- 
m.or  himfelf  indiredly  acknowledge  Fingal's  fuperiority, 
and  to  appear  fomewhat  apprehenfive  of  the  event,  after 
the  death  of  Fillan,  which  he  knew  would  call  forth  Fin- 
ga,l  in  all  his  might.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that,  although 
OiTian  has  introduced  into  his  poems  three  complete  he- 
roes, Cuthullin,  Cathmor,  and  Fingal,  he  has,  however, 
fenfiblv  diitinguiflied  each  of  their  charafters.  Cuthullin 
is  particularly  honourable  ;  Cathmor  particularly  amiable; 
Fingal  wile  and  great,  retaining  an  afcendant  peculiar  to 
himfelf,  in  whatever  licht  he  is  viewed. 

But  the  favourite  figure  in  Temora,  and  the  one  molt 
highly  finilhed,  is  Fillan.  His  character  is  of  that  fort, 
for  which  Oiiian  Ihews  a  particular  fondnefs  ;  an  eager, 
fervent  young  warrior,  tired  \a  ith  all  the  impatient  enthu- 
fialm  for  military  glory,  peculiar  to  that  time  of  life.  He 
had  flcetched  this  in  the  defcription  of  his  own  fon  Ofcar  ; 
but  as  he  has  extended  it  more  fully  in  Fillan,  and  as  the 
charadter  is  fo  confonant  to  the  epic  ftrain,  though,  fo  far 
as  1  remember,  not  placed  in  fuch  a  confpicuous  light  by 
any  other  epic  poet,  it  mav  be  worth  while  to  attend  a 
little  to  Oflian's  management  of  it  in  this  inftance. 

Fillan  was  the  ycungefl  of  ail  the  fons  of  Fingal; 
younger  it  is  plain  than  his  nephew  Ofcar,  by  whofe  fame 
and  great  deeds  in  war,  we  may  naturally  fuppofe  his  am- 
bition to  have  been  highly  ftimulated.  Withal,  as  he  is 
younger,  he  is  defcribed  as  more  rafh  and  fiery.  His  firil 
appearance  is  foon  after  Ofcar's  death,  when  he  was  em- 
ployed to  watch  the  motions  of  the  foe  by  night.  In  a  con- 
verlaticn  vrith  his  brother  Oiiian,  on  that  occafion,  we 


462     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

iearn  that  it  was  not  long  fmce  he  began  to  lift  the  fpear. 
''  Few  are  the  marks  of  my  fword  in  battle  ;  but  my  foul 
"  is  fire."  He  is  with  fome  difficulty  reftrained  by  Offian 
from  going  to  attack  the  enemy  ;  and  complains  to  him^, 
that  his  father  had  never  allowed  him  any  opportunity  of 
fignalifmg  his  valour.  "  The  king  hath  not  remarked  m.y 
"  fword  ;  I  go  foiHh  with  the  crowd  ;  I  return  without  my 
"  fame."  Soon  after,  when  Fingai  according  to  cuftom 
was  to  appoint  one  of  his  chiefs  to  command  the  army,  and 
each  was  (landing  forth,  and  putting  in  his  claim  to  this 
honour,  Fillan  is  prefented  in  the  following  mod  pidur- 
efque  and  natural  attitude.  "  On  his  Ipear  Itood  the  fon 
"  of  Clatho,  in  the  wandering  of  his  locks.  Thrice  he 
"  raifed  his  eyes  to  Fingai ;  his  voice  thrice  failed  him  as 
"  he  fpoke.  Fillan  could  not  boafl  of  battles  :  at  once  he 
"  flrode  away.  Bent  over  a  diftant  ftream  he  (lood ;  the 
"  tear  hung  in  his  eye.  He  llruck,  at  times,  the  thiltle's 
*'  head,  with  his  inverted  fpear."  No  lefs  natural  and 
beautiful  is  the  defcription  of  Fingal's  paternal  emotion  on 
this  occafion.  "  Nor  is  he  unfeen  of  Fingai.  Side-long 
"  he  beheld  his  fon.  He  beheld  him  with  burlling  joy.  He 
*'  hid  the  big  tear  with  his  locks,  and  turned  amidft  his 
^'  crouded  foul."  The  command,  for  that  day,  being  given 
to  GauL  Fillan  rufhes  amidft  the  thickeft  of  the  foe,  faves 
Gaul's  life,  who  is  wounded  by  a  random  arrpw,  and  diftin- 
guifhes  himfelf  fo  in  battle,  that  "  the  days  of  old  return  on 
'*  Fingal's  mind,  as  he  beholds  the  renown  of  his  fon.  As 
"  the  fun  rejoices  from  the  cloud,  over  the  tree  his  beams 
*'  have  raifed,  whilft  it  fliakes  his  lonely  head  on  the  heath, 
^^  fo  joyful  is  the  king  over  Fillan."  Sedate,  however,  and 
wife,  he  mixes  the  praife  v.'hich  he  beftows  on  him  with 
fome  reprehenfion  of  his  rafhnefs,  "  My  fon,  I  faw  thy 
*'  deeds,  and  my  foul  was  glad.  Thou-  art  brave,  fon  of 
"  Clatho,  but  headlong  in  the  ftrife.  So  did  not  Fingai 
"  advance,  though  he  never  feared  a  foe.  Let  thy  people 
"  be  a  ridge  behind  thee  ;  they  are  thy  flrength  in  the 
"  field.  Then  fhalt  thou  be  long  renowned,  and  behold 
"  the  tombs  of  thy  fathers." 

On  the  next  day,  the  greateft  and  the  laft  of  Fillan's 
life,  the  charge  is  committed  to  him  of  leading  on  the  hoft 

to 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         463 

to  battle.  Fingal's  fpeech  to  his  troops  on  this  occafion, 
is  full  of  noble  fentiment ;  and  v/here  he  recommends  his 
fon  to  their  care,  exrremely  touching.  "  A  young  beam 
"  is  before  you ;  few  are  his  Heps  to  war.  They  are  few, 
"  but  he  is  valiant ;  defend  my  dark-haired  fon.  Bring 
"  him  back  with  joy  ;  hereafter  he  may  ftand  alone.  His 
"  form  is  like  his  fathers;  his  foul  is  a  flame  of  their  fire." 
When  the  battle  begins,  the  poet  puts  forth  his  ftrength 
to  defcribe  the  exploits  of  the  young  hero ;  who,  at  laft 
encountering  and  killing  with  his  own  hand,  Foldath  the 
oppofite  general,  attains  the  highefl;  pinnacle  of  glory.  In 
what  follows,  when  the  fate  of  Fillan  is  drawing  near,  Of- 
iian,  if  any  where,  excels  himfelf.  Foldath  being  ilain, 
and  a  general  rout  begun,  there  was  no  refource  left  to 
the  enemy  but  in  the  great  Cathmor  himfelf,  who  in  this 
extremity  defcends  from  the  hill,  where,  according  to  the 
cuftom  of  thofe  princes,  he  furveyed  the  battle.  Obferve 
how  this  critical  event  is  wrought  up  by  the  poet.  "  Wide 
"  fpreading  over  echoing  Lubar,  the  flight  of  Bolga  is 
"  rolled  along.  Fillan  hung  forward  on  their  fteps ;  and 
"  flrewed  the  heath  with  dead.     Fingal  rejoiced  over  his 

"  fon. Blue-fliielded  Cathmor  rofe. Son  of  Alpin, 

"  bring  the  harp  !  Give  Fillan's  praife  to  the  wind  ;  raife 
'•  high  his  praife  in  my  hall,  while  yet  he  fnines  in  war. 
"  Leave,  blue-eyed  Clatho  !  leave  thy  hall !  behold  that 
"  early  beam  of  thine!  The  hoft  is  withered  in  its  courfe. 

"  No  farther  look it  is  dark — light-trembling  from 

"  the  harp,  ftrike,  virgins  !  ftrike  the  found."  The  fud- 
den  interruption,  and  fufpenfe  of  the  narration  on  Cath- 
mor's  rifing  from  his  hill,  the  abrupt  burfting  into  the 
praife  of  Fillan,  and  the  pafllonatc  apoi'lrophe  to  his  mo- 
ther Clatho,  are  admirable  efforts  of  poetical  art,  in  order 
to  intereft  us  in  Fillan's  danger  ;  and  the  whole  is  height- 
ened by  the  immediately  following  fnnile,  one  of  the  moft 
magnificent  and  fublime  that  is  to  be  met  with  in  any  poet, 
and  which,  if  it  had  been  found  in  Homer,  would  have 
been  the  frequent  fubjeft  of  admiration  to  critics :  '*  Fillan 
"  is  like  a  fpirit  of  heaven,  that  defcends  from  the  fkirt 
**  of  his  blafl.     The  troubled  ocean  feels  his  Ueps,  as  he 

•-•  fi  rides 


4^4     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  Glides  from  wave  to  wave.     His  path  kindles  behind 
"  liim ;  iflands  (liake  their  heads  on  the  heaving  feas." 

But  the  poet's  art  is  not  yet  exhaufted.  The  fall  of 
this  noble  young  warrior,  or,  in  Offian's  Ityle,  the  extinc- 
tion of  this  beam  of  heaven,  could  not  be  rendered  too 
interefting  and  affecling.  Our  attention  is  naturally  drawn 
towards  Fingal.  He  beholds  from  his  hill  the  rifmg  of 
CaLhmor,  and  the  danger  of  his  fon.  But  what  lliall  he 
do  ?  "  Shall  Fingal  rife  to  his  aid.  and  take  the  fword  of 
"  Luno  ?  What  then  fhould  become  of  thy  fame,  fon  of 
'"  white-bofomed  Clatho  ?  Turn  not  thine  eyes  from  Fin- 
"  gal,  daughter  of  Iniftore  !  I  fhall  not  quench  thy  early 
"  beam. — No  cloud  of  mine  Ihall  rife,  my  fon,  upon  thy 
"  foul  of  fire."  StruggUng  between  concern  for  the  fame, 
and  fear  for  the  fafety  of  his  fon,  he  withdrav/s  from  the 
fight  of  the  engagement ;  and  difpatches  Oliian  in  hafle  to 
the  field,  Vvdth  this  affeccion?.te  and  delicate  injunction. 
"  Father  of  Ofcar !"  addreffing  him  by  a  title  which  on 
this  occafion  has  the  highcft  propriety,  "  Father  of  Ofcar! 
"  lift  the  fpear ;  defend  the  young  in  arms.  But  conceal 
'^^  thy  fteps  from  Fillan's  eyes :  He  muft  not  know  that  I 
"  doubt  his  fleel."  OfTian  arrived  too  late.  But  unwilling 
to  defcribeFillan  vanquiflied,  the  poet  fupprefies  all  the  cir- 
cumllances  of  the  combat  with  Cathmor  ;  and  only  fhev.s 
us  the  dying  hero.  We  fee  him  animated  to  the  end  with 
the  fame  martial  and  ardent  fpirit ;  breathing  his  lad  in 
l^itter  regret  for  being  fo  earlv  cut  off  from  the  field  of 
glorv.  "  Offian,  lay  me  in  that  hollow  rock.  Raife  no 
*'  done  above  me  ;  left  one  Ihould  afk  about  my  fame.  I 
'•  am  fallen  in  the  firfl:  of  my  fields ;  fallen  v/ithout  renown. 
"  Let  thy  voice,  alone,  fend  joy  to  my  flying  foul.  Why 
"  Ihould  the  bard  know  where  dwells  the  early-fallen  Fil- 
"  Ian  ?"  He  who,  after  tracing  the  circumllances  of  this 
dory,  fliall  deny  that  our  bard  is  poffeffed  of  high  fenti- 
ment  and  high  art,  mufc  be  llrangely  prejudiced  indeed. 
Let  him  read  the  fiery  of  Pallas  in  Virgil,  which  is  of  a 
fimilar  kind  ;  and,  after  all  the  praife  he  may  jufl;ly  be- 
■ftow  on  the  elegant  and  finifhcd  delbriptlon  of  that  amiable 
author,  let  him  fay,  which  of  the  two  poets  unfold  mofjt 
of  the  human  foul.     I  v/ave  infifting  on  any  more  of  the 

parti- 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  465 

ticulars  In  Temora  ;  as  my  aim  is  rather  to  lead  the  rea- 
der into  the  genius  and  fpirit  of  Offian's  poetry,  than  to 
dwell  on  all  his  beauties. 

The  judgment  and  art  difcovered  in  conducing  works 
of  fuch  length  as  Fingal  and  Temora,  diilinguiih  them 
from  the  other  poems  ia  this  colledtion.  The  fmaller  pie- 
ces, however,  contain-  particular  beauties  no  lefs  eminent. 
They  are  hiftorical  poems,  generally  of  the  elegiac  kind  ; 
and  plainly  difcover  themfelves  to  be  the  work  ot  the  fame 
author.  One  conliflent  face  of  manners  is  every  where 
prefented  to  us  ;  one  Ipirit  of  poetry  reigns  ;  the  mallerly 
hand  of  Ofllan  appears  throughout  ;  the  i'ame  rapid  and 
animated  flyle  ;  the  fame  flrong  colouring  of  imaginati- 
on, and  the  fame  glowing  fenfibllity  of  heart.  Befides  the 
unity  which  belongs  to  the  compofitions  of  one  man,  there 
is  moreover  a  certain  unity  of  fubjeft,  which  very  happily 
connects  all  thefe  poems.  They  form  the  poetical  hiilory 
of  the  age  of  Fingal.  The  fame  race  of  heroes,  whom  we 
had  met  with  in  the  greater  poems,  CuthuUin,  Ofcar, 
Connal,  and  Gaul,  return  again  upon  the  ftage  ;  and  Fin- 
gal himfelf  is  always  the  principal  tigure,  prefented  on  eve- 
ry occafion,  with  equal  magnificence,  nay,  rifmg  upon  us 
to  the  laft.  The  clrcumfliances  of  Offian's  old  age  and 
blindnefs,  his  furviving  all  his  friends,  and  his  relating 
their  great  exploits  to  Malvina,  the  fpoufe  or  miftrefs  of 
his  beloved  fon  Ofcar,  furniih  the  fineft  poetical  fituations 
that  fancy  could  devife,  for  that  tender  pathetic  which 
reigns  in  Offian's  poetry. 

On  each  of  thefe  poems,  there  might  be  room  for  fepa- 
rate  obfervations,  with  regard  to  the  condud:  and  difpofi- 
tion  of  the  incidents,  as  well  as  to  the  beauty  of  the  de- 
fcriptions  and'fentiments.  Carthon  is  a  regular  and  high- 
ly-finiffied  piece.  The  main  flory  is  very  properly  intro- 
duced by  Clefsammor's  relation  of  the  adventure  of  hi* 
youth  ;  and  this  introduction  is  finely  heightened  by  Fin- 
gal's  fong  of  mourning  over  Moina  ;  in  which  Ofiian, 
ever  fond  of  doing  honour  to  his  father,  has  contrived  to 
diltinguiffi  him,  for  being  an  eminent  poet,  as  v/ell  as  war- 
rior. Fingal's  fong  upon  this  occafion,  when  *'' his  thou- 
"  land  bards  leaned  forward  from  their  feats,  to  hear  the 
N  n  n  "  voice 


466    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  voice  of  the  king,'*  is  inferior  to  no  paffage  in  the  whole 
book-;  and  with  great  judgment  put  in  his  mouth,  as  the 
ferioufnefs,  no  lefs  than  the  fublimlty  of  the  flrain,  is  pe- 
culiarly fuited  to  the  hero's  character.  In  Darthula,  are 
aiTenibled  almoil  all  the  tender  images  that  can  touch  the 
heart  of  man ;  friendlhip,  love,  the  affections  of  parents, 
fons,  and  brothers,  the  diftrefs  of  the  aged,  and  the  un- 
availing bravery  of  the  young.  The  beautiful  addrefs  to 
the  moon,  with  which  the  poem  opens,  and  the  tranfition 
from  thence  to  the  fubjeO:,  moft  happily  prepare  the  mind 
for  that  train  of  affefting  events  that  is  to  follow.  The 
ilory  is  regular,  dramatic,  interelling  to  the  laft.  He  who 
can  read  it  without  emotion,  may  congratulate  himfelf,  if 
he  pleales,  upon  being  completely  armed  againft  fympa- 
thetic  forrow.  As  Fingal  had  no  occafion  of  appearing  in 
the  aftion  of  this  poem,  Offian  makes  a  very  artful  tranfi- 
tion from  his  narration,  to  what  was  paffing  in  the  halls  of 
Selma.  The  found  heard  there  on  the  jflrings  of  his  harp, 
the  concern  v/hich  Fingal  fliows  on  hearing  it,  and  the  in- 
vocation of  the  ghofts  of  their  fathers,  to  receive  the  he- 
roes falHng  in  a  dillant  land  ;  are  introduced  with  great 
beauty  of  imagination,  to  increafe  the  folemnity,  and  to 
diverfify  the  fcenery  of  the  poem. 

Carric-thura  is  full  of  the  moft  fublime  dignity  ;  and 
has  this  advantage,  of  being  more  chearful  in  the  fubjeft, 
and  more  happy  in  the  cataftrophe,  than  moft  of  the  o- 
ther  poems  :  though  tempered  at  the  fame  time  with  epi- 
jbdes,  in  that  ftrain  of  tender  melancholy,  which  feems  to 
have  been  the  great  delight  of  OfTian  and  the  bards  of  his 
age,  Lathmon  is  peculiarly  diftinguiilied,  by  high  gene- 
rofity  of  fentiment.  This  is  carried  fo  far,  particularly  in 
the  refufal  of  Gaul,  on  one  fide,  to  take  the  advantage  of 
a  ileeping  foe  ;  and  of  Lathmon,  on  the  other,  to  over- 
power by  numbers  the  tv/o  young  warriors,  as  to  recall 
into  one's  mind  the  manners  of  chivalry  ;  fome  refem- 
blance  to  which  may  perhaps  be  fuggefted  by  other  inci- 
dents in  this  colledion  of  poems.  Chivalry,  however, 
took  rife  in  an  age  and  country  too  remote  from  thofe  of 
Ollian,  to  admit  the  fufpicion  that  the  one  could  have  bor- 
rowed any  thing  from  the  other.     So  far  as  chivalry  had 

any 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         467 

any  real  exiftence,  the  fame  military  enthufiafm,  which 
gave  birth  to  it  in  the  feudal  times,  might,  in  the  days  ot 
Offian,  that  is,  in  the  infancy  of  a  rifing  (late,  through  the 
operation  of  the  fame  caufe,  very  naturally  produj:e  effeai 
of  the  fame  kind  on  the  minds  and  manners  of  men.  So 
far  as  chivalry  was  an  ideal  fyftem,  exifling  only  in  ro* 
mance,  it  will  not  be  thought  furprizing,  when  we  reflect 
on  the  account  before  given  of  the  Celtic  bards,  that  this 
imaginary  refinement  of  heroic  manners  Ihould  be  found 
among  them,  as  much,  at  leaft,  as  among  the  Trobadorcs^ 
or  drolling  Provencal  bards,  in  the  tenth  or  eleventh  cen- 
tury ;  whofe  fongs,  it  is  faid,  firft  gave  rife  to  thofc  roman- 
tic ideas  of  heroifm,  which  for  fo  long  a  time  enchanted 
Europe*.  Offian's  heroes  have  all  the  gallantry  and  gene- 
rofity  of  thofe  faoulous  knights,  without  their  extrava- 
gance ;  and  his  love-fcenes  have  native  tendernefs,  with- 
out any 'mixture  of  thofe  forced  and  unnatural  conceits 
which  abound  in  the  old  romances.  The  adventures  re- 
lated by  our  poet  which  refemble  the  mod:  thofe  of  ro- 
mance, concern  women  who  follow  their  lovers  to  war, 
difguifed  in  the  armour  of  men ;  and  thefe  are  fo  manag- 
ed as  to  produce,  in  the  difcovery,  feveral  of  the  moll  in- 
terefting  fituations  ;  one  beautiful  inftance  of  which  may 
be  feen  in  Carric-thura,  and  another  in  Calthon  and  Col- 
mal. 

OiTHON  A  prefents  a  fituation  of  a  different  nature.  In 
the  abfence  of  her  lover  Gaul,  ihe  had  been  carried  oft 
and  raviflied  by  Dunrommath.  Gaul  difcovers  the  place 
where  Ihe  is  kept  concealed,  and  comes  to  revenge  her. 
The  meeting  of  the  two  lovers,  the  fentiments  and  the 
behaviour  of  Oithona  on  that  occafion,  are  defcribed  with 
fuch  tender  and  exquifite  propriety,  as  does  the  greateft 
honour,  both  to  the  art  and  to  the  delicacy  of  our  author  ; 
and  would  have  been  admired  in  any  poet  of  the  moft  re- 
fined age.  The  conduct  of  Croma  muft  flrike  every  rea- 
der as  remarkablv  judicious  and  beautiful.  We  are  to  be 
prepared  for  the  death  of  Malvina,  which  is  related  in  the 
fucceeding  poem.  She  is  therefore  introduced  in  perfon  ; 
"  file  has  heard  a  voice  in  a  dream  ;  fiie  feels  the  fiutter- 

"  ing; 

*  Vid.  Huetius  dc  originc  iiibalavam  RomanenCwm, 


4^8     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  ing  of  her  foul ;"  and,  in  a  moil  moving  lamentation 
addrefled  to  her  beloved  Ofcar,  flie  fmgs  her  ovi^n  death- 
fong.  Nothing  could  be  calculated  with  more  art  to  footh 
and  comfort  her,  than  the  (lory  which  OfTian  relates.  In 
the  young  and  brave  Fovargormo,  another  Ofcar  is  intro- 
duced ;  his  praifes  are  fung  ;  and  the  happinefs  is  fet  be- 
fore her,  of  thofe  who  die  in  their  youth,  "  when  their 
"  renown  is  around  them  ;  before  the  feeble  behold  them 
"  in  the  hall,  and  fmile  at  their  trembling  hands." 

But  no-where  does  OlTian's  genius  appear  to  greater 
advantage,  than  in  Berrathon,  which  is  reckoned  the 
conclufion  of  his  fongs,  "  The  lad  found  of  the  Voice 
"  of  Cona." 

Qualis  olor  noto  politurus  littore  vitam, 
Ingemit,  et  msellis  mulcens  concentibus  auras 
Prasfago  queritur  venientia  funera  cantu. 

The  whole  train  of  ideas  is  admirably  fuited  to  the  fub- 
jeft.  Every  thing  is  full  of  that  invihble  world,  into  which 
the  aged  Bard  believes  himfelf  now  ready  to  enter.  The 
airy  hall  of  Fingal  prefents  itfelf  to  his  view ;  "  he  fees 
*'  the  cloud  that  fhall  receive  his  ghoft  ;  he  beholds  the 
*'  mid  that  fiiall  form  his  robe  when  he  appears  on  his 
"  hill  ;"  and  all  the  natural  objefts  around  him  feem  to 
carry  the  prefages  of  death.  "  The  thiflle  fhakes  its  beard 
"  to  the  wind.  The  flower  hangs  its  heavy  head  ;  it 
"  feems  to  iliy,  I  am  covered  with  the  drops  of  heaven  j 
"  the  time  of  my  departure  is  near,  and  the  blaft  that 
"  fliall  fcatter  my  leaves."  Malvina's  death  is  hinted  to 
him  in  the  mod:  delicate  manner  by  the  fon  of  Alpin.  His 
lamentarion  over  her,  her  apotheofis,  or  aicent  to  the  ha- 
bitation of  heroes,  and  the  introdudion  to  the  ftory  which 
follows  from  the  mention  which  Offian  fuppofes  the  father 
of  Malvina  to  make  of  him  in  the  hall  of  Fingal,  are  all 
in  the  highefi;  fpirit  of  poetry.  "  And  doft  thou  remem- 
''-  ber  Offian,  O  Tofcar,  fon  of  Conloch  ?  The  battles  of 
"  our  youth  were  many  ;  our  fwords  went  together  to  the 
"  held."  Nothing  could  be  more  proper  than  to  end  his 
fongs  with  recording  an  exploit  ^f  the  father  of  that  Mal- 
vina, of  whom  his  heart  was  now  fo  full ;  and  who,  from 
'       '  ■  M\ 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN,  4% 

firft  to  laft,  had  been  fuch  a  favourite  objccl  throughout 
all  his  poems. 

The  fcene  of  mod  of  OfTian's  poems  is  hiid  in  Scotland, 
or  in  the  coafl  of  Ireland  oppofite  to  the  territories  of  Fln- 
gal.  When  the  fcene  is  in  Ireland,  we  perceive  no  change 
of  manners  from  thofe  of  Oflian's  native  country.  For  as 
Ireland  was  undoubtedly  peopled  with  Celtic  tribes,  the 
language,  cuftoms,  and  religion  of  both  nations  were  the 
fame.  They  had  been  feparated  from  one  another  by  mi- 
gration, only  a  few  generations,  as  it  flrould  feem,  before 
our  poet's  age  ;  and  they  (till  maintained  a  clofe  and  fie- 
quent  intercourfe.  But  when  the  poet  relates  the  expedi- 
tions of  any  of  his  heroes  to  the  Scandinavian  coaft,  or  to 
the  iflands  of  Orkney,  which  were  then  part  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian territory,  as  he  does  in  Carric-thura,  Sul-malla 
of  Lumon,  and  Cath-loda,  the  cafe  is  quite  altered.  Thofe 
countries  were  inhabited  by  nations  of  the  Teutonic  de- 
fcent,  who  in  their  manners  and  religious  rites  difiered 
widely  from  the  Celta: ;  and  it  is  curious  and  remarkable, 
to  find  this  difference  clearly  pointed  out  in  the  poems  of 
Offian.  His  defcriptions  bear  the  native  marks  of  one  who 
was  prefent  in  the  expeditions  which  he  relates,  and  who 
defcribes  what  he  had  feen  with  his  own  eyes.  No  fooner 
are  we  carried  to  Lochlin,  or  the  iilands  of  Iniilore,  than 
we  perceive  that  we  are  in  a  foreign  region.  New  objefts  be- 
gin to  appear.  We  meet  every  where  with  the  ftones  and 
circles  of  Loda,  that  is,  Odin,  the  great  Scandinavian 
deity.  We  meet  with  the  divinations  and  inchantments, 
for  which  it  is  well  known  thofe  northern  nations  were 
early  famous.  "  There,  mixed  with  the  murmur  of  wa- 
"  ters,  rofe  the  voice  of  aged  men,  who  called  the  forms 
"  of  night  to  aid  them  in  their  war  ;"  whlhl  the  Caledo- 
nian chiefs  who  affifted  them,  are  defcribed  as  (landing  at 
a  diftance,  heedlcfs  of  their  rites.  That  ferocity  of  man- 
ners which  diitinguifned  thofe  nations,  alfo  becomes  con- 
fpicuous.  In  the  combats  of  their  chiefs  there  is  a  pecu- 
liar favagenefs  ;  even  their  wornen  are  bloody  and  fierce. 
The  fpirit,  and  the  very  ideas  of  Regner  Lodbrog,  that 
northern  fcalder  whom  I  formerly  quoted,  occur  to  us 
again.  "  The  hawks,"  Offian  makes  one  of  the  Scandi- 
navian 


470     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

navian  chiefs  fay,  *'  ruih  from  all  their  winds  ;  they  are 
"  wgnt  to  trace  my  courfe.  We  rejoiced  three  days  above 
*'  the  dead,  and  called  the  hawks  of  heaven.  They  came 
"  from  all  their  winds,  to  feafl  on  the  foes  of  Annir." 

Dismissing  now  the  feparate  confideration  of  any  of 
our  author's  works,  I  proceed  to  make  fome  obfervations 
on  his  manner  of  writing,  under  the  general  heads  of  De~ 
fcription.  Imagery,  and  Sentiment. 

A  POET  of  original  genius  is  always  diflinguifhed  by  his 
talent  for  defcriptioii  *.  A  fecond-rate  Vv'riter  difcerns  no- 
thing new  or  peculiar  in  the  objed  he  means  to  defcribe. 
His  conceptions  of  it  are  vague  and  loofe ;  his  exprellions 
feeble ;  and  of  courfe  the  objed  is  prefented  to  us  indif- 
tindcly  and  as  through  a  cloud.  But  a  true  poet  makes  us 
imagine  that  we  lee  it  before  our  eyes :  he  catches  the  dif- 
tinguifliing  features  ;  he  gives  it  the  colours  of  life  and 
reality ;  he  places  it  in  fuch  a  light  that  a  painter  could 
copy  after  him.  This  happy  talent  is  chiefly  owing  to  a 
lively  imagination,  v/hich  lirft  receives  a  ftrong  impreffion 
of  the  objeft ;  and  then,  by  a  proper  lelecdon  of  capital 
picturefque  circumftances  employed  iii  defcribing  it,  tranf- 
mits  that  impreiiion  in  its  full  force  to  the  imaginations  of 
others.  That  OiTian  poffefles  this  defcriptive  power  in  a 
high  degree,  we  have  a  clear  proof  from  the  effefl:  vt^hich 
his  defcriptions  produce  upon  the  imaginations  of  thofe 
who  read  him  with  any  degree  of  attention  and  tade.  Few 
poets  are  more  interefting.  We  contract  an  intimate  ac- 
quaintance with  his  principal  heroes.  The  characters,  the 
manners,  the  face  of  the  country  become  familiar ;  we 
even  think  we  could  draw  the  figure  of  his  ghofts  :  In  a 
word,  whilft  reading  him,  we  are  tranfported  as  into  a  new 
region,  and  dwell  among  his  objects  as  if  they  were  all 
reai. 

It  were  eafy  to  point  out  feveral  inftances  of  exquifite 
painting  in  the  works  of  our  author.  Such,  for  inftance, 
as  the  fcenery  with  which  Temora  opens,  and  the  attitude 
Cairbar  is  there  prefented  to  us  ;  the  defcription  of  the 
young  ?:.rince  Cormac,  in  the  fame  book ;  and  the  ruins 

of 

*  See  the  rules  of  poetical  defcription  excellently  illufirated  by  Lord  Kaims,  in 
his  Elements  of  Criticifm,  vol,  iii.  chap.  21,  Of  narration  and  defcription. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         471 

of  Balclutha  in  Carthon.  "  I  have  feen  the  walls  of  Bal- 
"  clutha,  but  they  were  defolate.  The  fire  had  refounded 
"  in  the  halls  ;  and  the  voice  of  the  people  is  heard  on 
"  more.  The  flream  of  Clutha  was  removed  from  its 
"  place  by  the  fall  of  the  walls.  The  thiPcle  fliook  there 
"  its  lonely  head  :  The  mofs  whiftled  to  the  wind.  The 
"  fox  looked  out  from  the  windows  ;  the  rank  grafs  of 
*'^  the  wall  waved  round  his  head.  Defolate  is  the  dweil- 
"  ing  of  Moina  ;  filence  is  in  the  houfe  of  her  fathers." 
Nothing  alfo  can  be  more  natural  and  lively  than  the  man- 
ner in  which  Carthon  afterwards  defcribes  how  the  con- 
flagration of  this  city  affected  him  when  a  child  :  "  Have 
"  i  not  feen  the  fallen  Balclutha  ?  And  fhall  I  feaft  with 
"  Comhal's  fon?  Comhal!  who  threw  his  fire  in  the  midlt 
"  of  my  father's  hall  !  I  was  young,  and  knew  not  the 
"  caufe  why  the  virgins  wept.  The  columns  of  fmoke 
"  pleafcd  mine  eye,  when  they  rofe  above  my  walls  :  I 
"  often  looked  back  with  gladnefs,  when  my  friends  fled 
"  above  the  hill.  But  when  the  years  of  my  youth  came 
"  on,  I  beheld  the  mofs  of  my  fallen  walls.  My  figh 
*'  arofe  with  the  morning  ;  and  my  tears  defcended  with 
*'  night.  Shall  I  not  fight,  I  faid  to  my  foul,  againfl  the 
"  children  of  my  foes  ?  And  I  will  fight,  O  bard  !  I  feel 
"  the  itrength  of  my  foul."  In  the  fame  poem,  the  af- 
fembling  of  the  chiefs  round  Fingal,  who  had  been  warn- 
ed of  fome  impending  danger  by  the  appearance  of  a  pro- 
digy, is  defcribed  with  fo  many  pifturefque  circumftances, 
that  one  imagines  himfelf  prefent  in  the  aflembly.  "  The 
"  king  alone  beheld  the  terrible  fight,  and  he  forefav/  the 
"  death  of  his  people.  He  came  in  filence  to  his  hall, 
"  and  took  his  father's  fpear  ;  the  mail  rattled  on  his 
"  breafl:.  The  heroes  rofe  around.  They  looked  in  fi- 
"  lence  on  each  other,  marking  the  eyes  of  Fingal.  They 
"  faw  the  battle  in  his  face.  A  thoufand  fhields  are  pla- 
*'  ced  at  once  on  their  arms ;  and  they  drew  a  thoufand 
"  fwords.  Ihe  hall  of  Selma  brightened  around.  The 
"  clang  of  arms  afcends.  The  grey  dogs  howl  in  their 
*'  place.  No  word  is  among  the  mighty  chiefs;.  Each 
"  marked  the  eyes  of  the  king ;  and  half-alTumed  his 
•'  fpear." 

It 


472     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

It  h?cS  been  obje£led  to  Offian,  that  his  defcriptions  of 
military  actions  are  imperfeft,  and  much  lefs  diverfified 
by  circumftances  than  thofe  of  Homer.  This  is  in  fome 
meafure  true.  The  amazing  fertiHty  of  Homer's  inven- 
tion is  no  where  fo  much  difplayed  as  in  the  incidents 
of  his  battles,  and  in  the  little  hiftory  pieces  he  gives 
of  the  perfons  llain.  Nor  indeed,  with  regard  to  the  ta- 
lent of  defcription,  can  too  much  be  faid  in  praife  of  Ho- 
mer. Every  thing  is  alive  in  his  writings.  The  colours 
with  which  he  paints  are  thofe  of  nature.  But  Offian's  ge- 
nius was  of  a  different  kind  from  Homer's.  It  led  him 
to  hurry  towards  grand  objeds,  rather  than  to  amufe  him- 
felf  with  particulars  of  lefs  importance.  He  could  dwell 
on  the  death  of  a  favourite  hero  ;  but  that  of  a  private 
man  feldom  (lopped  his  rapid  courfe.  Homer's  genius  was 
more  comprehenfive  than  Offian's.  It  included  a  wider 
circle  of  objeds  ;  and  could  work  up  any  incident  into 
defcription.  Offian's  was  more  limited  ;  but  the  region 
within  which  it  chiefly  exerted  itfelf  was  the  higheft  of  all, 
the  region  of  the  pathetic  and  fublime. 

We  muft  not  imagine,  however,  that  Offian's  battles 
confift  only  of  general  indiftinft  defcription.  Such  beau- 
tiful incidents  are  fom.etimes  introduced,  and  the  circum- 
ftances  of  the  perfons  flain  fo  much  diverfified,  as  ffiew  that 
he  could  have  embelliflisd  his  military  fcenes  with  an  a- 
bundant  variety  of  particulars,  if  his  genius  had  led  him 
to  dwell  upon  them.  One  man  "  is  ftretched  in  the  duft: 
"  of  his  native  land  ;  he  fell,  where  often  he  had  fpread 
'•  the  feaft,  and  often  raifed  the  voice  of  the  harp."  The 
maid  of  Iniftore  is  introduced,  in  a  moving  apoftrophe, 
as  weeping  for  another;  "  and  a  third,  as  rolled  in  the 
'•  dull  he  lifted  his  faint  eyes  to  the  king,"  is  remember- 
ed and  mourned  by  Fingal  as  the  friend  of  Agandecca.  The 
blood  pouring  from  the  wound  of  one  who  is  flain  by 
night,  is  heard  "  hiffing  on  the  half-extinguiflied  oak,'* 
which  had  been  kindled  for  giving  Hght :  Another,  climb- 
ing a  tree  to  efcape  from  his  foe,  is  pierced  by  his  fpear 
from  behind  ;  "  fiirieking,  panting  he  fell ;  whilft  mofs 
'•  and  withered  branches  purfue  his  fall,  and  ffrew  the 
'•  blue  arms  of  Gaul."     Never  was  a  finer  pidure  drawn 

of 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.        473 

of  the  ardour  of  two  youthful  warriors  than  the  follow- 
ing :  "  I  faw  Gaul  in  his  armour,  and  my  foul  was 
*'  mixed  with  his :  For  the  fire  of  the  battle  was  in  his 
"  eyesi  he  looked  to  the  foe  with  joy.  We  fpoke  the  words 
"  of  friendfhip  in  lecretj  and  the  lightning  of  our 
"  fwords  poured  together.  We  drev/  them  behind  the 
"  wood,  and  tried  the  ftrength  of  our  arms  on  the  emp- 
"  ty  air." 

OssiAN  is  always  concife  in  his  defcriptions,  which 
adds  much  to  their  beauty  and  force.  For  it  is  a  great 
rniilake  to  imagine,  that  a  croud  of  particulars,  or  a 
very  full  and  extended  ftyle,  is  of  advantage  to  deicrif.-- 
tion.  On  the  contrary,  fuch  a  diffufe  manner  for  the 
moit  part  weakens  it.  Any  one  redundant  circumftancs 
is  a  nuifance.  k  encumbers  and  loads  the  fancy,  and 
renders  the  main  image  indiftind.  '*^  Obftat,"  as  Quin- 
tilian  fays  with  regard  to  ftyle,  "  quicquid  non  adjuvat." 
To  be  concife  in  defcription,  is  one  thing;  and  to  be 
general,  is  another.  No  defcription  that  refts  in  gene- 
rals can  pofTibly  be  good  ;  it  can  convey  no  lively  idea  ; 
for  it  is  of  particulars  only  that  we  have  a  diftintt  con- 
ception. But,  at  the  fame  time,  no  ftrong  imagination 
dwells  long  upon  any  one  particular  ;  or  heaps  together  a 
mafs  of  trivial  ones.  By  the  happy  choice  of  fome  one, 
or  of  a  few  that  are  the  moft  ftriking,  it  prefents  the 
image  more  complete,  fhews  us  more  at  one  glance,  than 
a  feeble  imagination  is  able  to  do,  by  turning  its  obie<5t 
round  and  round  into  a  variety  of  lights.  Tacitus  is  of 
all  profe  writers  the  moft  concife.  He  has  even  a  degree 
of  abruptnefs  refembling  our  author  :  Yet  no  v/riter  is 
more  eminent  for  lively  defcription.  When  Fingal,  af- 
ter having  conquered  the  haughty  Swaran,  propofcs  to 
difmifs  him  with  honour  :  "  Raife  to-morrow  thy  Vv'hite 
"  fails  to  the  wind,  thou  brother  of  Agandecca  !"  he 
conveys,  by  thus  addrefllng  his  enemy,  a  ftronger  im- 
preflion  of  the  emotions  then  pafling  within  his  mind, 
than  if  whole  paragraphs  had  been  fpent  in  defcribing 
the  conflict  between  relentment  againll  Swaran  and  the 
tender  remembrance  of  his  ancient  love.  No  amplifi- 
cation is  needed  to  give  us  the  moft  full  idea  of  a  hardy 
O  o  o  veteran. 


474     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

veteraiij  after  the  following  words  :  "  His  lliield  is  mark- 
"  ed  with  the  drokes  of  battle;  his  red  eye  defpifes 
"  danger."  When  Ofcar,  left  alonCj  was  furroiinded 
by  foes,  ''  he  flood,"  it  is  faid,  "  growing  in  his  place, 
**  like  the  flood  of  the  narrow  vale  ;"  a  happy  reprefen- 
tation  of  one,  Avho,  by  daring  intrepidity  in  the  midft 
of  danger,  feems  to  increafe  in  his  appearance,  and  be- 
comes more  formidable  every  moment,  like  the  fudden 
rifing  of  the  torrent  hemm.ed  in  by  the  valley.  And  a 
whole  croud  of  ideas,  concerning  the  circumftances  of 
domeftic  forrow  occafioned  by  a  young  warrior's  firft  go- 
ing forth  to  battle,  is  poured  upon  the  mind  by  thefe 
words  :  *'  Calmar  leaned  on  his  father's  fpear  ;  that  fpear 
"  which  he  brought  from  Lara's  hall,  when  the  foul  of 
"  his  mother  was  fad." 

The  concifenefs  of  OITian's  defcriptions  is  the  more 
proper  on  account  of  his  fubjedts.  Defcriptions  of  gay 
and  fmiling  fcenes  m.ay,  without  any  difadvantage,  be 
amplified  and  prolonged.  Force  is  not  the  predominant 
quality  expelled  in  thefe.  The  defcription  may  be 
weakened  by  being  difFufe,  yet  notwitliftanding,  may  be 
beautiful  fcill.  Whereas,  with  refpcft  to  grand,  folemn 
and  pathetic  fubjefts,  which  are  Offian's  chief  field,  the 
cafe  is  very  different.  In  thefe,  energy  is  above  all 
things  required.  The  imagination  mull  be  feized  at 
once,  or  not  at  all ;  and  it  is  far  more  deeply  impreffed 
by  one  ftrong  and  ardent  image,  than  by  the  anxious 
minutenefs  of  laboured  illiiftration. 

But  Offian's  genius,  though  chiefly  turned  towards 
the  fubliine  and  pathetic,  was  not  confined  to  it :  In 
fubje^h  alio  of  grace  and  delicacy,  he  difcovers  the 
hand  of  a  mailer.  Take  for  an  example  the  following  ele- 
gant defcription  of  Agandecca,  wherein  the  tendernefs 
of  Tibullus  feems  united  with  the  majefty  of  Virgil. 
*^  The  daughter  of  the  fnow  overheard,  and  left  the  hall 
**  of  her  fecret  figh.  She  cam.e  in  ail  her  beauty;  like 
"  the  moon  from  the  cloud  of  the  Eaft.  Lovelinefs 
"  was  around  her  as  light.  Her  fteps  w.erelike  the  mu- 
"  fic  of  fongs.  She  faw  the  youth,  and  loved  him.  He 
*'  was  the  ilolen  figh  of  her  foul.     Her  blue  eyes  rolled 

*'  on 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  475 

*'  on  him  in  f-;cret;  and  (he  bicfl  the  chief  of  Morvcn." 
Several  other  inftanccs  might  be  produced  of  the  feel- 
ings of  love  and  friendfliip,  painted  by  our  author  with  a 
nioft  natural  and  liappy  delicacy. 

The  fimplicity  of  Offian's  manner  adds  great  beauty 
to  his  defcripticns,  and  indeed  to  his  whole  poetry.  We 
meet  with  no  affe<5ted  ornaments  ;  no  forced  refinement  i 
no  marks  either  in  ftyle  or  thought  of  a  ftudied  endea- 
vour to  fliine  and  fparkle.  Offian  appears  every  where 
prompted  by  his  feelings  ;  and  to  fpeak  from  the  abun- 
dance of  his  heart.  I  rem.ember  no  more  than  one  in- 
ftance  of  what  can  be  called  quaint  thought  in  this  whole 
colleftion  of  his  works.  It  is  in  the  firft  book  of  Fin- 
gal,  where  from  the  tombs  of  two  lovers  two  lonely  yews 
are  mentioned  to  have  fprung,  "  whofe  branches  v/ilhed 
"  to  meet  on  high."  This  fympathy  of  the  trees  with 
the  lover?,  may  be  reckoneci  to  border  on  an  Italian  con- 
ceit; and  it  is  fomewhat  curious  to  find  this  fingle  in- 
(lance  of  that  fort  of  wit  in  our  Celtic  poetry. 

The  "joy  of  grief,"  is  one  of  OfTjan's  remarkable  ex- 
prefTions,  feveral  times  repeated.  If  any  one  fhall  think 
that  it  needs  to  be  jultined  by  a  precedent,  lie  may  find 
it  twice  ufed  by  Homer;  in  the  fliatt,  when  Achilles  is 
vifited  by  the  ghoft  of  Patrockis;  and  in  the  OdyiTey, 
when  UlyfTes  meets" his  mother  in  the  fiiades.  On  botli 
thefe  oocafions,  the  heroes,  melted  with  tendernefs,  la- 
ment their  not  having  it  in  their  power  to  throw  their 
arms  around  tHe  ghoft,  ''  that  we  might,"  fay  they,  *'  in 
'■'  a  mutual  embrace,  enjoy  the  delight  of  grief." 

But  in  truth  theexpreffion  Hands  in  need  of  no  defence 
from  authority  ;  for  it  is  a  natural  andjuft  exprefiion  ; 
and  conveys  a  clear  idea  of  that  gratification,  which  a 
virtuous  heart  often  feels  in  the  indulgence  of  a  tender 
melancholy.  OlTian  makes  a  very  proper  diftinftion  be- 
tween this  gratification,  and  the  deftruftive  effeft  of  over- 
povv^ering  grief.  "  There  is  a  joy  in  grief,  when  peace 
"  dwells  in  the  breafts  of  the  iad.  But  forrow  waftes 
*'  the  mournful,  O  daughter  of  Tofcar,  and  their  days 

"  are 

*  Odyff.   11.  i2U.      Iliad.   23.  98. 


4/6      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

•^^  are  few,"  To  "  give  the  joy  of  grief,"  generally 
figaifies  to  raife  the  ftrain  of  foft  and  grave  mufic  ;  and 
finely  chara6lerifes  the  taftc  of  Offian's  age  and  country. 
In  tliofe  days,  when  the  fongs  of  bards  were  the  great 
delight  of  heroes,  the  tragic  mufe  was  held  in  chief  ho- 
nour ;  gallant  aftions,  and  virtuous  fuffcrings,  were  the 
chofen  theme;  preferably  to  that  light  and  trifling 
drain  of  poetry  and  inufic,  which  promotes  light  and 
trifling  manners,  and  fcrves  to  emafculate  the  mind. 
"  Strike  the  harp  in  my  hall,  "  faid  the  great  Fingal,  in 
the  midfi;  of  youth  and  vi6lory,  *'  Strike  the  harp  in  my 
"  hall,  and  let  Fingal  hear  the  fong.  Pleafant  is  the 
''joy  of  grief !  It  is  like  the  fliower  of  fpring,  when 
"  it  foftens  the  branch  of  the  oakj  and  the  young  leaf 
"  lifts  its  green  head.  Sing  on,  O  bards  !  To-mor- 
"  rov/  we   lift    the  fail." 

Personal  epithets  have  been  much  ufed  hy  all  the 
poets  of  the  moft  ancient  ages:  and  when  well  chofen, 
not  general  and  unmeaning,  they  contribute  not  a  lit- 
tle to  render  the  ftyle  defcriptive  and  animated.  Be- 
fides  epithets  founded  on  bodily  diflinftions,  a-kin 
to  many  of  Homer's,  we  find  in  Ollian  feveral  which 
are  remarkably  beautiful  and  poetical.  Such  as,  Ofcar 
of  the  future  fights,  Fingal  of  the  mildeft  look,  Carril 
of  other  times,  the  mildly-blufning  Everallin  ;  Bragela, 
the  lonely  fun-beam  of  Dunfcaich  ;  a  Culdee,  the  fon 
of  the  fccret  cell. 

But  of  all  the  ornaments  employed  in  defcriptive  po- 
etry, comparifons  or  firnilcs  are  the  moll  iplendid.  Thefe 
chiefly  form  what  is  called  the  imagery  of  a  poem  :  And 
as  they  abound  fo  mjuch  in  the  vvorks  of  Oilian,  and  are 
commonly  among  the  favourite  pailages  of  all  poets,  it 
may  be  expected  that  I  Ihould  be  fomewhat  particular  in 
my  remarks  upon  them. 

A  POETICAL  fimiiie  always  fuppofes  two  objects  brought 
together,  between  which  there  is  fome  near  relation  or 
connection  in  the  fancy.  "What  that  relation  ought  to 
he,  cannot  be  precifely  defined.  For  various,  almoft 
numberlefs,  arc  the  analogies  formed  among  objefts,  by 
a  fprightly  imagination.     The  relation  of  aftual  fimili- 

tude, 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         477 

tudc,  or  likenefs  of  appearance,  is  far  from  *being  the 
only  foundation  of  poetical  comparifon.  Sometinies  a 
refemblance  in  the  effed:  produced  by  two  objec'is,  is 
made  the  connecting  principle :  Sometimes  a  refem- 
blance in  one  diftinguifhing  property  or  circumftance. 
Very  often  two  objefts  are  brought  together  in  a  fimiie, 
though  they  refcmble  one  another^  ftridtly  Ipeaking,  in 
nothing,  only  becaule  tliey  raife  in  the  mind  a  train  of 
fimilar,  and  what  may  be  called,  concordant  ideas ;  fo 
that  the  remembrance  of  the  one,  when  recalled,  ferves 
to  quicken  andjieighten  the  impreffion  made  by  Che  other. 
Thus,  to  give  an  inllance  from  our  poet,  the  pleafure 
with  which  an  old  man  looks  back  on  the  exploits  of 
his  youth,  has  certainly  no  direft  refemblance  to  the 
beauty  of  a  fine  evenings  farther  than  that  both  agree 
in  producing  a  certain  calm,  placid  joy.  Yet  Offian 
has  founded  upon  this,  one  of  the  moli  beautiful  com- 
parifons  that  is  to  be  met  with  in  any  poet.  "  Wilt 
"  thou  not  liften,  fon  of  the  rock,  to  the  fong  of  Offian  ? 
''  My  foul  is  full  of  other  times >  the  joy  of  my  youth 
"  returns.  Thus  the  fun  appears  in  the  weft,  after  the 
''  fteps  of  his  brightnefs  have  moved  behind  a  fiiorm. 
"  The  green  hills  lift  their  dewy  heads.  The  blue 
"  ftreams  rejoice  in  the  vale.  The  aged  hero  comes 
"  forth  on  his  ftafFj  and  his  grey  hair  glitters  in  the 
''  beam."  Never  was  there  a  finer  group  of  objects.  It 
raifes  a  ftrong  conception  of  the  old  m.an's  joy  and 
elation  of  heart,  by  difplaying  a  Tcene,  v/hich  produces 
in  every  fpeftator,  a  correfponding  train  of  pleafing  emo- 
tions ;  the  declining  fun  looking  forth  in  his  brightnefs 
after  a  ftorm  ;  the  chearful  face  of  all  nature ;  and  the 
Hill  life  finely  animated  by  the  circumflance  of  the  aged 
hero,  with  his  llafF  and  his  grey  locks  -,  a  circum.ftance 
both  extremely  pidlurefque  in  itfelf,  and  peculiarly  fuited 
to  the  main  obje£l  of  the  comparifon.  Such  analogies 
and  affociations  of  ideas  as  thefe,  are  highly  pieafing  to 
the  fancy.  They  give  opportunity  for  introducing  many 
a  fine  poetical  picflure.  They  diverfify  the  fcene  i  they 
aggrandize  the  fubjeft;  they  keep  the  imiagination  av/ake 
and  fprightly.     For  as  the  judgment  is  principally  ex- 

ercifed 


478      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

ercifed  in  diftingiiiiliing  objefts,  and  remarking  the  dif- 
ferences among  thofe  which  feem  alike  j  fo  the  higheft 
amufement  of  the  imagination  is  to  trace  likenelTes  and 
agreements  among  thoft  which  feem  different. 

The  principal  rules  which  refpect  poetical  compari- 
fcns  are,  that  they  be  introduced  on  proper  occafions, 
when  the  mind  is  dilpofed  to  reliih  them ;  and  not  in  the 
midfl:  of  fome  fevere  and  agitating  paffion,  which  cannot 
admit  this  play  of  fancy ;  that  they  be  founded  on  a 
refemblance  neither  too  near  and  obvious,  fo  as  to  give 
little  amufement  to  the  invagination  in  tracing  it,  nor 
too  faint  and  remote,  fo  as  to  be  apprehended  with  dif- 
ficulty J  that  they  ferve  either  to  illuftrate  the  principal 
objed,  and  to  render  the  conception  of  it,  more  clear 
and  diftindj  or  at  leaft,  to  heighten  and  embellifh  it, 
by  a  fuitable  aflbciation  of  images  *. 

Every  country  has  a  fcenery  peculiar  to  itfelf  3  and 
the  imagery  of  a  good  poet  will  exhibit  it.  For  as  he 
copies  after  nature,  his  allufions  will  of  courl'e  be  taken 
from  thofe  objeds  which  he  fees  around  him,  and  which 
have  often  ftruck  his  fancy.  For  this  reafon,  in  order  to 
judge  of  the  propriety  of  poetical  imagery,  we  ought  to 
be,  in  fome  meafure,  acquaint-ed  with  the  natural  hiflory 
of  the  country  where  the  fcene  of  the  poem  is  laid.  The 
nitroduftion  of  foreign  im.ages  betrays  a  poet,  copying 
not  from  nature,  but  from  other  writers.  Hence  fo  ma- 
ny Lions,  and  Tygers,  and  Eagles,  and  Serpents,  which 
w'c  meet  with  in  the  fimiles  of  modern  poets  ;  as  if  thefe 
animals  had  acquired  fom.e  right  to  a  place  in  poetical 
comparifons  for  ever,  becaufe  employed  by  ancient  au- 
thors. 1  hey  employed  them  with  propriety,  as  obje6ts 
generally  known  in  their  country ;  but  they  are  abfurdly 
ulcd  for  illuilration  by  us,  who  know  them  only  at  fe- 
cond-hand,  or  by  defcription.  To  mofl  readers  of  mo- 
dern poetry,  it  were  more  to  the  purpofe  to  defcribe  Li- 
ons or  Tygers  by  fimiles  taken  from  men,  than  to  com- 
pare men  to  Lions.  OfTian  is  very  correfl  in  this  parti- 
cular. His  imagery  is,  without  exception,  copied  from 
that  face  of  nature,  which  he  faw  before  his  eves ;  and 

by 

*  See  Elements  of  Criticifra,  ch,  19.  vol.  j. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  479 

by  conieqiience  may  be  expefted  to  be  lively.  We  meet 
with  no  Grecian  or  Italian  Icenery  ;  but  with  the  mills, 
and  clouds,  and  Itorms  ol' a  northern  mountainous  region. 
No  poet  abounds  more  in  limiles  than  OiTian.  There 
are  in  this  collection  as  many,  at  leaft,  as  in  the  whole 
Iliad  and  Odyfiey  of  Homer.  I  am  indeed  inclined  to 
think,  that  the  works  of  both  poets  are  too  much  croud- 
ed  with  them.  Similes  are  fparkling  ornaments ;  and 
like  all  things  that  fparkle,  are  apt  to  dazzle  and  tire  us 
by  their  luftre.  But  if  OlTian's  fimiles  be  too  frequent, 
they  have  this  advantage  of  being  commonly  fhorter  than 
Homer's  i  they  interrupt  his  narration  lefs ;  he  jull  glan- 
ces afide  to  fome  refembling  obje6l,  and  inftantly  re- 
turns to  his  former  trad.  Homer's  fimiles  include  a  wi- 
der range  of  objefts.  But  in  return,  Ofllan's  are,  with- 
out exception,  taken  from  objefts  of  dignity,  which  can- 
not be  laid  for  ail  thofe  which  Homer  employs,.  The 
Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  Stars,  Clouds  and  Meteors, 
Lightning  and  Thunder,  Seas  and  Whales,  Rivers, 
Torrents,  Winds,  Ice,  Rain,  Snow,  Dews,  Mift,  Fire 
and  Smoke,  Trees  and  Forells,  Heath  and  Grafs  and 
Flowers,  Rocks  and  Mountains,  Mufic  and  Songs,  Light 
and  Darknefs,  Spirits  and  Ghofts ;  thefe  form  the  circle, 
within  which  Offian's  comparifons  generally  run.  Some, 
not  many,  are  taken  from  Birds  and  Beafl.s ;  as  Eagles, 
Sea  Fowl,  the  Florfe,  the  Deer,  and  the  Mountain  Bee  ; 
and  a  very  few  from  fuch  operations  of  art  as  were  then 
known.  Homer  has  diverlified  his  imagery  by  many 
more  allufions  to  the  animal  world;  to  Lions,  Bulls, 
Goats,  Herds  of  Cattle,  Serpents,  Infects ;  and  to  the 
various  occupations  of  rural  and  paftoral  life.  Offian's 
defect  in  this  article,  is  plainly  owing  to  the  defart,  un- 
cultivated ftate  of  his  country,  which  fuggefted  to  him 
few  images  beyond  natural  inanimate  cbjeds,  in  their 
rudeft  form.  The  birds  and  animals  of  the  country  were 
probably  not  numerous;  and  his  acquaintance  with  them 
was  flender,  as  they  were  little  fubje<5ted  to  the  ufes  of 
man. 

The   great  obje6tion  made  to  Ofiian's  imagery,  is  its 
uniformity,  and  the  too  frequent  repetition  of  the  iame 

compa- 


48o     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  ON 

comparifons.  In  a  work  ih  thick  fown  with  fimiles,  one 
could  not  but  expect  to  find  images  of  the  fame  kind 
fometimes  fuggefted  to  the  poet  by  refem.bling  objects; 
efpeciaily  to  a  poet  like  Offian,  who  wrote  from  the  im- 
m.ediate  impulfe  of  poetical  enthufiafm,  and  without 
much  preparation  of  ftudy  or  labour.  Fertile  as  Ho- 
mer's imagination  is  acknowledged  to  be,  who  does  not 
know  how  often  his  Lions  and  Bulls ,  and  Flocks  of 
Sheep,  recur  with  little  or  no  variation;  nay,  fometimes 
in  the  very  fame  words  ?  The  objedion  made  to  OfTian 
is,  however,  founded,  in  a  great  meafure,  upon  a  mif- 
take.  It  has  been  fuppofed  by  inattentive  readers,  that 
wherever  the  Moon,  the  Cloud,  or  the  Thunder,  returns 
in  a  fiinile,  it  is  the  fame  fimile,  and  the  fame  Moon,  or 
Cloud,  or  Thunder,  which  they  had  met  with  a  few  pages 
before.  V/hereas  very  often  the  fimiles  are  widely  differ- 
ent. The  object,  whence  they  are  taken,  is  indeed  in 
fubftance  the  fame;  but  the  image  is  nev/;  for  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  objed  is  changed  ;  it  is  prefented  to  the 
fancy  in  another  attitude  ;  and  clothed  with  new  cir- 
cumftances,  to  make  it  fuit  the  different  illuftration  for 
which  it  is  employed.  In  this,  lies  Offian's  great  art ; 
in  io  happily  varying  the  form  of  the  few  natural  appear- 
ances with  which  lie  was  acquainted,  as  to  make  them 
correfpond  to  a  great  many  different  objeds. 

Let  us  take  for  one  inftance  the  Moon,  which  is  very 
freciuently  introduced  into  his  comparifons  ;  as  in  nor- 
thern climates,  v/here  the  nights  are  long,  the  Moon  is  a 
greater  objed  of  attention,  than  in  the  climate  of  Ho- 
mer ;  and  let  us  view  how  much  our  poet  has  diverfified 
its  appearance.  The  Ihield  of  a  warrior  is  like  "  the  dark- 
"  ened  moon  when  it  moves  a  dun  circle  through  the 
"  heavens."  The  face  of  a  ghoft,  wan  and  pale,  is  like 
"  the  beam,  of  the  fetting  moon."  And  a  different  ap- 
pearance of  a  ghofl,  thin  and  indiffind,  is  like  "  the 
"  new  moon  feen  thro'  the  gathered  mift,  when  the  fl<.y 
*'  ])Ours  down  its  flaky  fnow,  and  the  world  is  filent  and 
*'  dark  ;"  or  in  a  different  form  ftill,  is  like  the  "  watry 
"  beam  of  the  moon,  vv'hen  it  ruihes  from  between  two 
"  clouds,  and  the  m.idnight-fhower  is  on  the  field."    A 

very 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  481 

very  oppofite  ufe  is  made  of  the  moon  in  the  defcription 
of  Agandecca :  "  She  came  in  all  her  beauty,  like  the 
*'  moon  from  the  cloud  of  Eaft."  Hope,  fucceeded  by 
difappointment,  is  "  joy  rifmg  on  her  face,  and  forrow 
*'  returning  again,  like  a  thin  cloud  on  the  moon."  But 
when  Swaran,  after  his  defeat,  is  cheared  by  Fingal's  ge- 
nerofity,  "  His  face  brightened  like  the  full  moon  of  hea- 
"  ven,  when  the  clouds  vanifli  away,  and  leave  her  calm 
"  and  broad  in  the  midft  of  the  fky."  Venvela  is  "  bright 
"  as  the  moon  when  it  trembles  o'er  the  weftern  wave  ;" 
but  the  foul  of  the  guilty  Uthal  is  "  dark  as  the  troubled 
"  face  of  the  moon,  when  it  foretels  the  ftorm."  And 
by  a  very  fanciful  and  uncommon  allufion,  it  is  faid  of 
Cormac,  who  was  to  die  in  his  early  years,  "  Nor  long 
"  fhalt  thou  lift  the  fpear,  mildly-fhining  beam  of  youth  ! 
"  Death  ftands  dim  behind  thee,  like  the  darkened  half 
"  of  the  moon  behind  its  growing  light.'* 

Another  inflance  of  the  fame  nature  may  be  taken 
from  mill,  which,  as  being  a  very  familiar  appearance  in 
the  country  of  Offian,  he  applies  to  a  variety  of  purpofes, 
and  purfues  through  a  great  many  forms.  Sometimes, 
which  one  would  hardly  expect,  he  employs  it  to  heighten 
the  appearance  of  a  beautiful  object.  The  hair  of  Morna 
is  "  like  the  miit  of  Cromla,  when  it  curls  on  the  rock, 
"  and  fhines  to  the  beam  of  the  weft." — "  The  fong  comes 
"  with  its  mufic  to  melt  and  pleafe  the  ear.  It  is  like  foft 
"  mift,  that  rifmg  from  a  lake  pours  on  the  filent  vale. 
"  The  green  flowers  are  filled  with  dew.  The  fun  returns 
"  in  its  ftrength,  and  the  mift  is  gone*.'* — But,  for  the 
moft  part,  mift  is  employed  as  a  fmiilitude  of  fome  difa- 
greeable  or  terrible  objedt.  "  The  foul  of  Nathos  was  fad, 
"  like  the  fun  in  the  day  of  mift,  when  his  face  is  v/atry 
"  and  dim."  "  The  darknefs  of  old  age  comes  like  the 
P  p  p  "  mift 

*  There  is  a  remarkable  propriety  in  this  comparifon.  It  is  intended  to  explain 
the  effeft  of  foft  and  mournful  mufic.  Armin  appears  difturbed  at  a  performance 
of  this  kind,  Carmor  fays  to  him,  "  Why  burfls  the  figh  of  Armin  ?  Is  there  a 
"  caufe  to  mourn?  The  long  comes  with  its  mufic  to  melt  and  pleafe  the  ear.  It 
"  is  like  foft  mift,  &c."  that  is,  fuch  mournful  fongs  have  a  happy  elfcft  to  foftcn 
the  heart,  and  to  improve  it  by  tend.;r  emotions,  as  themoiftuie  of  themift  refrefl;- 
es  and  nourifhcs  ihe  flowers ;  whilft  the  fadnefs  they  occafion  is  only  tranllent,  and 
foon  difpelled  by  the  fucceeding  occupations  and  amufements  of  life:  "  The  fun 
"  returns  in  its  lirength,  and  the  mift  is  gone." 


\2      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  o 


N 


*'  mlfl  of  the  defart."  The  face  of  a  ghofl;  Is  "  pale  as 
*^-  the  mid  of  Cromla.'*  "  The  gloom  of  battle  is  rolled 
*'  along  as  mlfl  that  is  poured  on  the  valley,  when  ftorms 
"  invade  the  filent  fun-fhine  of  heaven."  Fame  fuddenly 
departing,  is  likened  to  "  mill  that  flies  avi^ay  before  the 
*'  ruftling  wind  of  the  vale."  A  ghofl,  flowly  vanifliing, 
to  "  mifl  that  melts  by  degrees  on  the  funny  hill."  Cair- 
bar,  after  his  treacherous  alfaiTmation  of  Ofcar,  is  com- 
pared to  a  pefiilential  fog.  "  I  love  a  foe  like  Cathmor," 
fays  Fingal,  "  his  foul  is  great ;  his  arm  is  flrong  ;  his 
*'  battles  are  full  of  fame.  But  the  little  foul  is  like  a  va- 
"  pour  that  hovers  round  the  marfhy  lake.  It  never  rifes 
"  on  the  green  hill,  lefl  the  winds  meet  it  there.  Its 
"  dwelling  is  in  the  cave ;  and  it  fends  forth  the  dart  of 
"  death."  This  is  a  funile  highly  finifhed.  But  there  is 
another  which  is  flill  more  flriking,  founded  alfo  on  mift, 
in  the  4th  book  of  Temora.  Tw^o  fadious  chiefs  are  con- 
tending ;  Cathmor  the  king  interpofes,  rebukes,  and  Ti- 
lenccs  them.  The  poet  intends  to  give  us  the  higheft  idea 
of  Cathmor's  fuperiority  ;  and  moft  effedually  accompliflr- 
es  his  intention  by  the  following  happy  image.  "  They 
"  funk  from  the  king  on  either  fide  ;  like  two  columns 
'•  of  morning  mid,  when  the  fun  rifes  between  them,  on 
"  his  glittering  rocks.  Dark  is  their  rolling  on  either 
"  fide  ;  each  towards  its  reedy  pool."  Thefe  inflances 
may  fufliciently  Ihew  with  what  richnefs  of  imagination 
Oflian's  comparifons  abound,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  with 
what  propriety  of  judgment  they  are  employed.  If  his  field 
v/as  narrow,  it  mufl  be  admitted  to  have  been  as  well  cul- 
tivated r.s  its  extent  would  allow. 

As  it  is  ufual  to  judge  of  poets  from  a  comparifon  of 
their  fimiles,  more  than  of  other  paiTages,  it  will  perhaps 
be  agreeable  to  the  reader,  to  fee  how  Homer  and  OfTian 
have  conduced  feme  images  of  the  fame  kind.  This 
might  be  fliewn  in  many  inftances.  For,  as  the  great  ob- 
jeds  of  nature  are  common  to  the  poets  of  all  nations,  and 
make  the  general  ilore-houfe  of  all  imagery,  the  ground- 
work of  their  comparifons  muft,  of  courfe,  be  frequently 
the  fame.  I  fnall  feleft  only  a  few  of  the  mofl  confidera- 
ble  from  both  poets.     Mr.  ^^ope's  tranilation  of  Homer 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         483 

can  be  of  no  ufe  to  us  here.  The  parallel  is  altogether 
unfair  between  profe,  and  the  impofinj  harmony  of  flowing 
numbers.  It  is  only  by  viewing  Homer  in  the  fimplicity 
of  a  profe  tranflation,  that  we  can  form  any  comparifon 
between  the  two  bards. 

TiiK  Ihock  of  two  encoimtering  armies,  the  noife  and 
the  tumult  of  battle,  afford  one  of  the  mod  grand  and 
awful  fubjetls  of  defcription  ;  on  \vhich  all  epic  poets  have 
exerted  their  flrength.  Let  us  firft  hear  Hcm.er.  Tlie 
following  defcription  is  a  favourite  one,  for  we  f\nd  it  twice 
repeated  in  the  hme  words  *.  ''  When  now  the  conflicl- 
"  ing  holts  joined  in  the  field  of  battle,  then  were  mutii- 
"  ally  oppofed  fhields,  and  fw^ords,  and  the  ilrength  of 
"  armed  men.  The  bolfy  bucklers  were  dalhed  againlh 
"  each  other.  The  univerfal  tumult  rofe.  There  were 
"  mingled  the  triumphant  fliouts  and  the  dying  groans  of 
"  the  vidors  and  the  vanquilhed.  The  earth  iireamcd 
"  with  blood.  As  when  winter-torrents,  rulhing  from 
"  the  mountains,  pour  into  a  narr.ow  valley  their  violent 
*'  waters.  They  iifue  from  a  thoufand  fprings,  and  mix 
"  in  the  hollowed  channel.  The  diif  ant  Ihepherd  hears, 
"  on  the  mountain,  their  roar  from  afar.  Such  was  the 
"  terror  and  the  fliout  of  the  engaging  armies."  In  ano- 
ther paflage,  the  poet,  much  in  the  manner  of  Offian, 
heaps  fimile  on  fimile,  to  exprefs  the  vallnefs  of  the  idea, 
with  v;hich  his  imagination  ieems  to  labour.  "  With  a 
"  mighty  fnout  the  hofts  engage.  Not  fo  loud  roars  the 
*'  wave  of  ocean,  when  driven  againft  the  fhore  by  the 
"  whole  force  of  the  boiflerous  north  ;  not  fo  loud  in  the 
"  woods  of  the  mountain,  the  nolfe  of  the  flame,  when 
"  rifmg  in  its  fury  to  confume  the  forefi  ;•  not  lb  loud  the 
*'  wind  among  the  lofty  oaks,  when  the  wrath  of  the  ftorm 
"  rages  ;  as  was  the  clamour  of  the  Greeks  and  Trojans, 
"  when,  roaring  terrible,  they  rufhed  againft  each  other. f'* 

To  thefe  defcriptions  and  fimiles,  Vv'e  may  oppofe  the 
following  from  Ollian,  and  leave  the  reader  to  judge  be- 
tween them.  He  will  find  images  of  the  fame  kind  em- 
ployed ;  commonly  lefs  extended  ;  but  thrown  forth  with 
a  glowing  rapidity  which  characlerifes  our  poet,     "  As 

"  autumn's 

*  Iliad,  iv,  416.  andlliad,  viii.  Go.  +   Iliad,  xiv.  293. 


484      A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  autumn's  dark  ftorms  pour  from  two  echoing  hills,  to- 
*'  wards  each  other  approached  the  heroes.  As  two  dark 
"  Itreams  from  high  rocks  meet  and  m.ix,  and  roar  on 
"  the  plain  ;  loud,  rough  and  dark  in  battle,  meet  Loch- 
"  lin  and  Inisfail.  Chief  mixed  his  ftrokes  with  chief, 
"  and  man  with  man.  Steel  clanging,  founded  on  fteel. 
''•  Helmets  are  cleft  on  high  ;  blood  burfts,  and  fmokes 
'^  around. — As  the  troubled  noife  of  the  ocean,  when  roll 
"  the  waves  on  high  ;  as  the  laft  peal  of  the  thunder  of 
"  heaven,  fuch  is  the  noife  of  battle." — "  As  roll  a  thou- 
"  fand  waves  to  the  rock,  fo  Swaran's  hoft  came  on ;  as 
'•  meets  a  rock  a  thoufand  waves,  fo  Inisfail  met  Swaran. 
"  Death  raifes  all  his  voices  around,  and  mixes  with  the 
"  found  of  fliields. — ^The  field  echoes  from  wing  to  wing, 
"  as  a  hundred  hammers  that  rife  by  turns  on  the  red  fon 
"  of  the  furnace." — "  As  a  hundred  winds  on  Morven  j 
"  as  the  ftreams  of  a  hundred  hills ;  as  clouds  fly  fucceffive 
"  over  heaven  ;  or  as  the  dark  ocean  affaults  the  fhore  of 
"  the  defart ;  fo  roaring,  fo  vaft,  fo  terrible,  the  armies 
"  mixed  on  Lena's  echoing  heath."  In  feveral  of  thefe 
images,  there  is  a  remarkable  fimilarity  to  Homer's  ;  but 
what  follows  is  fuperior  to  any  comparifon  that  Homer 
ufes  on  this  fubjeft.  "  The  groan  of  the  people  fpread 
"  over  the  hills;  it  Vv^as  like  the  thunder  of  night,  when 
"  the  cloud  burfts  on  Cona,  and  a  thoufand  ghofts  fhriek 
"  at  once  on  the  hollow  wind."  Never  v/as  an  image  of 
more  awful  fublimity  employed  to  heighten  the  terror  of 
battle. 

Both  poets  compare  the  appearance  of  an  army  ap- 
proaching, to  the  gathering  of  dark  clouds.  "  As  when 
"  a  ihepherd,"  fays  Homer,  "  beholds  from  the  rock  a 
"  cloud  borne  along  the  fea  by  the  weftern  wind ;  black 
"  as  pitch  it  appears  from  afar,  failing  over  the  ocean, 
"  and  carrying  the  dreadful  ftorm.  He  ftirinks  at  the 
"  fight,  and  drives  his  flock  into  the  cave  :  Such,  under 
"  the  Ajaces,  moved  on,  the  dark,  the  thickened  phalanx 

"  to  the  war*." "  They  came,"  fays  Oflian,  "  over 

^'  the  defart  like  ftormy  clouds,  when  the  winds  roll  them 
^'  over  the  heath  j  their  edges  are  tinged  with  lightning  ; 

"  and 

*  Iliad,  iv.  275. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  485 

"  and  the  echoing  groves  forefee  the  florm."  The  edges 
of  the  cloud  tinged  with  lightning,  is  a  fublime  idea  ;  but 
the  fhepherd  and  his  flock,  render  Homer's  fimile  more 
pifturefque.  This  is  frequently  the  difference  between 
the  two  poets.  Oflian  gives  no  more  than  the  main 
image,  ftrong  and  full.  Homer  adds  circumftances  and 
appendages,  which  amufe  the  fancy  by  enlivening  the 
fcenery. 

Homer  compares  the  regular  appearance  of  an  army, 
to  "  clouds  that  are  fettled  on  the  mountain-top,  in  the 
"  day  of  calmncfs,  when  the  ftrength  of  the  north  wind 
"  fleeps  f."  Offian,  with  full  as  much  propriety,  com- 
pares the  appearance  of  a  difordered  army,  to  "  the  m.oun- 
"  tain-cloud,  when  the  blall  hath  entered  its  \vomb  ; 
"  and  icattersthe  curling  gloom  on  every  fide."  Offian's 
clouds  affume  a  great  many  forms  ;  and,  as  we  might  ex- 
pect from  his  climate,  are  a  fertile  fource  of  imagery  to 
him.  "  The  warriors  followed  their  chiefs,  like  the  ga- 
"  thering  of  the  rainy  clouds,  behind  the  red  meteors  of 
"  heaven."  An  army  retreating  without  coming  to  ac- 
tion, is  likened  to  "  clouds,  that  having  long  threatened 
"  rain,  retire  flowly  behind  the  hills."  The  picture  of 
Oithona,  after  flie  had  determined  to  die,  is  lively  and 
delicate.  "  Her  foul  was  refolved,  and  the  tear  was  dried 
"  from  her  wildly-looking  eye.  A  troubled  joy  rofe  on 
"  her  mind,  like  the  red  path  of  the  lightning  on  a  ftor- 
"  my  cloud."  The  image  aUb  of  the  gloomy  Cairbar, 
meditating,  in  filence,  the  affaffination  of  Ofcar,  until  the 
moment  came  when  his  defigns  were  ripe  for  execution,  is 
extremely  noble,  and  complete  in  all  its  parts.  "  Cairbar 
"  heard  their  words  in  filence,  like  the  cloud  of  a  fhower  ; 
*'  it  (lands  dark  on  Croinla,  till  the  lightning  burfts  its 
"  fide.  The  valley  gleams  with  red  light  ;  the  fpirits  of 
"  the  ftorm  rejoice.  So  ftood  the  filent  king  of  Temora 
"  — at  length  his  v/ords  are  heard." 

Homer's  comparifon  of  Achilles  to  the  Dog-Star,  is 
very  fublime.  "  Priam  beheld  him  rufning  along  the 
"  plain,  fhining  in  his  armour,  like  the  ftar  of  autumn ; 
"  bright  are  its  beams,  diftinguifhed  amidll  the  multitude 

"  of 

t   UiP-d,  V.  .522. 


486    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  of  ilars  in  the  dark  hour  of  night.  It  rifes  In  its  fplen- 
"  dor  ;  but  Its  fplendor  is  fatal  j  betokening  to  miferable 
"  men,  the  deflroying  heat  *."  The  firil  appearance  of 
Finga?,  is,  in  like  manner,  compared,  by  OiTian,  to  a  (lar 
or  meteor.  "  FingaL  tall  in  his  ihip.  ilretched  his  bright 
"  lance  before  him.  Terrible  was  the  gleam  of  his  fteel : 
"  it  was  like  the  green  meteor  of  death,  fetting  in  the 
"  heath  of  Malmor,  when  the  traveller  is  alone,  and  the 
"  broad  moon  is  darkened  in  heaven."  The  hero's  ap- 
pearance in  Homer,  is  more  m.agnificent ;  in  Offian, 
more  terrible. 

A  TREE  cut  dov/n,  or  overthrown  by  a  (lorm,  is  a  fimi- 
litude  frequent  among  poets  for  defcribing  the  fall  of  a 
warrior  in  battle.  Homer  employs  it  often.  But  the  mofl 
beautiful,  by  far,  of  his  comparifons,  founded  on  this  ob- 
jeft,  indeed  one  of  the  mofr  beautiful  in  the  whole  Iliad, 
is  that  on  the  death  of  Euphorbus.  "  As  the  young  and 
"  verdant  olive,  which  a  man  hath  reared  with  care  In  a 
"  lonely  field,  where  the  fprings  o'l  water  bubble  around 
*•  it ;  it  Is  fair  and  flourifhing  ;  it  is  fanned  by  the  breath 
"  of  all  the  winds,  and  loaded  with  white  bloffoms  ; 
"  when  the  fudden  blaft  of  a  whirlwind  defcending,  roots 
''  it  out  from  its  bed,  and  ftretches  it  on  the  duft  f ."  To 
this,  elegant  as  it  is,  we  may  oppofe  the  following  fnnile 
of  Offian's,  relating  to  the  death  of  the  three  fons  of  Uf- 
noth.  "  They  fell,  like  three  young  oaks  which  flood 
"  alone  on  the  hill.  The  traveller  faw  the  lovely  trees, 
'^  and  wondered  how  they  grew  fo  lonely.  The  blafl  of 
"  the  defart  came  by  night,  and  laid  their  green  heads 
"  low.  Next  day  he  returned  ;  but  they  were  withered, 
"  and  the  heath  was  bare."  Malvina's  allufion  to  the 
fame  objed,  in  her  lamentation  over  Ofcar,  is  fo  exquifite- 
ly  tender,  that  I  cannot  forbear  giving  it  a  place  alfo.  "  I 
''  was  a  lovely  tree  in  thy  prefence,  Ofcar !  with  all  my 
"  branches  round  me.  But  thy  death  came  like  a  blaft 
"  from  the  defart,  and  laid  my  green  head  low.  The 
"  fpring  returned  with  its  fliowers  ;  but  no  leaf  of  mine 
"  arofe."  Several  of  Olhan's  fimiles  taken  from  trees, 
are  remarkably  beautiful,  and  diverfified  with  vv^ell  chofen 

circum- 

*  Iliad,  xxii.  26.  +  Iliad,  xvii.  53. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         487 

circumfliances ;  fuch  as  that  upon  the  death  of  P-yno  and 
Oria  ;  "  They  have  fallen  like  the  oak  of  the  defart;  when 
"  it  lies  acrois  a  dream,  and  withers  in  the  wind  of  the 
"  mountains:"  Or  that  which  Oflian  applies  to  himfelf; 
"  I,  like  an  ancient  oak  in  Morven,  moulder  alone  in  my 
"  place ;  the  blait  hath  lopped  my  branches  away ;  and  I 
"  tremble  at  the'wings  of  the  north." 

As  Homer  exalts  his  heroes,  by  comparing  them  to 
gods,  Ofiian  makes  the  fame  ufe  of  comparifons,  taken 
from  fpirits  and  gholls.  Swaran  "  roared  in  battle,  like 
"  the  fnrill  fpirit  of  a  florm  that  fits  dim  on  the  clouds  of 
"  Gormal,  and  enjoys  he  death  of  the  mariner."  His 
people  gathered  around  Erragon,  "  like  dorms  around 
*'  the  gholl  of  night,  when  he  calls  them  from  the  top  of 
"  Morven,  and  prepares  to  pour  them  on  the  land  of  the 
"  flranger." — "  They  fell  before  my  fon,  like  groves  in 
"  the  defart,  when  an  angry  ghoft  ruflies  through  night, 
'•  and  takes  their  green  heads  in  his  hand."  In  fuch  ima- 
ges, OiTian  appears  in  his  ftrength  ;  for  very  feldom  have 
fupernatural  beings  been  painted  with  fo  much  fublimity, 
and  fuch  force  of  imagination,  as  by  this  poet.  Even  Ho- 
mer, great  as  he  is,  mull  yield  to  him  in  fimiles  formed  upon 
thefe.  Take,  for  inftance,  the  following,  which  is  the 
moft  remarkable  of  this  kind  in  the  Iliad.  "  Merriones 
"  followed  Idomeneus  to  battle,  like  Mars  the  deflroyer 
*'  of  men,  when  he  ruflies  to  war.  Terror,  his  beloved 
*'  fon,  (Irong  and  fierce,  attends  him  j  who  fills  with  dif- 
"  may,  the  moft  valiant  hero.  They  come  from  Thrace, 
"  armed  againft  the  Ephyrians  and  Phlegians ;  nor  do  they 
"  regard  the  prayers  of  either  ;  but  difpoie  of  fuccefs  at 
"  their  will  *."  The  idea  here,  is  undoubtedly  noble : 
but  obferve  what  a  figure  OfTian  fets  before  the  aftonilhed 
imagination,  and  with  what  fublimely-terrible  circumftan- 
ces  he  has  heightened  it.  "  He  ruihed  in  the  found  of  his 
"  arms,  like  the  dreadful  fpirit  of  Loda,  when  he  comes 
"  in  the  roar  of  a  thoufand  ftorm.s,  and  fcatters  battles 
*'  from  his  eyes.  He  fits  on  a  cloud  over  Lochlin's  ieas. 
^'  His  mighty  hand  is  on  his  fword.    The  winds  lift  his 

"  ihuiiiV'- 
*  lYiii.  xiii.  298. 


488     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

"  flaming  locks.  So  terrible  was  Cuthullin  in  the  day  of 
"  his  fame." 

Homer's  comparifons  relate  chiefly  to  martial  fubjeds, 
to  the  appearances  and  motions  of  armies,  the  engagement 
and  death  of  heroes,  and  the  various  incidents  of  war.  In 
Offian,  we  find  a  greater  variety  of  other  fubjecls  illufl:rat- 
ed  by  fimiles ;  particularly,  the  fongs  of  bards,  the  beauty 
of  women,  the  different  circumfl:ances  of  old  age,  forrow, 
and  private  difl:refs  ;  which  give  occafion  to  much  beauti- 
ful imagery.  What,  for  inftance,  can  be  more  delicate 
and  moving,  than  the  following  fimile  of  Oithona's,  in 
her  lamentation  over  the  diflionour  flie  had  fuifered  ? 
'*^  Chief  of  Strumon,"  replied  the  fighing  maid,  "  why 
"  didft  thou  come  over  the  dark-blue  wave  to  Nuath's 
"  mournful  daughter  ?  Why  did  not  I  pafs  away  in  fecret, 
*'  like  the  flower  of  the  rock,  that  lifts  its  fair  head  un- 
*'  feen,  and  flrews  its  withered  leaves  on  the  blall  ?"  The 
mufic  of  bards,  a  favourite  objeft  with  OfTian,  is  illuftrated 
by  a  variety  of  the  moft  beautiful  appearances  that  are  to 
be  found  in  nature.  It  is  compared  to  the  calm  fhower  of 
fpring  ;  to  the  dews  of  the  morning  on  the  hill  of  roes  ; 
to  the  face  of  the  blue  and  ftill  lake.  Two  fimiles  on  this 
fubjecl,  I  fliail  quote,  becaufe  they  would  do  honour  to 
any  of  the  mofl:  celebrated  clafljcs.  The  one  is,  "  Sit 
"  thou  on  the  heath,  O  bard  !  and  let  us  hear  thy  voice  ; 
"  it  is  pleafant  as  tke  gale  of  the  fpring  that  fighs  on  the 
"  hunter's  ear,  when  he  wakens  from  dreams  of  joy,  and 
"  has  heard  the  mufic  of  the  fpirits  of  the  hill."  The 
other  contains  a  fliort,  but  exquifitely  tender  image,  ac- 
companied with  the  fineft  poetical  painting.  "  The  mu- 
"  fie  of  Carril  was  like  the  memory  of  joys  that  are  paft, 
"  pleafant  and  mournful  to  the  foul.  The  ghofi:s  of  de- 
"  parted  bards  heard  it  from  Slimora's  fide.  Soft  founds 
"  fpread  along  the  wood  ;  and  the  filent  valleys  of  night 
"  rejoice."  What  a  figure  would  fuch  imagery  and 
fuch  fcenery  have  made,  had  they  been  prefented  to  us, 
adorned  with  the  fweetnefs  and  harmony  of  the  Virgilian 
numbers  ! 

I  HAVE  chofen  all  along  to  compare  Ofiian  with  Ho- 
mer, rather  than  Virgil,  for  an  obious  reafon.      There  is 

y,  much 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.        489 

ti  much  nearer  correfpondence  between  the  times  and 
manners  of  the  two  former  poets.  Both  wrote  In  ah  early 
period  of  foclety ;  both  are  originals  ;  both  are  dlllln- 
gulflied  by  fmiplicity,  fubllmlty,  and  fire.  The  correal 
elegance  of  Virgil,  his  artful  imitation  of  Homer,  the 
Roman  flatellnefs  which  he  every  where  maintains,  admit 
no  parallel  with  the  abrupt  boldnefs,  and  enthufiatick. 
warmth  of  the  Celtic  bard.  In  one  article,  indeed,  there 
is  a  refemblance.  Virgil  is  more  tender  than  Homer  ; 
and  thereby  agrees  more  with  Offian  ;  with  this  dliference, 
that  the  feelings  of  the  one  are  more  gentle  and  polifiied, 
thofe  of  the  other  more  ftrong ;  the  tendernefs  of  Virgil 
foftens,  that  of  Offian  diffolves  and  overcomes  the  heart. 
A  RESEMBLANCE  may  be  fometimes  obfferved  between 
Offian 's  comparlfons,  and  thofe  employed  by  the  facred 
writers.  They  abound  much  In  this  figure,  and  they  ufe 
it  with  the  utmoft  propriety  *.  The  Imagery  of  Scripture 
exhibits  a  foil  and  climate  altogether  different  from  thofe 
of  Offian  ;  a  warmer  country,  a  more  fmlling  face  of  na- 
ture, the  arts  of  agriculture  and  of  rural  life  much  farther 
advanced.  The  wine-prefs,  and  the  threfhing-floor,  are 
often  prefented  to  us,  the  Cedar  and  the  Palm-tree,  the 
fragrance  of  perfumes,  the  voice  of  the  Turtle,  and  the 
beds  of  Lilies.  The  fmiiles  are,  like  Offian's,  generally 
fhort,  touching  on  one  point  of  refemblance,  rather  than 
fpread  out  Into  little  epifodes.  In  the  following  example 
may  be  perceived  what  inexpreffible  grandeur  poetry  re- 
ceives from  the  intervention  of  the  Deity.  "  The  nati- 
"  ons  fliall  rufli  like  the  rufhings  of  many  waters  ;  but 
"  God  fliall  rebuke  them,  and  they  fnall  fly  tar  off,  and 
"  fliall  be  chafed  as  the  chaff  of  the  mountains  before  the 
"  wind,  and  like  the  down  of  the  thiftle  before  the  whirl- 
"  windf." 

Besides  formal  comparlfons,  the  poetry  of  Offian  is  c:n- 
belllflied  with  many  beautiful  metaphors  :  Such  as  that 
remarkably  fine  one  applied  to  Deugela  ;  "  She  was  co- 
"  vered  with  the  light  of  beauty ;  but  her  heart  was  the 
"  houfe  of  pride."  This  mode  of  expreffion,  which  fup- 
Q  q  q  preffes 

*  See  Dr.  Lowthde  Sacra  Poefi  Heb^seorum, 
+  Ifaiah  xvii,  13. 


490    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

preffes  the  mark  of  comparifon,  and  fubflitutes  a  figured 
defcription  in,  room  of  the  objed  defcribed,  is  a  great  en- 
livener  of  ftyle.  It  denotes  that  glow  and  rapidity  of 
fancy,  which,  without  paufmg  to  form  a  regular  fimile, 
paints  the  objeQ:  at  one  ftroke.  "  Thou  art  to  me  the 
"  beam  of  the  eaft,  rifmg  in  a  land  unknown.'*  "  In 
*'  peace,  thou  art  the  gale  of  fpring  ;  in  war,  the  moun- 
**  tain-itorm/'  "  Pleafant  be  thy  reft,  O  lovely  beam  ! 
*'  foon  haft  thou  fet  on  our  hills  !  The  fteps  of  thy  de- 
*'  parture  were  ftately,  like  the  moon  on  the  blue-trem- 
"  bling  w^ave.  But  thou  haft  left  us  in  darknefs,  firft  of 
"  the  maids  of  Lutha  ! — Soon  haft  thou  fet,  Malvina  ! 
"  but  thou  rifeft,  like  the  beam  of  the  eaft,  among  the 
"  fpirits  of  thy  friends,  where  they  fit  in  their  ftormy 
*'  halls,  the  chambers  of  the  thunder."  This  is  correfl:, 
and  finely  fupported.  But  in  the  following  inftance,  the 
metaphor,  though  very  beautiful  at  the  beginning,  be- 
comes imperfeQ:  before  it  clofes,  by  being  improperly 
mixed  with  the  literal  fenfe.  "  Trathal  went  forth  with 
"  the  ftream  of  his  people  ;  but  they  met  a  rock  :  Fingal 
"  ft;ood  unmoved  ;  broken,  they  rolled  back  from  his 
"  fide.  Nor  did  they  roll  in  fafety  ;  the  fpear  of  the 
"  king  purfued  their  flight.'* 

The  hyperbole  Is  a  figure  which  we  might  exped  to 
find  often  employed  by  Offian  ;  as  the  undifcipllned  ima- 
gination of  early  ages  generally  prompts  exaggeration, 
and  carries  its  objefts  to  excefs  j  whereas  longer  experi- 
ence, and  farther  progrefs  In  the  arts  of  life,  chaften  men's 
ideas  and  exprefTions.  Yet  OfFian's  hyperboles  appear 
not  to  me,  either  fo  frequent  or  fo  harfii  as  might  at  firft 
have  been  looked  for  ;  an  advantage  owing,  no  doubt,  to 
the  more  cultivated  ftate,  in  which,  as  was  before  ftiown, 
poetry  fubfifted  among  the  ancient  Celtse,  than  among 
moll  other  barbarous  nations.  One  of  the  moft  exag- . 
gerated  defcriptionis  m  the  whole  work,  Is  what  meets 
us  In  the  beginning  of  FIngal,  where  the  fcout  makes 
his  report  to  Cuthullln  of  the  landing  of  the  foe.  But 
this  is  fo  far  from  deferving  cenfure,  that  it  merits 
praife,  as  being,  on  that  occafion,  natural  and  proper. 
The  fcout  arrives,  trembling,  and  full  of  fears  ;  and  it  is 

well 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  491 

well  known,  that  no  paflion  difpofes  men  to  hyperbolize 
more  than  terror.  It  both  annihilates  themfelves  in  their 
own  apprehenfion,  and  magnifies  every  objed:  which  they 
view  through  the  medium  of  a  troubled  imagination. 
Hence  all  thofe  indiftind  images  of  formidable  greatnefs, 
the  natural  marks  of  a  difturbed  and  confufed  mind,  which 
occur  in  Moran's  defcription  of  Swaran's  appearance,  and 
in  his  relation  of  the  conference  which  they  held  toge- 
ther ;  not  unlike  the  report,  which  the  affrighted  Jewilh 
fpies  made  to  their  leader,  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  "  The 
"  land  through  which  we  have  gone  to  fearch  it,  is  a  land 
*'  that  eateth  up  the  inhabitants  thereof;  and  all  the  pco- 
"  pie  that  we  law  in  It,  are  men  of  a  great  ftature  :  and 
"  there  law  we  giants,  the  fons  of  Anak,  which  come  of 
**  the  giants  ;  and  we  were  in  our  own  fight  as  grafs- 
*'  hoppers,  and  fo  were  we  in  their  light  *." 

With  regard  to  perfoniflcations,  I  formerly  obferved 
that  Offian  was  fparing,  and  I  accounted  for  his  being  fo. 
Allegorical  perfonages  he  has  none ;  and  their  abfence  is 
not  to  be  regretted.  For  the  intermixture  of  thefe  ilia- 
dowy  beings,  which  have  not  the  fupport  even  of  mytho- 
logical or  legendary  belief,  with  human  aftors,  feldom 
produces  a  good  effed.  The  ficlion  becomes  too  vifible 
and  phantaftick  ;  and  overthrows  that  impreffion  of  rea- 
lity, which  the  probable  recital  of  human  aftions  is  cal- 
culated to  make  upon  the  mind.  In  the  ferious  and  pa- 
thetlck  fcenes  of  Oirian  efpecially,  allegorical  charaders 
would  have  been  as  much  out  of  place,  as  in  Tragedy  ; 
ferving  only  unfeafonably  to  amufe  the  fancy,  whilil  they 
flopped  the  current,  and  weakened  the  force,  of  paffioru 

With  apoilrophes,  or  addreffes  to  perfons  abfent  or 
-dead,  which  have  been,  in  all  ages,  the  language  of  paf- 
fion,  our  poet  abounds  ;  an.d  they  are  among  his  highell 
beauties.  Witnefs  the  apodrophe,  iii  the  iirll  book  of 
Fingal,  to  the  maid  of  Iniftore,  whofe  Jover  had  fallen  in 
battle  ;  and  that  inimitably  fine  one  of  Cuthullin  to  Bra- 
gela,  at  the  conclufion  of  the  fame  book.  He  commands 
the  harp  to  be  (truck  In  her  praife  ;  and  the  mention  of 
Bra^ela's  name,  immediately  fuggefting  to  him  a  crowd 

^       .of 

*  Numbeii  jtiil.22,  ^g^ 


492     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

of  tender  Ideas ;  "  Doft  thou  ralfe  thy  fair  face  from  the 
"  rocks,"  he  exclaims,  "  to  find  the  fails  of  Cuthullin  ? 
"  The  fea  is  rolling  far  diftant,  and  its  white  foam  fhall 
"  deceive  thee  for  my  fails."  And  now  his  imagination 
being  wrought  up  to  conceive  her  as,  at  that  moment, 
really  in  this  fituatioa,  he  becomes  afraid  of  the  hswm  flie 
may  receive  from  the  inclemency  of  the  night ;  and  with 
an  enthufiafm,  happy  and  affeding,  though  beyond  the 
cautious  ftrain  of  modern  poetry,  "  Retire,"  he  proceeds, 
"  retire,  for  it  is  night,  my  love,  and  the  dark  winds 
"  Ugh  in  thy  hair.  Retire  to  the  hall  of  my  feafts,  and 
"  think  of  the  times  that  are  paft  ;  for  I  will  not  return 
"  till  the  florm  of  war  has  ceafed.  O  Connal,  fpeak  of 
"  wars  and  arms,  and  fend  her  from  my  mind  ;  for  love- 
"  ly,  with  her  raven  hair,  is  the  white-bofomed  daughter 
"  of  Sorglan."  This  breathes  all  the  native  fpirit  of 
pafiion  and  tendernefs. 

The  addrefles  to  the  fun,  to  the  moon,  and  to  the  even- 
ing flar,  mull  draw  the  attention  of  every  reader  of  tafte, 
as  among  the  moit  fplendid  ornaments  of  this  colledion. 
The  beauties  of  each  are  too  great,  and  too  obvious,  to 
need  any  particular  comment.  In  one  paflage  only  of 
the  addrefs  to  the  moon,  there  appears  fome  obfcurity. 
"  Whither  doft  thou  retire  from  thy  courfe,  when  the 
"  darknefs  of  thy  countenance  grows  ?  Haft  thou  thy  hall 
"  like  Offian  ?  Dwelieft  thou  in  the  fliadow  of  grief? 
'•  Have  thy  ftfters  fallen  from  Heaven  ?  Are  they  who  re- 
"  joiced  with  thee  at  night,  no  more  ?  Yes,  they  have 
"  "fallen,  fair  light !  and  thou  doft  often  retire  to  mourn." 
We  may  be  at  a  lofs  to  comprehend,  at  firft  view,  the 
ground,  of  thefe  fpeculations  of  Oflian,  concerning  the 
moon  ;  but  when  all  the  circumftances  are  attended  to, 
they  will  appear  to  flow  naturally  from  the  prefent  fitua- 
tion  of  his  mind.  A  mind  under  the  dominion  of  any 
ftrong  paffion,  tinctures,  with  its  own  difpofition,  every 
objeft  which  it  beholds.  The  old  bard,  with  his  heart 
bleeding  for  the  lofs  of  all  his  friends,  is  meditating  on 
the  diiterent  phafes  of  the  moon.  Her  waning  and  dark- 
nefs, prefents  to  his  melancholy  imagination,  the  image 
of  fotrow  y  and  prefently  the  idea  arifes,  and  is  indulged, 

that. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN. 


493 


that,  like  himfelf,  fhe  retires  to  mourn  over  the  lofs  of 
other  moons,  or  of  ftars,  whom  he  calls  her  fifters,  and 
fancies  to  have  once  rejoiced  with  her  at  night,  now  fallen 
from  heaven.  Darknefs  fuggeiled  the  idea  of  mourning, 
and  mourning  fuggelted  nothing  fo  naturally  to  OiTian,  as 
the  death  ot  beloved  friends.  An  inltance  precifely  fimi- 
lar  of  this  influence  of  paffion,  may  be  feen  in  a  paflage 
which  has  always  been  admired  of  Shakefpear's  King  Lear. 
The  old  man  on  the  point  of  diftraclion,  through  the  in- 
humanity of  his  daughters,  fees  Edgar  difguifed  like  a  beg- 
gar and  a  madman. 

Lear.    Didft  thou  give  all  to  thy  daughters  ? 
And  art  thou  come  to  this  ? 

Couldeft  thou  leave  nothing?    Didft  thou  give  them 
all? 
Kent.   He  hath  no  daughters,  Sir. 
Lear.    Death,  traitor !   nothing  could  have  fubdued 
nature, 
To  fuch  a  lownefs,  but  his  unkind  daughters. 

King  Lear,  Aft  3.  Scene  5. 

The  apoftrophe  to  the  winds,  in  the  opening  of  Dar- 
thula,  is  in  the  higheft  fpirit  of  poetry.  "  But  the  winds 
"  deceive  thee,  O  Darthula  ;  and  deny  the  woody  Etha 
*'  to  thy  fails.  Thefe  are  not  thy  mountains,  Nathos,  nor 
"  is  that  the  roar  of  thy  climbing  waves.  The  halls  of 
"  Cairbar  are  near,  and  the  towers  of  the  foe  lift  their 
"  head. — Where  have  ye  been,  ye  fouthern  winds  ;  when 
"  the  fons  of  my  love  were  deceived  ?  But  ye  have  been 
"  fporting  on  plains,  and  purfuing  the  thillle's  beard.  O 
"  that  ye  had  been  ruftling  in  the  fails  of  Nathos,  till  the 
"  hills  of  Etha  rofe  !  till  they  rofe  in  their  clouds,  and  faw 
"  their  coming  chief.'*  This  paifage  is  remarkable  for  the 
refemblance  it  bears  to  an  expoftulation  with  the  wood 
nymphs,  on  their  abfence  at  a  critical  time  ;  Vvhich,  as  a 
favourite  poetical  idea,  Virgil  has  copied  from  Theocri- 
tus, and  Milton  has  very  happily  imitated  from  both. 

Where  were  ye,  nymphs  !  when  the  remorfclefs  4scp 
Clos'd  o'er  the  head  of  your  lov'd  Lycidas  ? 

For 


494    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  oif 

For  neither  were  ye  playing  on  the  fteep 
Where  your  old  bards,  the  famous  Druids,  lie; 
Nor  on  the  fliaggy  top  of  Mona  high, 
Nor  yet  where  Deva  fpreads  her  wizard  ftream*. 

Having  now  treated  fully  of  Oflian's  talents,  with  re- 
fpect  to  defcription  and  imagery,  it  only  remains  to  mak« 
fome  obfervations  on  his  fentiments.  No  fentiments  can 
be  beautiful  without  being  proper ;  that  is,  fuited  to  the 
charadler  and  fituation  of  thofe  who  utter  them.  In  this 
refpe6t,  Offian  is  as  correft  as  moft  writers.  His  charac- 
ters, as  above  obferved,  are  in  general  well  fupported  ; 
which  could  not  have  been  the  cafe,  had  the  fentiments 
been  unnatural  or  out  of  place.  A  variety  of  perfonages 
of  different  ages,  fexes,  and  conditions,  are  introduced 
into  his  poems  ;  and  they  fpeak  and  ad  with  a  propriety 
of  fentiment  and  behaviour,  which  it  is  furprifing  to  find 
in  fo  rude  an  age.  Let  the  poem  of  Darthula,  through- 
out, be  taken  as  an  example. 

But  it  is  not  enough  that  fentiments  be  natural  and  pro- 
per. In  order  to  acquire  any  high  degree  of  poetical  me- 
rit, they  mud  alfo  be  fubllme  and  pathetic. 

The  fublime  is  not  confined  to  fentiment  alone.  It  be- 
longs to  defcription  alfo  ;  and  whether  in  defcription  or  in 
fentiment,  imports  fuch  ideas  prefented  to  the  mind,  as 
raife  it  to  an  uncommon  degree  of  elevation,  and  fill  it 
with  admiration  and  aftoniftiment.  This  is  the  highefl  ef- 
fect either  of  eloquence  or  poetry :  And  to  produce  this 
effeft,  requires  a  genius  glowing  w^ith  the  llrongeft  and 
warmed  conception  of  fome  objed  awful,  great  or  magni- 
ficent. That  this  character  of  genius  belongs  to  Offian, 
may,  I  think,  fufficiently  appear  from  many  of  the  pafla- 
ges  I  have  already  had  occafion  to  quote.  To  produce 
more  inflances,  were  fuperfluous.  If  the  engagement  of 
Fingal  with  the  fpirit  of  Loda,  in  Carric-thura  ;  if  the  en- 
counters of  the  armies,  in  Fingal  ;  if  the  addrefs  to  the 
fun,  in  Carthon ;  if  the  fimiles  founded  upon  ghofl:s  and 

fpiritt 

*  Milton's  Lycidas.  See  Theocrlt.  Idyll.  I. 

And  Virg.  Eclog.  lo. 
Quae  nemora,  aut  qui  vos  faltus  habuere,  puellas,  &c. 


THE  POEMS  or  OSSIAN.         495 

fplrlts  of  the  night,  all  formerly  mentioned,  be  not  ad- 
mitted as  examples,  and  illuflrious  ones  too,  of  the  true 
poetical  fublime,  I  confefs  myfelf  entirely  ignorant  of  this 
quality  in  writing. 

All  the  circumftances,  indeed,  of  Ofiian*s  compofition, 
are  favourable  to  the  fublime,  more  perhaps  than  to  any 
other  fpecies  of  beauty.  Accuracy  and  corrednefs  ;  art- 
fully-connected narration  ;  exaft  method  and  proportion 
of  parts,  we  may  look  for  in  polifhed  times.  The  gay  and 
the  beautiful,  will  appear  to  more  advantage  in  the  midft 
of  fmiling  fcenery  and  pleafurable  themes.  But  amidfl 
the  rude  fcenes  of  nature,  amidft  rocks  and  torrents  and 
whirlwinds  and  battles,  dwells  the  fublime.  It  is  the 
thunder  and  the  lightning  of  genius.  It  is  the  offspring 
of  nature,  not  of  art.  It  is  negligent  of  all  the  lelTer 
graces,  and  perfedlly  confident  Vvith  a  certain  noble  dif- 
order.  It  afl'ociates  naturally  with  that  grave  and  folemn 
fpirit,  which  diftinguiflies  our  author.  For  the  fublime, 
is  an  awful  and  ferious  emotion ;  and  is  heightened  by  all 
the  images  of  Trouble,  and  Terror,  and  Darknefs. 

Ipfe  pater,  media  nimborum  in  nofte,  corufca 
Fulmina  molitur  dextra ;  quo  maxima  motu 
Terra  tremit ;  fugere  fer?e  ;  &  mortalia  corda 
Per  gentes,  humilis  ftravit  pavor  ;  ille,  flagranti 
Aut  Atho,  aut  Rhodopen,  aut  alta  Ceraunia  telo 
Dejicit. ViRG.  Georg.  I. 

^Simplicity  and  conclfenefs,  are  never-failing  charac- 
feriftics  of  the  ftile  of  a  fublime  writer.  He  reils  on  the 
majefty  of  his  fentiments,  not  on  the  pomp  of  his  expref- 
fions.  The  main  fecret  of  being  fublime,  is  to  fay  great 
things  in  few,  and  in  plain  words :  For  every  fuperfluous 
decoration  degrades  a  fublime  idea.  The  mind  rifes  and 
fwells,  when  a  lofty  defcription  or  fentiment  is  prefented 
to  it,  in  its  native  form.  But  no  fooner  does  the  poet 
attempt  to  fpread  out  this  fentiment  or  defcription,  and  to 
deck  it  round  and  round  with  glittering  ornaments,  than 
the  mind  begins  to  fall  from  its  high  elevation ;  the  tran- 
fport  is  over ;  the  beautiful  may  remain,  but  the  fublime 
is  gone.    Hence  the  concife  and  fimple  ftyle  of  Offian, 

gives 


49^     A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

gives  great  advantage  to  his  fublime  conceptions ;  and  af*-* 
fids  them  in  feizing  the  imagination  with  full  power  *. 

Sublimity,  as  belonging  to  fentiment,  coincides,  in  a 
great  meafure,  with  magnanimity,  heroiim,  and  generofity 
of  lentiment.  Whatever  difcovers  human  nature  in  its 
greatell  elevation  ;  whatever  befpeaks  a  high  effort  of 
foul  ;  or  {hows  a  mind  fuperior  to  pleafures,  to  dangers, 
and  to  death,  forms  what  may  be  called  the  moral  or  feii- 
ti mental  fublime.  For  this,  OfTian  is  eminently  diftin- 
guilhed.  No  poet  maintains  a  higher  tone  of  virtuous  or 
noble  fentiment,  throughout  all  his  works.  Particularly 
in  all  the  fentiments  of  Fingal,  there  is  a  grandeur  and 
loftinefs  pioper  to  fwell  the  mind  with  the  higheft  ideas  of 
human  perfedtion.  Wherever  he  appears,  we  behold  the 
hero.  The  objefts  which  he  purfues,  are  always  truly 
great  ;  to  bend  the  proud  ;  to  protect  the  injured  ;  to 
defend  his  friends  ;  to  overcome  his  enemies  by  genero- 
fity more  than  by  force.  A  porticn  of  the  fame  fpirit  ac- 
tuates all  the  other  heroes.  Valour  reigns  ;  but  it  is  a 
generous  valour,  void  of  cruelty,  animated  by  honour, 
not  by  hatred.  We  behold  no  debafing  paffions  among 
Fingal's  warriors  ;  no  fpirit  of  avarice  or  of  infult ;  but 
a  perpetual  contention  for  fame  ;  a  defire  of  being  dif- 
tinguiflied  and  remembered  for  gallant  adions ;  a  love  of 
juilice;  and  a  zealous  attachment  to  their  friends  and  their 
country.  Such  is  the  Itrain  of  fentiment  in  the  works  of 
Offian. 

But 

*  The  noted  faying  of  Julius  Cacfar,  to  the  pilot  in  a  ftorm  ;  "  Quid  times  ? 
Casfarem  vehis  ;"  is  magHanimous  and  fublime.  Lucan,  not  fatisfied  with  this  fim- 
plc  concifcnefs,  refolved  to  amplify  and  improve  the  thought.  Obferve,  how  eve- 
ry time  he  twifts  it  round,  it  departs  farther  from  the  fublime,  till,  at  laft,  it  endi 
in  tumid  declamation. 

Sperne  minas,  inquit,  Pelagi,  ventoque  furenti 
Trade  finum.     Italiam,  fi  ccelo  aucloie,  recufas, 
Me,  pete.     Sola  tibl  caufa  base  eft  j alia  timoris 
Veflorem  non  effe  tuum  ;  quern  numma  nunquam 
Deftituunt;  de  quo  male  tunc  fortuna  meretur, 
Cum  poll  vota  venit;  medias  perrumpe  procellas 
Tutela  fecure  mea.      Cceli  ifte  fretique, 
Mon  puppis  noltrs,  labor  eft.     Hanc  Casfare  prelTaia 
A  fluc^u  defendit  onus. 

Quid  tania  ft  rage  paratur, 

Ignyras  ?  Qua^iit  pelagi  ccelique  tumultn 

Quid  prsftct  fortuna  mihi. 

Pharfal.  V,  578. 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.  497 

But  the  fublimity  of  moral  fentiments,  if  they  want- 
ed the  foftening  of  the  tender^  would  be  in  hazard  of 
giving  a  hard  and  fiifF  air  to  poetry.  It  is  not  enough 
to  admire.  Admiration  is  a  cold  feeling,  in  compa- 
rifon  of  that  deep  intereft,  which  the  heart  takes  in  ten- 
der and  pathetick  fcenes ;  where,  by  a  myfterious  at- 
tachment to  the  objefts  of  compaflion,  we  are  pleafed 
and  delighted,  even  whilft  we  mourn.  With  fcenes  of 
this  kind,  Offian  abounds  -,  and  his  high  merit  in  thefe, 
is  incontellible.  He  may  be  blamed  for  drawing  tears 
too  often  from  our  eyes ;  but  that  he  has  the  power  of 
commanding  them,  I  believe  no  man,  who  has  the  leaft 
fenfibility,  will  queftion.  The  general  chara6ter  of  his 
poetry,  is  the  heroic  mixed  with  the  elegiac  ftrain;  ad- 
miration tempered  with  pity.  Ever  fond  of  giving,  as 
lie  exprefifes  it,  *'  the  joy  of  grief,"  it  is  vifibie,  that  on 
all  moving  fubjetls,  he  delights  to  exert  his  genius;  and 
accordingly,  never  v/ere  there  finer  pathetick  fituations, 
than  what  his  works  prefent.  His  great  art  in  managing 
them  lies  in  giving  vent  to  the  fimple  and  natural  emo- 
tions of  the  heart.  We  meet  with  no  exaggerated  de- 
clamation ;  no  fubtile  refinements  on  forrow  ;  no  fubfti- 
tution  of  defcription  in  place  cf  paffion.  Oflian  felt 
llrongly  himfelf ;  and  the  heart,  when  uttering  its  native 
language,  never  fails,  by  powerful  fympathy,  to  affecb  the 
heart.  A  great  variety  of  examples  might  be  produced. 
We  need  only  open  the  book  to  find  them  every  where. 
What,  for  inftance,  can  be  more  moving,  than  the  la- 
mentations of  Oithona,  after  her  misfortune  ?  Gaul,  the 
fon  of  Morni,  her  lover,  ignorant  of  what  fne  had  dif- 
fered, comes  to  her  refcue.  Their  meeting  is  tender  in 
the  higheft  degree.  He  propofes  to  engage  her  foe,  in 
finoile  combat,  and  gives  her  in  charge  what  Ihe  is  to  do, 
if  he  himfelf  Ihall  fall.  "  And  ihall  the  daughter  of 
''  Niiathlivc?  Ihe  replied,  with  a  burfling  figh.  Shall 
''  I  live  in  Tromathon,  and  the  fon  of  Morni  low  ?  My 
*'  heart  is  not  of  that  rock  3  nor  my  foul  carelefs  as  that 
"  fea,  which  lifts  its  blue  waves  to  every  wind,  and  rolls 
"■  bene  ath  the  florm.  The  blaft,  which  (liall  lay  thee  low, 
**  ihall  fpread  the  branches  of  Oithona  on  earth.  We 
R  r  r  "  ihall 


498    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

''  iliall  wither  together,  fon  of  car-borne  Morni  !  The 
"  narrow  houfe  is  pleafant  to  me ;  and  the  grey  ftone  of 
"  the  dead  ;  for  never  more  will  I  leave  thy  rocks,  fea- 

*^  fiirrounded  Tromathon ! Chief  of  Strumon,  why 

"  earned  thou  over  the  waves  to  Nuath's  mournful 
"  daughter  ?  Why  did  not  I  pafs  away  in  feci-et,  like 
"  the  flower  of  the  rock,  that  lifts  its  fair  head  unfeen, 
"  and  flrews  its  withered  leaves  on  the  blaft  ?  Why  didft 
''  thou  come,  O  Gaul !  to  hear  my  departing  figh  ? — 
"  O  had  I  dwelt  at  Duvranna,  in  the  bright  beams  of 
"  my  fnr.e  !  Then  had  my  years  come  on  with  joy; 
"  and  the  virgins  would  blefs  my  flcps.  But  I  fall  in 
"  vouth,  fon  of  Morni,  and  mv  father  fliall  bluili  in  his 
"  hall." 

OiTHONA  mourns  like  a  woman;  in  Cuthullin's  ex- 
preffions  of  grief  after  his  defeat,  we  behold  the  fenti- 
ments  of  a  hero,  generous  but  defponding.  The  fituation 
is  rem.arkably  fine.  Cuthullin,  roufed  from  his  cave,  by 
the  noife  of  battle,  fees  Fingal  victorious  in  the  field. 
He  is  defcribed  as  kindling  at  the  fight.  "  His  hand  is 
"  on  the  fword  of  his  fathers;  his  red-rolling  eyes  on 
^"^  the  foe.  He  thrice  attempted  to  rufli  to  battle  ;  and 
"  thrice  did  Connal  ftophim;"  fuggefting,  that  Fingal 
v/as  routing  the  foe  ;  and  that  he  ought  not,  by  the 
fhow  of  fuperfluous  aid,  to  deprive  the  king  of  any 
part  of  the  honour  of  a  viftory,  which  was  owing  to 
him  alone.  Cuthullin  yields  to  this  generous  fentiment; 
but  we  fee  it  flinging  him  to  the  heart  with  the  fenfe  of 
his  own  difgrace.  "  Then,  Carril,  go,"  replied  the 
chief,  "  and  greet  the  king  of  Morven.  When  Lochiin 
'^  falls  away  like  a  ftream  after  rain,  and  the  noife  of 
"  the  battle  is  over,  then  be  thy  voice  fweet  in  his  ear, 
"  to  praife  the  king  of  fwords.  Give  him  the  fword  of 
*'  Caithbat;  for  Cuthullin  is  worthy  no  more  to  lift  the 
"  arms  of  his  fathers.  But,  O  ye  gholis  of  the  lonely 
*'  Cromia !  Ye  fouls  of  chiefs  that  are  no  more  !  Be  ye 
"  the  companions  of  Cuthullin,  and  talk  to  him  in  the 
*^  cave  of  his  fbrrow.  For  never  more  ihall  I  be  re- 
"  nowned  among  the  mighty  in  the  land.  I  am  like  a 
'^  b°am  that  has  flione  ;  like  a  mill  that  has  fled  away  ; 

"  wlien 


THE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         499 

when  the  blaft  of  the  morning  came,  and  brightened 
the  fliaggy  fide  of  the  hill.  Connal !  talk  of  arms  no 
more  :  Departed  is  my  fame.  My  fighs  fliall  be  on 
Cromla's  wind  3  till  my  footfteps  ceafe  to  be  fee n. 
And  thou,  white-bofomed  Bragela !  mourn  over  the 
fall  of  my  fame ;  for  vanquiflied,  I  will  never  return 
to  thee,  thou  fun-beam  of  Dunfcaich  !" 

■IE^ua.t  ingens 


Uno  in  corde  pudor,  ludufque,  &  confcia  virtus. 

Besides  fuch  extended  pathetick  fcenes,  Offian  fre- 
quently pierces  the  heart  by  a  fingle  unexpected  ftroke. 
When  Olcar  fell  in  battle,  "  No  father  mourned  his  fon 
*'  flain  in  youth  j  no  brother,  his  brother  of  love;  they 
'^  fell  without  tears,  for  the  chief  of  the  people  was 
"  low."  In  the  admirable  interview  of  Heftor  with 
Andromache,  in  the  fixth  Iliad,  the  circumftance  of  the 
child  in  his  nurfe's  amns,  has  often  been  remarked,  as 
adding  much  to  the  tcndernefs  of  the  fcene.  In  the  fol- 
lowing pafTage,  relating  to  the  death  of  Cuthullin,  we 
find  a  circumftance  that  muft  ftrike  the  imagination  with 
ftill  greater  force.  "  And  is  the  fon  of  Semo  fallen  ?" 
faid  Carril  with  a  figh.  "  Mournful  are  Tura's  walls, 
"  and  forrow  dwells  at  Dunfcaich.  Thy  fpoufe  is  hfx: 
"  alone  in  her  youth  ;  the  fon  of  thy  love  is  alone.  He 
"  fhall  come  to  Bragela,  and  alk  her  why  flie  weeps. 
"  He  fhall  lift  his  eyes  to  the  wall,  and  fee  his  father's 
*'  fword,  Whofe  fword  is  that?  he  will  fayj  and  the 
"  foul  of  his  mother  is  fad."  Soon  after  Fingal  had 
fhewn  all  the  grief  of  a  father's  heart  for  Ryao,  one  of 
his  fons,  fallen  in  battle,  he  is  calling,  after  his  accuf- 
tomed  manner,  his  fons  to  the  chace.  "  Call,"  fays  he, 
"  Fillan  and  Ryno — ^But  he  is  not  here — My  fon  refts 
"  on  the  bed  of  death." — This  unexpected  ilart  of  an- 
guifli,  is  worthy  of  the  higheft  tragic  poet. 

If  Ihe  come  in,   fhe'll  fure  fpeak  to  my  wife — 
My  wife  ! — my  wife — What  wife — I  have  no  wife — 
Oh  infupportable  !  Oh  heavy  hour ! 

Othello,  Ad  5.  Scene  7. 

Thi 


500    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION  on 

The  contrivance  of  the  incident  in  both  poets  is  fimi- 
iar;  but  the  circumftances  are  varied  with  judgment. 
Othello  dv/ells  upon  the  name  of  wife,  when  it  had  fal- 
len from  him,  with  the  confufion  and  horror  of  one  tor- 
tured Vv'ith  guilt.  Fingal,  with  the  dignity  of  a  hero, 
corrects  himfelf,  and  fupprcfTes  his  rifing  grief. 

The  contrail  which  Offian  frequently  makes  between 
his  prefent  and  his  former  itatc,  diffufes  over  his  whole 
poetry,  a  folemn  pathetick  air,  which  cannot  fail  to  make 
imprcflion  on  every  heart.  The  conclufion  of  the  fongs 
of  Selma,  is  particularly  calculated  for  this  purpofe. 
Nothing  can  be  more  poetical  and  tender,  or  can  leave 
upon  the  mind,  a  ftronger,  and  more  affecSting  idea  of 
the  venerable  aged  bard.  "  Such  were  the  words  of  the 
*'  bards  in  the  days  of  the  fong;  when  the  king  heard 
"  the  mufic  of  harps,  and  the  tales  of  other  times.  The 
*<^  chiefs  gathered  from  all  their  hills,  and  heard  the  love- 
*'  ly  found.  They  praifed  the  voice  of  Cona*  ;  the  firfb 
"  among  a  thoufand  bards.  But  age  is  now  on  my 
'^  tongue,  and  my  foul  has  faiJed.  I  hear,  fometimes,  the 
"  ghoiis  of  bards,  and  learn  their  pleafant  fong.  But 
"  memory  fails  on  my  mind ;  I  hear  the  call  of  years. 
''  They  fay,  as  they  pafs  along,  Why  does  OlTian  fing  ? 
"  Soon  fhall  he  lie  in  the  narrow  houfe,  and  no  bard 
"  fhall  raife  his  fame.  Roll  on,  ye  dark-brown  years  ! 
"  for  ye  bring  no  joy  in  your  courfe.  Let  the  tomb 
*<  open  to  Offian,  for  his  flrength  has  failed.  The  fons 
"  of  the  fong  are  gone  to  reft.  My  voice  remains,  like 
*'  a  blaftj  that  roars  lonely  on  a  fea-furrounded  rock, 
*'  after  the  v;inds  are  laid.  The  dark  mofs  whiftles  there, 
''  and  the  diftant  mariner  fees  the  waving  trees." 

Upon  the  whole  ^  if  to  feel  ftrongly,  and  to  defcribe 
naturally,  be  the  two  chief  .ingredients  in  poetical  genius, 
Ofnan  muft,  after  fair  examination,  be  held  to  pofTefs 
that  genius  in  a  high  degree.  The  queftion  is  not,  whe- 
ther a  few  improprieties  may  be  pointed  out  in  his  works ; 
v/hether  this,  or  that  paffage,  might  not  have  been  work- 
ed up  with  more  art  and  fliill,  by  foip.e  writer  of  happier 
times  ?  A  thoufand  fuch   cold  and  frivolous  criticifms, 

arc 

*  Ofiian  hiir.fcif  Is  poetically  callcil  The  Voice  oi   Com. 


tHE  POEMS  OF  OSSIAN.         501 

arc  altogether  Indecifive  as  to  his  genuine  merit.  But, 
has  he  the  fpirit,  the  lire,  the  inipiration  of  a  poet  ? 
Does  he  utter  the  voice  of  nature  ?  Does  he  elevate  by 
his  fentiments  ?  Does  he  inrerell  by  his  defcriptions  ? 
Does  he  paint  to  the  heart  as  well  as  to  the  fancy?  Does 
he  make  his  readers  glow,  and  tremble,  and  weep  ? 
Thefe  are  the  great  charafterifiics  of  true  poetry.  Where 
thefe  are  found,  he  muft  be  a  minute  critic  indeet],  who 
can  dwell  upon  flight  dcfedls.  A  few  beauties  of  this  high 
kind,  tranfccnd  whole  volumes  of  faultlefs  mediocrity. 
Uncouth  and  abrupt,  Oflian  may  fometimes  appear,  by 
rcafon  of  his  concifenefs.  But  he  is  fublime,  he  is  pa- 
thetic, in  an  eminent  degree.  If  he  has  not  the  extenfive 
knowledge,  the  regular  dignity  of  narration,  the  fulnefs 
and  accuracy  of  defcription,  which  we  find  in  Homer 
and  Virgil,  yet,  in  ftrength  of  imagination,  in  grandeur 
of  fentiment,  in  native  majelly  of  paffion,  he  is  fully 
their  equal.  It'  he  flows  not  always  like  a  clear  fl:ream, 
yet  he  breaks  forth  often  like  a  torrent  of  fire.  Of  art, 
too,  he  is  far  from  being  defl:itute  ;  and  his  imagination 
is  remarkable  for  delicacy  as  well  as  fl:rength.  Seldom 
or  never  is  he  either  trifling  or  tedious;  and  if  he  be 
thought  too  melancholy,  yet  he  is  always  moral.  Tho' 
his  merit  were  in  other  refpefts  much  leis  than  it  is,  this 
alone  ought  to  entitle  him  to  high  regard,  that  his  wri- 
tings are  remarkably  favourable  to  virtue.  They  awake 
the  tendereil  fympathies,  and  infpire  the  moft  generous 
emotions.  No  reader  can  rife  from  him,  without  being 
warmed  with  the  ientiments  of  humanity,  virtue  and  ho- 
nour. 

Though  unacquainted  with  the  original  language, 
there  is  no  one  but  mufl:  judge  the  tranflation  to  deferve 
the  higheft  praife,  on  account  of  its  beauty  and  elegance. 
Of  its  faithful nefs  and  accuracy,  I  have  been  afl^ured  by 
perfons  fkilled  in  the  Gaelic  tongue,  who,  from  their 
youth,  were  acquainted  with  many  of  thefe  poems  of 
Ofiian.  To  transfafe  fuch  fpirited  and  fervid  ideas  from 
one  language  into  another;  to  tranflate  literally,  and 
yet  with  fuch  a  glow  of  poetry ;  to  keep  alive  fo  much 
paflTion,  and  fupport  fo  much  dignity  throughout,  is  one 

of 


502    A  CRITICAL  DISSERTATION,  &c. 

of  the  moll  diiticulc  works  of  genius,  and  proves  the 
tranOator  to  have  been  animated  with  no  fmall  portion  of 
Offian's  fpirit. 

The  meafured  profe  v/hich  he  has  employed,  poflefles 
confiderabie  advantages  above  any  fort  of  verfification 
he  could  have  chofen.  Whilft  it  pleafes  and  fills  the 
ear  v/ith  a  variety  of  harmonious  cadences,  being,  at  the 
fame  time,-  freer  from  conftraint,  in  the  choice  and  ar- 
rangement of  words,  it  allows  the  fpirit  of  the  original 
to  be  exhibited  with  more  juftnefs,  force,  and  fimplicity. 
Ek  -?;3nL,  hov/ever,  and  mafteriy  as  Mr.  Macpherfon's 
tranfiation  is,  we  muft  never  forget,  whilil  v/e  read  it,  that 
we  are  putting  the  m.erit  of  the  original  to  a  fevere  teft. 
For  we  are  examining  a  poet  ftripped  of  his  native  drefs  ; 
divefted  of  the  harmony  of  his  own  numbers.  We 
know  how  much  grace  and  energy  the  works  of  the  Greek 
and  Latin  poets  receive  from  the  charm  of  verfification 
in  their  original  languages.  If  then,  deflitute  of  this 
advantage,  exhibited  in  a  literal  verfion,  OfTian  ftill  has 
power  to  pleafe  as  a  poet  j  and  not  to  pleafe  only,  but 
often  to  command,  to  tranfport,  to  melt  the  heart  3  we 
may  very  fafely  infer,  that  his  produdlions  are  the  ofF- 
fpring  of  true  and  uncommon  genius  ;  and  we  may  very 
boldly  afiign  him  a  place  among  thofe,  whofe  works  are 
to  lall  for  ages. 


*  {^*- 


%-
