Ihi 


°  ^ 


•h  ---'.' 


y/y^ 


x^Jx^v 


I 


jpurltra!  Moth* 
HANNAH    MORK. 

AN  ACCOCNT  OF  BEB  LITE  . 


TUB 


POIiTICAL   WORKS 


OP 


HANNAH  MORE. 


^ISSttf)  a  Memoir  of  tf)c  ^utl^on 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  SCOTT,  WEBSTER,  &  GEARY, 
CHARTERHOUSE-SQUARE. 


MDCCCXXXIX, 


GLASGOW  t 
pniNTCD  BT  GBORQB  BROOKMAH. 


CONTENTS. 


Memoir  of  the  Aatiior    . 

SACRED  DRAMAS. 
IncroduetioD  .  .  .  • 

Moms  in  the  Bulnishci 

David  and  Goliath   .  .  .  . 

Belahasxar       .... 
Daniel       .  .  .  .  < 

Refleetioni  of  King  Heceldah  in  his  sieknen 
The  Search  after  Hm>piiiess,  a  Pastoral  Drama 
Ode  to  Charity 


TRAGEDIES. 


The  Inflexible  Cajitlve 

Perey 

The  Fatal  Falsehood 


▼ 

S 

9 

n 

81 

TS 

101 

107 

133 


159 

.    S13 

169 


POEMS. 


Sir  Eldred  of  tlie  Bower  .  .  .  . 

The  Bleeding  Rock  . 

An  Heroie  Epistle  to  Miss  Sally  Home 

Ode  ftom  H.  M.  at  Bristol  to  Dragon,  Mr  Ganriek's 

dog  ...  . 

Plorio)  a  Tale ..... 
The  Bas  Blen.  or  Conversation 
SensibiUty        ..... 
The  nare  Trade 

Bishop  Bonner'k  Ghost  .... 
Hie  Pnppet-Show    .... 
Dan  and  Jane   ..... 
The  Two  Gardeners 

The  Lady  and  the  Pie    .  . 

The  Plnm-eakes      .... 
Ttam  the  Carpet,  or  the  Two  Weavers 
Inscription  in  Fairy  Bower     • 
The  Foolish  Traveller    .... 
The  Impotk"  'lUy  eonquerrd  . 


House* 


3S1 
838 
844 


851 
859 
881 
885 
405 
419 
480 
425 
488 
431 
434 
438 
^\ 


Iv 


CONTKNTS. 


The  Bad  lUrgAln 
Here  and  There 


BALLADS. 

The  Honest  Miller  of  01(\ucettrr«hire 
King  Dionysius  and  Squire  Damocles 
The  Hackney  Coachman  • 

Robert  and  Richard,  or  the  Ohoat  of  Toor  Molly 
The  Cari>enter,  or  the  Danger  of  Evil  Company 
The  Riot,  or  Haifa  Loaf  belter  than  no  Bread 
Patient  Joe       ..... 
Hie  Oin  Shop,  or  a  Peep  into  a  Prison 

HTMNS.  EPITAPHS.  AND  INSCRIPTION 


The  True  Heroes,  or  the  Noble  Army  of  Marty 

A  Christmas  Hymn  .  . 

Morning  Soliloquy         .  . 

Hymn  of  Praise  for  the  abundant  Harvest 

On  the  Rev.  Mr  Penrose  . 

On  Mrs  Blandford    .  . 

On  Mrs  LlUle 

On  General  Lawrence  . 

On  tile  Rev.  Mr  Hunter 

To  the  Memory  of  Mrs  Elizabeth  Ives 

On  Cluer  Dicey,  Esq.     . 

On  a  Young  Lady    .  . 

Inseription  on  a  Cenotaph  . 

On  the  Rev.  Mr  Love 

On  Sir  James  Stonhouse,  Bart.,  M.D.        • 

On  Sarah  Stonhouat  • 

On  Mr  Sb^pluid  •  •  • 


IS 


S. 


/ 


MEMOIR  OF  HANNAH  MORE. 


This  distinguished  advocate  of  Evangelical  religion 
and  pure  morality,  was  descended  from  a  respectable 
iamily,  and  bom  in  the  parish  of  St^leton  in  Glouces- 
tershire, in  the  year  1745.    She  was  one  of  five  sisters. 

It  appears  from  the  information  commanicated  by  her 
elegant  biogn^pher  Mr  Roberts,  to  whose  labours  and 
researches  we  are  indebted  for  the  materials  of  the  pre- 
sent sketch,  that  the  grandfather  of  cur  authoress  had 
kept  an  endowed  school  near  the  village,  which  was  her 
birthplace,  and  that  her  fother  (impoverished  by  the 
unfavourable  result  of  a  lawsuit,  in  which  considerable 
property  was  involved,)  lived  in  seclusion,  devoting  his 
time  and  talents  to  the  education  of  his  daughters,  with 
a  view  to  their  keeping  school.  The  old  man  being 
possessed  of  varied  and  solid  learning,  taught  the  ele- 
mentary principles  of  Geometry  and  the  rudiments  of 
the  Latin  langiuige,  to  the  youthful  Hannah,  whose 
precocity  of  understanding,  and  quickness  of  apprehen- 
sion were  such  as  to  render  Ids  task  an  easy  one. 

**  HoUiter  studio  fallente  Uborem. 

It  is  recorded  of  her  as  an  anecdote  prophetic  of  the 
realities  of  her  raaturer  years,  that  in  the  plays  of  her 
childhood,  she  used  to  ride  upon  a  chair  and  tell  her 
sisters  f  the  eldest  of  whom  was  then  qualified  to  become 
an  instructress)  that  she  would  go  to  London  to  sec 
booksellers  and  bishops,  and  that  she  hoped  one  day  to 
buy  a  whole  quire  of  paper. 

At  the  age  of  twelve,  Hannah  was  removed  from  the 
paternal  roof  to  the  Boarding  scJiool  of  her  siiiters,  at 
Bristol.  Here  this  intelligent  girl  had  considerable  ad- 
vantages of  which  she  eagerly  availed  herself,  acquiring 
in  particular,  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  the  proTiuxv- 
dation  and  idiom  of  the  fronch  language,  aud  «o 


vi  MEMOIR  OF 

condderablo  were  her  powers  of  general  couversation  a? 
gfxteen,  that  Doctor  Woodward,  a  physician  and  a  i 
eminent  scholar,  when  one  day  attending  her  in  an  ill- 
ness— and  all  her  life  she  was  of  a  delicate  constitution, 
forgot  in  the  fascinations  of  her  discourse,  the  real  pur- 
port of  his  visit,  until  he  had  nearly  left  the  house ; 
happily  for  his  professional  credit  he  returned  from  the 
stairs  excUdming,  *'  Bless  me !  I  forgot  to  ask  the  girl 
how  she  is  !*'  and  entered  the  room  again,  saying,  **  How 
are  you  to-day,  my  poor  child  ?" 

The  first  fruit  of  Hannah  More's  literary  productions 
was  the  pastoral  drama,  entitled  the  **  Search  after 
Happiness,"  which  she  wrote,  and  we  believe,  published 
in  1762.  Tills  poem  originated,  it  is  said,  in  her  anxiety 
to  supply  to  tiie  young,  for  the  exercise  of  memory, 
more  select  and  purer  matter,  than  the  publications  of 
that  day  afforded. 

The  dass  of  useful  rudiinental  works  which  has  since 
issued  in  such  prolific  succession  from  the  bookshops, 
and  which  are  both  tlie  causes  and  effects  of  superior 
moral  culture,  was  then  unknown;  and  the  power  of 
the  press,  as  it  affects  the  intellectual  character  of 
females  especially,  was  unrecognised  and  uufelt.  At 
the  age  of  twenty  we  find  her  exercising  her  mind  in 
the  study  of  the  Italian  and  Spanish  languages,  and  in 
occasional  translations  from  both. 

Even  at  this  period  of  her  life,  her  literary  character 
had  spread  abroad  and  was  duly  appreciated.  Among 
the  friends  whose  tastes  and  judgment,  must  have  essen- 
tially aided  in  the  development  of  her  mental  powers 
and  in  the  selection  of  the  best  subjects,  she  had  tho 
'  happy  privilege  to  reckon  many  characters  of  literary 
distinction  and  moral  excellence,  who  honoured  httr 
with  their  intimacy  to  the  close  of  life. 

Nor  was  this  intellectual  and  fosdnating  woman 
without  an  admirer  of  a  different  and  more  tender  char- 
acter. Mr  Turner,  a  gentleman  of  considerable  property, 
but  much  older  than  the  object  of  his  admiration,  pro- 
posed for  and  was  accepted  by  Hannah,  who  in  antici- 
pation of  the  result,  resigned  her  sliare  in  her  sisters* 
school,  and  incurred  expenses  which  embarrassed  her. 
Circumstances  which  arc  not  fully  explained  prevented 
this  connexion  from  taking  place.  Mr  Tumor  (whose 
temper  appears  to  have  been   cai>riciou8,  and  who 


HANNAH  MORE.  r\i 

indisputably  trifled  with  her  feelingfs,)  has  shown  thai 
no  blaine  could  t>e  attributable  to  her,  by  liia  havia|^ 
afterwards  solicited  a  renewal  of  the  engagement.  On 
Uds  being  declined,  he  settled  upon  her  an  annuity,  whMi 
by  the  iutervention  of  Doctor  Stonehouse,  she  was  with 
difficulty  prevailed  upon  to  accept ;  and  at  his  deoith  ha 
bequeathed  to  her  the  sum  of  one  thousand  pounds. 

The  effect  of  this  disappohitment  on  the  tody  was,  a 
resolution  never  again  to  risk  a  similar  entanglement, 
and  to  this  determination,  she  steadily  adhered,  althoogk 
she  was  very  soon  afterwards  pressed  to  abandon  it. 

Hannah  Mwe,  who  was  now  in  her  twenty-second 
year,  had  all  the  enthusiasm  natural  to  one  of  refined 
tastes  and  quick  sensibihties.  She  was  ardently  anxious 
to  witness  the  versatile  and  extraordinary  powers  ot 
Ganick,  who  was  now  about  to  close  his  theatrical  career. 
At  this  time  persons  who  moved  In  the  religious  drdei 
of  society,  did  not  entertain  the  same  scruples  about 
the  propriety  of  attending  plays,  which  now  very  for- 
tunately prevail.  She  first  saw  this  object  of  her 
admiration  in  **  King  Lear,"  and  was  powerfully  af- 
fected. In  the  following  year,  she  made  another  visit 
to  London,  and  had  the  happiness  to  be  introduced  to  Mr 
and  Mrs  Garrick,  with  whom  she  afterwards  lived  ou 
terms  of  the  most  intimate  friendship.  At  their  house 
elie  became  acquainted  with  Mrs  Montagu,  the  vindica- 
tor of  Shakspeare  from  the  absurd  criticisms  of  Voltaire, 
whom  she  describes  as  **  delicate  evoi  to  fragility,  with 
a  countenance  the  most  animated  in  the  world,  blending 
the  sprightly  vivacity  of  fifteen  with  the  %visdom  of  a 
Nestor,  and  as  not  only  the  finest  genius  but  the  finest 
lady  she  ever  knew." 

Th»re  too  she  met  and  was  made^  known  to  Samuel 
Johnson  and  Edmund  Burke,  those  shining  lights,  the 
one  of  EngUslt  literature,  and  the  oUier  of  Knglisk 
statesmen. 

The  great  moralbt  has  been  usually  represented  as 
more  to  be  respected  than  loved— but  our  authoress  in 
bar  letters  gives  many  very  new  and  agreeable  glimpses 
of  his  character.  In  writing  to  her  sister  Sarali,  &hc  thus 
describes  her  impressions  on  first  visiting  him  with  Bliss 
Beymrids  at  his  own  house. 

•'  The  most  amiable  and  obliging  of  women  orde.TcA 
Imv  eoach  to  take  us  to  Dr  JohnsQn's  own  houio  { t*(a« 


viii  MEMOIR  OF 

Abyssuiia's  Johnson,  Dictionary  Johnson,  Rambler's, 
Idltir'd  and  Ir(>nc's  Johnson  !  Can  you  picture  to  your- 
selves the  palpitation  of  our  hearts  as  we  approached 
his  mansion  ?  When  our  visit  was  ended  he  called  for 
his  hat  (as  it  rained)  to  attend  us  down  a  very  long  entry 
to  our  coach,  and  not  Rasselas  himself  could  have 
acquitted  himself  more  en  caoalicr."" 

In  the  following  year,  she  had  again  the  advantage 
of  associating  familiarly  with  the  elite  of  the  world  of 
letters,  including  the  most  distinguished  characters  of 
her  own  sex,  and  although  in  danger  of  being  spoiled  by 
the  adulatory  homage  wliich  was  freely  paid  to  her 
worth  and  talents,  never  was  w»)man  less  inflated  by 
the  admiration  of  her  genius,  nor  mure  improved  by  in- 
tercourse with  intellectual  society. 

But  while  her  taste  was  attaining  a  high  degree  of 
refinement,  her  christian  dispositions  acquired  fresh 
energies,  and  in  her  letters  written  in  unreserved  con- 
fidentre  to  her  school  keeping  sisters,  we  find  the  eviden- 
ces of  heartfelt  piety  and  tenderness  of  soul  on  every 
point,  in  which  she  perceived  an  aberration  from  chris- 
tian practice.  For  example — one  evening  at  the  opera, 
she  thought  of  the  call ;  What  docst  thou  here,  Elijah  ? 
and  was  always  painfully  atfected  by  any  violation  of 
tlie  sacredness  of  the  Sabbath,  and  never  sanctioned  by 
her  own  conduct  the  habit  of  making  or  receiving  any 
visits  on  tliat  day,  as  she  deemed  them  inconsistent  with 
practical  devotion ;  and  even  in  the  enj<)yment  of  edifying 
and  delightful  conversations,  on  a  particular  Sunday  she 
thus  moralizes  on  their  insufficiency  to  satisfy  the  long- 
ings and  aspirations  of  a  religious  temper — "  For  my  own 
part  (written  on  a  Sunday  evening  to  her  sisters)  the 
more  I  see  of  the  honoured,  famed,  and  great ;  the  more 
I  see  of  the  littleness,  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  all  created 
good,  and  thnt  no  earthly  pleasure  can  fill  up  the  wants 
of  the  immortal  principle  within ;  one  need  go  no  farther 
than  the  company  I  have  just  left,  to  be  convinced  that 
pain  is  for  man,  and  that  fortune,  talents  and  science, 
confer  no  exemption  from  the  general  lot.  Mrs  Mon- 
tague, eminently  distinguished  for  wit  and  virtue,  tlie 
wisest  where  all  are  wise,  is  hastening  to  insensiblo 
decay  by  a  slow  but  sure  hectic.  Mrs  Chapone  has 
experienced  the  severest  reverses  of  fortune,  and  Mrs 
Boscawen's  life  Las  been  a  continued  series  of  affiictionsi 


HANNAH  MORE.  fx 

itiat  may  almost  bear  a  parallel  with  those  of  the  righte- 
ous man  of  Uz.  Tell  me  then  what  is  it  to  be  wise?" 
Again  she  retomed  to  her  home,  where  she  composed 
as  an  experimental  effort  the  legendary  talc  of  "  Sir 
Eldred  of  the  Bower,"  and  "The  Bleeding  Rock/'  for 
wliirh  productions  of  her  muse  Mr  Cadell  paid  her  a  sum 
much  exceeding  her  own  estimate  of  their  worth.  These 
popms  obtained  the  approval  of  those  best  qualified  to 
judge  of  them  :  her  friend  Garrick  read  "Sir  Elilied* 
to  a  party  of  hor  acquaintances  with  such  feeling  aa 
affected  to  tears  his  own  wife,  who  was  well  accustomed 
to  the  graces  of  his  intonation,  and  the  authoress  hers^ 
shed  tears  abundantly ;  and  Johnson  declared  on  perus- 
ing it  that  "  Miss  More  had  but  one  fault,  that  of  suffer- 
ing herself  to  gaze  upon  the  barren  rocks  of  Bristol, 
while  the  rich  pastures  of  London  had  no  fence  to 
exclude  her  from  them."  lie  repeated  many  of  the 
stanzas  by  heart ;  and  he  read  both  these  poems  through 
at  the  house  of  Garrick,  and  suggested  some  alterations 
in  the  first  stanza  of  "  Sir  Eldred,*'  but  not  altering  one 
word  of  the  other  poem.  At  this  time  (1776)  one  of 
Hannah's  sisters  was  -writh  her  in  London,  and  in  a  letter 
to  another  sister  at  Bristol,  thus  playfully  alludes  to  the 
happy  nature  of  the  intercourse  which  subsisted  between 
the  '  Moralist*  and  the  interesting  females  of  the  elegant 
society  in  which  they  were  domesticated. 

*'  If  a  wedding  should  take  place  before  onr  return, 
don't  be  surprised — between  the  mother  of  •  Sir  Eldred' 
and  the  father  of  my  much  loved  *  Irene  ;*  nay,  Mrs 
Montague  says,  if  tender  words  are  the  precursors  oi 
connubial  engagements,  we  may  expect  great  things ; 
for  it  is  nothing  but,  *  Qiild,'  '  Little  Fool,'  •  Love ' 
and  *  Dearest.'  After  much  critical  discourse,  he  turns 
round  to  me,  and  with  one  of  his  most  amiable  looks, 
which  must  be  seen,  to  form  the  least  idea  of  it.  he  says, 
•  I  have  hoard  that  you  are  engaged  in  the  useful  and 
honoumble  employment  of  teaching  young  Lidies  ;'  upon 
which,  nnth  all  the  same  ease,  familiarity,  and  confidence, 
as  we  should  have  done,  had  only  our  own  Dr  Stone- 
house  been  present,  we  entered  upon  the  history  of  <.ur 
birth,  parentage,  and  education,  showing  how  we  were 
bom  with  more  desires  than  guineas,  and  how,  as  years 
increased,  our  appetites  increased  also,  the  cuplio;vvd  xvX 
home  being  too  small  to  gratify  them ;  and  how  \v\V\i  i^ 

a2 


X  MEMOIR  OF 

bottle  of  water,  a  bed,  and  a  blanket,  wc  set  out  to  seek 
our  fortunes ;  and  how  wo  found  a  great  bouse,  with 
notliing  in  it;  and  how  it  was  like  to  remain  so  till 
looking  into  our  knowledge-box,  we  happened  to  find  a 
little  kamingt  a  good  thing  when  land  is  gone,*  or 
rather  none ;  and  so  at  last  by  giving  a  little  of  tlus 
little  laming  to  those  who  had  less,  we  got  a  good  storo 
of  gold  in  return,  but  how,  alas !  we  wanted  the  wit  to 
keep  it. — I  love  you  both ;  cried  the  inamorato,— I  lov« 
you  all  five — I  never  was  at  Bristol— I  will  come  on 
purpose  to  see  you.  Wliat!  five  women  live  happily 
together!  I  will  come  and  see  you— I  have  spent  a 
happy  evening— I  am  glad  I  came — God  for  ever  bless 
you,  you  live  to  shame  duchesses.  He  took  his  leave 
with  so  much  warmth  and  tenderness,  we  were  quite 
affected  at  his  manner.*' 

Amidst  her  varied  range  of  literary  f4>plJcation,  Theo- 
logy had  a  superior  charm  for  her,  and  of  sermons  she 
says,  there  are  few  persons  to  whom  one  can  venture  to 
recommend  tiiem.  She  herself  read  all  that  were  deserv- 
ing of  notice,  with  a  power  of  discrimination,  an  acute- 
ncss  of  Judgment,  and  a  fastidiousness  of  criticism, 
worthy  even  of  her  "  gay  and  libertine  friend  *'  Johnson, 
as  ^e  playfully  called  the  grave  moralist.  As  an  instance 
of  this,  we  may  notice  her  observation  on  the  frequent 
use  of  tlie  term  vice,  in  the  untranslated  sermons  of 
Saurin ;  **  I  think  tin  is  a  tlieolog^cal,  vice  a  moral,  and 
crime  a  Judicial  term." 

It  is,  however,  more  than  probable,  that  she  was 
indebted  for  these  distinctions  to  having  read  the  re- 
marks of  Locke  on  *'  moral  relations,"  in  which  divine, 
civil,  and  philosophical  laws  are  respectively  termed 
measures  of  tin  and  duty,  crimet  and  innocencet,  vifttie 
and  vice.  She  returned  to  Bristol  uninjured  by  tho 
blandisliments  of  fashion  and  adulation,  and  with  all  her 
original  simplicity  of  character.  "  The  constitution  of 
her  mind  was  so  opposed  to  sophistication  and  art,  that 
rank,  literature,  affectation,  and  fashion,  saw  tho  bird 
e::cape  as  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  without  losing  a 
feather  of  ils  natural  plumage,  to  soar  at  large  in  its 
own  free  element,  and  revisit  its  accustomed  scenes.** 

*  Sb*  slladed  evidently  to  the  eoaplet  in  Hodlbrast— i 
"  When  foods  and  Und  and  all  it  spent. 
Then  leamiof  is  nuMt  csecllent.*' 


HANNAH  MOBE.  xl 

Miu  Hannnh  Morc's  domestkation  with  the  Oarricka* 
and  the  dramatic  taste  which  ao  predominated  in  the 
society  which  osually  frequented  the  hos|rftable  house  of 
the  British  Bosdns,  probably  mlginated  the  tragedy  of 
**  Percy,**  which  was  presented  to  the  public  at  the  close 
ttf  1777»  and  most  lavourably  received.  It  had  the 
advantage  of  appearing  under  the  friendly  ausfHces  nf 
Oarrick,  who  wrote  the  Prologue  and  Epilogue,  and 
exerted  himself  unceasingly  in  all  the  arrangemoits 
connected  with  its  representation  before  the  public.  The 
crities  approved ;  four  thousand  copies  were  sold  within 
a  fortnight  after  publication,  and  altogether  the  success 
of  this  play  was  enough  to  disturb  the  equanimity  of  a 
leas  regubrfied  temperament. 

Dr  Percy,  the  bishop  of  Dromore,  and  other  grave 
churchmen  attended  the  representation,  and  from  the 
critical  and  elegant  pen  of  the  prelate,  she  was  favoured 
with  the  following  note :— **  Dr  Perry  waits  on  Mrs 
More,  with  his  best  thanks  for  her  most  invaluable 
IMVsent  of  **  Percy,**  corrected  with  her  own  liand,  which 
he  shall  ever  highly  value  and  keep  as  a  pledge  of 
friendship.  He  should  not  have  delayed  returning  his 
sincere  acknowledgments  so  long,  but  he  has  been  for 
'  many  days  past,  wholly  engaged  in  regulating  and  dis- 
pensing the  duke's  annual  ciuirity  to  many  hundreds 
ef  poor.**  To  this  a  personal  vint  succeeded  from  his 
lordship  to  present  the  congratulations  of  the  duke  and 
duchess  of  Northumberland,  on  the  success  of  "  Percy,** 
and  from  Mackenzie,  whose  mortal  span  had  been 
nearly  commensurate  with  her  own,  she  had  the  grati- 
fication of  receiving  a  characteristic  letter  on  the  8ame 
•ubject,  in  which  be  writes,  **  Though  a  man,  and  a  man 
•f  business,  I  too  can  shed  tears,  and  feel  the  luxury 
of  shedding  them." 

In  the  succeeding  summer  1778,  we  find  her  mind 
verging  with  its  wonted  tendency,  towards  the  study  of 
scriptural  subjects ;  and  in  a  letter  to  Iier  friend  Mrs 
Ouatldn,  she  states,  that  she  l.ad  rend  over  three  times, 
within  a  very  short  period,  tlie  "  Epistle.","  with  Locke's 
paraphrase,  and  thnt  of  another,  in  wliich  the  obscurities 
of  St  Paul  were  olncidated ;  wliirh  rending,  without 
doubt,  became  tlie  groundwork  for  the  noble  os^y 
which  she  aftcrwnrda  composed  on  the  life  nnd  writings 
of  the  same  Apostle.    Amidst  tlic  varied  6u\)jc€l&  oi  Ywr 


xli  MEMOIR  OF 

Berious  contemplation,  the  knowlcdg-e  of  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  prominent  one,  and  by  this  her  more  discursive 
reflections  uerc  controllp«l.  Slie  liad  about  this  tinio 
the  satisfaction  of  formin*^  an  acquaintance  witli  Dr 
Forteus,  then  bishop  of  Loudon,  wliicli  was  only  dis- 
solved at  his  deatli.  But  whilst  she  was  thus  increasing^ 
the  number  of  her  friends,  she  had  also  to  regret  the 
loss  of  Mr  Garrick,  who  had  been  her  generous  and  dis- 
interested friend  for  many  years ;  and  to  whom  sh« 
owed  her  introduction  to  the  most  eminent  literary 
society.  The  disruption  of  tliis  connecting  link,  between 
her  and  the  gay  and  brilliant  world,  occasioned  such  a 
revolution  in  her  feeling's,  as  led  her  to  detach  herself 
from  those  habits  and  associations,  which,  while  they 
gratified  her  intellectual  tastes  and  predilections,  formed 
an  opposing"  barrier  to  the  concentration  of  her  thoughts 
and  energies  on  "the  deep  things  of  God." 

The  soul-harrowing  ceremony  of  the  interment  of  her 
best  friend  in  Westminster  abbey  she  had  the  fortitude 
to  witness,  and  thus,  in  a  letter  to  Bristol,  she  concludes 
her  details  of  the  mournful  pageant. — "  And  this  is  all  of 
Garrick !  yet  a  very  little  while  and  he  shall  say  to  the 
worm,  Thou  art  my  brother,  and  to  corruption,  thou  art 
iny  mother  and  my  sister ;  so  passes  away  the  fashion 
of  this  world,  and  the  very  same  night  he  was  buried, 
the  playhouses  were  as  full  as  if  no  such  thing  had  hap- 
pened ;  nay,  the  very  mourners  of  the  day  partook  of  the 
revelries  of  the  night,  the  same  night  too."  Miss  Hannah 
More  continued  an  unabated  intimacy  with  Mrs  Garrick; 
and  every  year  while  the  widow  lived,  visited  her  at 
Hampton  Court,  where  she  indulged  in  restrained  and 
mi  obtrusive  grief,  which  never  was  obliterated  from  her 
affectionate  heart. 

Eiicourag^ed  by  the  success  of  "Percy,"  she  wrote 
another  tragedy,  "  Fatal  Falsehood,"  which  met  with 
considerable  success,  but  not  equal  to  that  which  had 
cttendod  the  representation  of  "  Percy  ;*'  and  on  the 
occasion  of  preparing-  for  the  press  a  second  edition  of 
tins  play,  her  publisher  oboerved  to  her  "  that  she  was  too 
good  a  Christian  for  an  author."  In  I7B0,  Miss  Hannah 
More  again  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  attending  parties  of 
the  filite  of  London  society,  at  the  house  of  Mrs  Delany, 
where  she  met,  amongst  persons  of  the  most  elevated 
rank,  Horace  \Valpoh»,  Soamc  Jenyns,  Mr  Pei)y8,  and  Mra 


HANNAH  aiORE.  xiif 

Boscawcn,  nnd  in  the  same  year,  visited  Dr  Kennicott 
at  Oxford,  where  she  cominciu'ed  her  long  arqaaintanee 
with  Dr  Home,  aftenn-ards  bishop  of  Norwich.  And  it 
appears  by  a  letter  to  Iier  sisters,  that  the  pioas  and 
learuiKi  Lowth,  addressed  to  her  some  Latin  verses, 
no  inconsiderable  compliment  to  her  merits  and  learning  ; 
and  Dr  Home,  in  the  following  year,  condescended  to 
present  her  with  a  practical  jen  d'esprit  on  an  occasion 
of  social  conviviality. 

In  1782,  the  Sacred  Dramas,  with  the  poem  of  Sensihf. 
iity,  appeared ;  and  these  have  since  reached  a  nineteenth 
edition.  The  authoress  "feared  at  one  time  that  the 
word  Sacrfd  in  the  title,  was  tying  a  millstone  about  the 
neck  of  Sensibility,  that  would  drown  them  both  to- 
gether." 

Bishops  Lowth  and  Forteiis  bore  flattering  testimony 
to  these  dramas,  and  considered  that  they  were  calcu- 
lated to  do  much  good.  But  we  question  the  justness 
of  this  commendation,  as  applied  to  their  representation 
cm  the  stage.  People  do  not  frequent  the  theatre  with 
a  religious  feeling ;  and,  therefore,  no  representations 
should  be  encouraged,  which  may  be  calculated  to 
weaken  our  reverence  for  religion.  Sacred  dramas 
undoubtedly  origiuHted  in  exuberant  piety  and  the  purest 
intention,  but  they  are  liable  to  ;;reat  abuse,  and  thoje 
only  who  have  seen  the  continent.il  representations, 
can  be  aware  of  the  extent  of  the  evil.  Happily  the  taste, 
in  our  own  country,  is  opposed  to  the  adaptation  of 
sfUTcd  subjects  to  the  stage.  They,  however,  may  be 
read  privately,  with  jn'pat  advantage. 

Considering  these  dramas  merely  as  literary  composi- 
tions, there  are  in  them  some  passages  of  striking  pathos 
and  beauty ;  for  example,  in  "  David  and  Goliath" — 

"  And  what  is  dpalh  ? 
Is  it  8C  terrible  to  die,  vnj  brother  ? 
Or  grant  It  terrible,  is  it  for  that 
The  less  inevitable  ?     If  indeed 
We  cuuld,  by  stratagem,  elude  the  blow 
When  some  high  duty  calls  \u  forth  to  die. 
And  thus  for  ever  shun  it,  and  escdpp 
The  universal  lot,— then  fond  selMcve, 
Then  cautious  prudence,  boldly  might  jiro'Icce 
Their  flne-spun  arguments,  their  ler.m'd  har.viKue^b 
Their  cobweb  arts,  their  phrase  sophistical, 


Xlv  MEMOIR  OF 

Their  subtle  doubts,  and  all  the  ippcioui  trick 

Of  selfish  cunning  labouring  for  its  end. 

But  since,  howe'cr  protracted,  death  will  como. 

Why  fondly  study  with  ingenious  pains 

To  put  it  off?— To  breathe  a  little  longer 

Is  to  defer  our  fiate,  but  not  to  shun  it : 

Small  gain  I  which  Wisdom  with  indiiTerent  eye 

Beholds.    Why  wish  to  drink  the  bitter  dregs 

Of  life's  exhausted  chalice,  whose  last  runnings 

Even  at  the  best  are  vapid  ?    Why  not  die, 

(If  Heaven  so  will)  In  manhood's  opening  bloom, 

When  all  the  flush  of  life  is  gay  about  us ; 

When  sprightly  youth,  with  many  a  new-bom  joy. 

Solicits  every  sense  ?    So  may  we  then 

Present  a  sacrifice  unmeet  indeed, 

(Ah  how  unmeet !)  but  less  unworthy  far. 

Than  the  world's  leavings;  than  a  worn  out  heart. 

By  vice  enfeebled,  and  by  vain  desire 

Sunk  and  exhausted !" 

joaae  Han  way  has  stated,  that  on  seeing^  tliese 
dramas,  **he  sat  down  to  read  thcra  with  fear  and 
trembling,  as  he  had  persuaded  liimself  it  was  taking  an 
undue  liberty  with  tlie  scriptures ;"  and  he  has  also  told 
us,  that  he  had  no  sooner  finished  them,  than  he  circu- 
lated them  in  a  female  boarding  school,  where  he  liad 
some  youthful  friends. 

Mrs  Trimmer,  the  useful  compiler  of  Sacred  History, 
And  many  other  excellent  books,  some  years  subse- 
quently to  this  period  conveyed  the  approving  testimony 
of  Sir  A.  Johnston,  late  chief  justico  of  Ceylon,  which 
was  very  gratifying  to  the  authoress. 

His  letter  "informed  her,  that  he  had  caused  many  of 
her  tracts  and  other  parts  of  her  works,  to  be  translated 
into  the  Cingalese,  and  Tamul  languages ;  and  that  they 
were  read  with  pleasure  and  avidity  by  the  natives  • 
confirming  the  account,  by  a  beautiful  specimen  of  a 
Cingalese  translation,  of  the  drama  of  **  Moses  in  the 
Bulrushes,"  written  on  a  Palmyra  leaf,  and  enclosed 
in  a  case  of  the  wood  of  the  country  richly  painted. 

Of  Mr  More,  we  hear  nothing  in  tlie  numerous  letters 
of  his  daughter,  which  have  been  selected  for  publica- 
tion by  her  biographer,  Mr  Roberts,  nor  is  there  one 
addressed  to  liim.  This  omission  on  her  part  is  ni»t 
easily  to  be  explained,  as  it  appears  from  her  own  state- 
ment, that  he  had  not  outlived  Ids  faculties,  nor  been 
doomed  to  the  miseries  of  a  sick  bed.    He  died  at  a  very 


HANNAH  MORE.  xv 

aovanced  age,  in  1783,  and  his  dniglitcr  then  at  Haa^ 
ton  Court  with  Mn  Ganrick,  deeply  and  oaaSectedly 
friered  at  her  berearonent. 

After  this  afflictioo,  she  very  soon  withhM  her  per- 
sonal ■anctinn  from  dramatie  entertaininentB,  rcftuing 
eren  to  be  present  at  any  one  of  the  ezMhitiaDs  of  Sirs 
Siddons,  who  was  thai  artonirfring  the  London  world 
with  her  faistrionie  powers.  Yet  Hannah  More  ocxm- 
donaUy  indulged  the  natural  TirafCity  of  her  nund,  in 
composing  Terses  merely  imagittatrre  and  playful.  In 
1784,  she  wrote  the  **Bas  Blea,"*  of  which  George  IlL 
desired  to  hare  a  copy  in  her  own  hand,  and  of  which 
Pr  Jcrfmson,  in  a  letter  to  Mrs  Tlirale,  says,  "Mka 
H<m"«>»  More  has  written  a  poem  called  the  *Daa 
Bleu,*  which  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  rery  great  perfor- 
mance, it  wanders  about  in  mancoaript,  and  sorely  will 
•oon  find  its  way  to  Bath.*^ 

Miss  Hannah  More  had  gradually  experioiced  the 
oonriction,  that  all  mere  worldly  eigoymaitB  are  insuf- 
ficient to  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  an  immortal  being. 
She  was  desirous  to  withdraw  more  from  the  world, 
and  became  possessed  of  a  little  rural  resdence,  railed 
Cowslip  Green,  near  BristoL  There  she  deroted  herself 
more  strictly  to  the  study  of  the  inspired  writiDgs,  relax- 
ing her  mind  >vith  occupation  in  a  garden,  for  which, 
from  her  earliest  years,  she  had  a  particular  fondness.  She 
•tUl,  howoTer,  continued  her  annual  visits  to  her  friend 
Mn  Qarrick,  in  London,  where  with  erery  inducement 
to  mingle  in  the  gay  society  she  bad  been  formerly  accus- 
tomed to,  she  devoted  her  mornings  urnnterruptedly  to 
religions  observances.  In  her  social  intercourse,  she 
avidled  herself  of  every  opportunity  of  vindicating  the 
ways  of  God,  and  those  evangelical  principles  which 
now  influenced  her  every  opinion  and  action ;  without 
at  the  same  time  showing  any  of  that  counterfeit  sanc- 
tity, which  would  interdict  the  discussion  of  all  sutjects 
of  general  literature  with  persons  of  recognised  infor- 
mation and  expanded  intelligence.  We  accordingly 
find  her  at  this  period  of  her  life,  occasionally  enjoy- 
ing the  sodcty  (rf  the  most  eminent  literary  chisracters 
of  the  day. 

Her  letters  to  her  sisters,  at  Bristol,  iitTitten  in  aD  the 
Inartificial  style  of  unreserved  communication,  bear 
testimony  to  the  elevated  society  in  which  she  fami\\aT\Y 


xvi  MEMOIR  OF 

iniii{^led ;  and  if  tlio  porusjil  of  thorn  excite  in  the  cursory 
and  unreflecting  reiulcr,  n  passin|(  smile  at  her  appar- 
ently ostentatious  piirade  of  intimacy  with  persons  of 
quality,  and  her  self-corn pl.icent  enntneratiun  of  the 
names  of  princes  and  peers,  dowager  duchesses,  bishops, 
baronets,  generals,  and  ambassadors,  while  those  of  a 
lower  scale  in  society,  are  more  incidentally  mentioned, 
it  should  be  borne  in  mind,  that  these  letters  are  confi- 
dential effusions  from  on«*  si^^ter  to  another  ;  and  if,  on  a 
few  occasions,  when  refen'ing  to  the  extraordinary 
popularity  of  some  of  the  productions  of  her  pen,  a  little 
vanity  is  exhibited,  allowances  should  also  be  made  for 
tho  peculiar  circumstances  under  which  these  aft'cc- 
tiooate  sisters  corresponded.  The  elevation  of  Miss 
Hannah  More,  from  the  humble  rank  of  school  mistress^ 
to  familiar  associatitm  with  individuals  of  the  first  rank 
in  Great  Britain,  was  attributable  to  the  fame  which  she 
acquired  by  her  literary  works ;  surely  then  frequent 
allusion  to  their  siu-cess — to  tlioie,  whose  sympathies 
and  interests,  were  identified  with  her  own,  were  per- 
fectly excusable. 

Her  next  publication  was  entitled,  "  Thoughts  on  the 
Manners  of  the  Great."  This  work,  bishop  Porteiia 
declared  himself  "  impatient  to  see  in  the  hands  of  every 
man  and  woman  of  quality  in  London  and  Westmin- 
ster, as  she  alone  could  make  the  fashionable  world  read 
books  of  morality  and  religion,  and  find  improvement 
where  they  only  looked  for  amusement." 

Her  faithful  friend  and  counsellor,  the  Rev.  John 
Newton,  considered  that  she  had  a  consecrated  pen, 
and  in  writiuflf  tc  him  of  the  subject  of  her  new  work, 
she  says,  '*  I  have  not  gone  deep,  it  is  but  a  superficial 
view  of  the  ^ubject,  it  is  confined  to  prevailing  pract  cal 
evils.  Should  this  succeed,  I  hope  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
unolher  time  to  attack  the  principle.  I  have  not  ovvn^'d 
myself  tho  author,  not  so  much  because  of  that  fear  of 
man  which  worketh  a  snare,  as  because,  being  anony- 
mous, it  may  be  ascribed  to  some  better  person,  and 
because  I  fear  I  do  not  live  as  I  write.'*  There  was 
no  vanity  at  least  in  this  candid  acknowledgment,  and 
In  truth,  she  was  now  of  an  humble  spirit,  and  makin^f 
rapid  progress  in  holy  living,  devoting  her  faculties  daily 
more  and  more  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Soon   afterwards   slie   produced   a  litUo   poem   on 


HANNAH  MORB.  xvii 

*'  Slavery,'"  which  brought  her  into  intimate  acquaint- 
ance with  Mr  Wilberforce,  who  was  then  espousing  in 
parliament  the  negroes*  cause,  and  Dr  Home,  on  writ- 
ing to  her  on  this  subject,  expresses  his  hope,  that  *'  the 
Bweet  strains  of  your  muse  may  contribute  towards 
procuring  them  (the  negroes)  comforts  of  a  more  solid 
and  durable  cast,  such  as  you  describe  in  your  hut  page : 
religion  and  humanity  would  determine  the  question 
speedily,  but  policy  will  exhibit  many  a  turn  and  double 
in  the  chase.  About  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century, 
the  swarthy  Cjrprian,  archbishop  of  Carthage,  presided 
in  a  council  of  eighty-seven  African  bishops :  who  knows 
what  times  may  be  seen  there  again  ?*' 

Miss  Hannah  More,  and  her  amiable  sisters,  who  had 
now  retired  from  the  management  of  a  school,  in  the 
following  year,  made  one  of  the  noblest  efforts  on 
record,  in  the  cause  of  social  improvement  by  introduc- 
ing in  the  parish  of  Cheddar,  ten  miles  distant  from  their 
own  residence,  an  extended  scale  of  religious  and  educa- 
tional discipline. 

In  a  letter  to  Mr  Wilberforce,  two  years  afterwards, 
Hannah  More  gives  a  frightful  portraiture  of  the  rural 
demoralizatiou  in  England ;  and  we  are  reluctantly 
obliged  to  agree  with  her,  that  it  was  principally  occa- 
sioned by  tho  negligence  and  worldly-mindedness  of  tlie 
then  resident  clergymen ;  a  neglect,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
which  was  not  then  confined  to  the  vicinity  of  Cheddar, 
but  which  was  too  generally  prevalent,  and  from  which 
has  naturally  flowed  many  of  tho  evils  of  schism  and 
sectarism.  In  that  letter  she  details  the  local  circum- 
stances of  her  neighbourhood,  and  specifies  the  vexatious 
embarrassments  by  which  the  progress  of  her  benevolent 
enterprise  was  impeded.  "  We  found  more  than  two 
thousand  people  in  the  parish,  almost  all  very  poor ;  no 
gentry,  a  dozen  wealthy  farmers,  hard,  brutal,  and 
ignorant.  We  saw  but  one  bible  in  all  the  parish,  and 
that  was  used  to  prop  a  flower  pot  No  clergyman  had 
resided  in  it  for  forty  years.  One  rode  over,  three  miles 
from  Wells,  to  preach  once  on  a  Sunday,  but  no  weekly 
duty  was  done,  or  sick  persons  visited;  and  children 
wore  often  buried  without  any  funeral  service.  Eight 
persons  in  the  morning,  and  twenty  in  the  afternoon, 
was  a  good  congregation."  The  work,  however,  com- 
menced, progressed,  and  prospered;  God bles«>ed \t» foT 


xviii  MEMOIR  UF 

he  saw  **  that  it  was  good/*  pnd  hundreds  of  cliildreu, 
who  would  otherwise  have  been  as  ignorant  of  evangeli- 
cal religion  as  the  beasts  that  perish,  have  been,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  these  exemplary  women,  initiated 
in  the  saving  Icnowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

In  1792,  .when  revolutionary  principles  were  spreading 
their  baneful  influence  throughout  England,  Miss 
Hannah  More  published,  as  an  antidote  to  the  political 
pestilence,  the  *'  Dialogues  of  Village  Politics,  by  Will 
Chip.*'  Of  these  tracts,  several  hundred  tiiousands 
were  almost  instantaneously  bought  up  and  circulated 
in  London  idone. 

Our  authoress  soon  afterwards  published,  "  Remarks 
on  a  production  of  M.  Dupont,  a  French  atheist,  who 
had  addressed  an  impious  oration  to  the  national  conven- 
tion.** Two  hundred  and  forty  pounds  were  the  profits 
of  these  *  Remarks,'  and  this  sum  she  appropriately 
and  considerately  dedicated  to  the  relief  of  tlie  sulfering, 
emigrant  clergy  of  France,  who  in  groat  numbers  had 
sought  the  hospitable  refuge  of  our  shores.  The  *  next 
publication  of  Mrs  Hannah  More,  was  "  Strictures  on 
Female  Education,"  tlian  which,  none  of  her  other 
works  produced  a  greater  sensation  witliin  those  pre- 
cincts of  pleasurable  folly,  familiarly  denominated  the 
circles  of  foshion.  From  every  quarter,  the  homage  of 
^>probation  was  offered  her,  and  among  those  who  ten- 
dered the  meed  of  their  admiration,  were  the  bibhups  of 
London,  Durham,  Landaff,  and  Lincoln. 

Such  a  character  as  that  of  Mrs  Hannah  More  could 
hardly  fail  to  become  an  object  of  interested  jealousy,  to 
those  who  dreaded  the  influence  of  her  example  as  con- 
trasted with  their  own  indefensible  indifference  and 
t-loth.  Eut  amongst  the  most  violent  of  her  opponents, 
is  it  not  surprising  to  find  a  clergyman  of  the  established 
ehurch  ?  From  this  person,  whose  name  was  Here,  she 
had  the  mortification  of  encountering  the  most  uiipro- 
Folced  and  inexcusable  opposition.  He  carried  his 
warfare  against  her  schools  to  such  an  extent  as  to 
cause  her  being  presented  at  the  visitation  of  the  arch- 
deacon of  hia  district,  on  the  frivolously  technical  charge 
that  she  was  keeping  an  unlicensed  school.     He  aUo 

*  About  this  time,  she  dropped  the  title  of  Miss,  and  requested 
ber  Mends  to  address  her  as  Mistress,  wliich  the  always  afterwards 


HANNAH  MORE.  liz 

endeavoured  to  create  a  pr{>jadioe  against  otic  of  her 
teadiers,  who  bad  on  teyenl  occasions  prayed  extem- 
pore with  his  poinls,  and  for  which  Mrs  "«»"*»»  Mora 
was  obliged  to  remove  him,  lest  it  shoold  be  stqpposel 
that  there  was  any  tendency  towards  jmafirism  in  her 
sduMriSyor  a  wish  ontliepart  <rf  the  patroness  to  pro- 
mote Qdyinist  sentiments.  It  appears  that  many  oUmt 
abeordities  and  delinqoencies»  had  been  imputed  to  her  | 
the  very  tracts  which  she  had  pobttshed  to  stem  tktb 
torrent  of  anarday  and  crime,  were  represented  by  her 
opponents,  as  efforts  to  disseminate  the  Fkendi  princi- 
ples of  the  day—those  which  it  was  her  especial  oldeek 
to  discountenance  and  to  remove !  She  was  taunted  at 
the  same  time  with  beiag  an  Arminian  and  a  Calvinist ! 
Mrs  Hannah  More  has  been  som^mes  termed  a  Galvln- 
ist,  and  pobi^M  the  observation  d  her  friend  Mr  New- 
ton, **that  she  was  not  an  enemy  to  the  Calvinists,* 
whUe  she,  Ulce  him,  disapproved  of  some  of  the  schemes  of 
Calvin,  may  give  a  foir  idea  of  her  peculiar  opinions  on 
theological  doctriues.  As  to  controversy,  she  disliked 
It  especially,  for  she  was  too  devout  to  enter  into  the 
wide  and  noisy  field  of  polemical  discussion*  In  a  word, 
she  pressed  upon  her  readers  and  her  arqoaiutanees, 
faith,  as  the  animating  principle,  and  boUuess  as  its 
Intimate  emanation. 

A  declaration,  however,  of  the  sentiments  of  the 
bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  the  diocesan  of  Mr  Bere, 
regarding  the  character  <rf  this  enlightened  and  zealous 
lady,  was  pre-eminentiy  calculated  to  set  her  mind  at 
ease.  His  lordship  honoured  her  with  the  foUowii^ 
remarkable  exculpatory  exprestion ;  **  I  can  only  say, 
tliat  if  you  are  not  a  dnoere  and  z«dons  firiend  to  the 
constitutional  establishment,  both  in  church  and  state, 
you  are  one  of  the  greatest  hypocrites,  as  well  as  one 
of  the  best  writers,  in  his  majesty's  dominions.'* 

It  was  also  most  flattering  to  Mrs  Hannah  More,  to 
receive  on  the  failure  ot  her  oiq;)onenrs  disgraceful 
attack  on  her  character,  kind,  nay,  affectionate  inqui- 
•Hes  from  her  late  royal  highness  the  duchess  of  Glnu- 
rester,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Martha  More.  Sho 
also  received  congratulatory  letters  from  the  bish  >|» 
of  Durham,  and  from  Mr  Alexander  Knox,  who  could 
not  contain  his  honest  indignation  on  learning  that 
'^une  of  the  most  illustrious  females  that  ever  WQ&  \li 


XX  MEMOIR  OF 

the  world— ono  of  the  most  indefatigable  labourers  in 
Che  husbandry  of  Ood — one  of  the  most  truly  evangelical 
divines  of  this  age,  perhaps  almost  of  any  (not  apostolic 
age  (for  such  a  view  of  complete  yet  unexceeding  chris* 
tianity,  I  soberly  think  I  have  never  met  with  elsewhere, 
except  in  the  New  Testament  itself,  as  in  her  latter 
writings) — that  such  a  personage  should  have  her  ten- 
derest  feelings  thus  barbarously  sported  with,  not  merely 
n  pamphlets,  but  even  in  annuuciatory  advertisements 
— and  her  pure  and  exalted  views  traduced  and  vilified 
by  every  acrimonious  bigot — who  has  neither  moral  taste 
enough  to  diecem  her  motives,  nor  common  sense 
enough  to  decide  upon  facts ;  that  all  this,  perhaps  the 
last  scene  in  tlio  life  of  Hannah  More,  is,  I  would  say,  in 
some'  sense  a  national  disgrace.  Public  candour  and 
gratitude  should  in  my  mind,  call  forth  such  an  interfer- 
ence of  the  humane,  the  virtuous,  and  the  respectable, 
as  would  authoritatively  put  an  extinguisher  on  this 
ever  reviving  tlame." 

In  1802,  Mrs  Hannah  More  removed  from  Cowslip 
Green,  and  went  to  reside  at  Barleywood,  where  she 
built  a  house  and  formed  a  delightful  retreat,  and  where 
she  more  unreservedly  perhaps  than  at  any  former 
period  of  her  life  attached  herself  to  spiritual  exercises. 
Her  dinry,  in  1804,  exhibits  satisfactory  evidence  that 
she  had  experienced  all  the  peace  which  perfect  faith 
alone  can  impart  to  the  mind,  and  that  rest  for  her  soul 
which  she  had  often  before  desired. 

In  the  following  year  appeared  her  *•  Hints  towards 
forming  the  Character  of  a  young  Princess,"  intended 
obviously  for  the  late  princess  Charlotte.  Dr  Fisher, 
afterwards  bishop  of  Salisbury,  tlie  excellent  tutor  of 
this  lamented  personage,  took  it  to  the  queen  who  was 
delighted  with  the  work,  though  the  writer  was  un- 
avowed,  and  must  have  been  highly  amused  as  well  as 
gratified  by  the  receipt  of  three  or  four  letters  from 
some  of  the  heads  of  the  church,  beginning  and  termi- 
nating with  "  Sir." 

In  1809,  "  Ccelebs  fn  Search  of  a  Wife,"  was  ushered 
into  the  literary  worhJ,  and  this,  like  its  predecessors, 
was  unacknowledged  until  several  editions  had  been 
printed  off.  This  work,  now  comparativelr/  little  sought 
for,  was  at  first  extremely  popular.  In  America  thirty 
editiom  of  a  thousand  each  were  published. 


HANNAH  MORE.  xxi 

** Practical  Piety"  succeeded,  to  which  Dr  Magee, 
afterwards  archbishop  of  Dublin,  and  the  well  known 
author  of  **  Discourses  on  the  Atonement,"  gave  his  in« 
fluential  testimony.  **  I  have  read  your  work  on  *'  Prac- 
tical Piety,**  with  real  edification.  My  taste,  my  heart, 
and  my  understanding  have  all  received  their  several 
shares  of  improvement,  and  I  have  risen  from  its  study 
with  a  strengthened  impression  of  what  I  have  a]%vays 
felt  on  the  perusal  of  your  writings— that  the  life  of  the 
author  lias  been  a  public  benefit  and  a  public  blessing.** 

As  a  continuation  of  the  same  suliject,  she  wrote 
**  Christian  Mcnrals.**  But  perhaps  the  noblest  of  her 
productions  is  her  "  Essay  on  the  Character  and  Writings 
of  St  Paul,**  which  appeared  about  two  years  after 
**  Christian  Morals,"  against  the  doctrines  oi  which,  she 
antidpated  the  murmurings  of  the  extremes  of  the  high 
Calvinista  and  high  churchmen,  and  in  this  she  was  not 
mistaken.  One  party  considered  that  the  necessity  of 
holiness  was  too  strongly  pressed,  while  the  other  deemed 
the  eflScacy  of  faith  was  magnified  unduly. 

In  1819,  **  Moral  Sketches  of  Prevailing  Opinions  and 
Manners,  Fcnreign  and  Domestic,  with  Reflections  on 
Prayer,**  were  given  to  the  public.  This  work,  with  its 
predecessors,  **  Practical  Piety,**  and  '*  Christian  Morals,** 
formed  a  connected  series,  and  met  like  them  with  an 
astonishingly  rapid  and  extensive  sale.  Very  soon  after 
the  appearance  of  this  latter  work,  it  was  the  misfortune 
of  the  authoress  to  be  deprived  by  death  of  Martha,  the 
last  and  best  beloved  of  her  sbters,  Sarah  having  died 
two  years  before.  This  privation  was  a  severe  affliction 
to  the  now  solitary  sister,  who  felt  that  in  such  a  case 
<*it  is  the  survivor  dies;**  yet  patience  had  its  perfect 
work,  and  the  resignation  of  the  christian  triumphed. 

The  health  of  Mrs  Hannah  More  at  length  gradually 
and  decidedly  declined,  and  during  six  months  of  the 
year  1822,  she  was  confined  to  her  bed,  by  a  febrile  affec- 
tion. This  interval  she  employed,  among  other  prepar- 
ations for  eternity,  in  arranging  the  plan  of  a  little  vol- 
ume on  Prayer,  which  she  survived  to  publish. 

At  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-two,  she  enjoyed  more 
than  her  usual  share  of  health.  But  now  she  felt  she  was 
destined  to  pay  the  unavoidable  penalty,  one  of  the  bit- 
terest conditions  of  prolonged  life,— tlie  loss  successively 
of  all  those  old  and  much  loved  friends  whoao  socicly 


XXll 


MEMOIR  OF 


she  had  onco  so  eminently  adorned  and  enjoyed.  She 
had,  however,  the  happiness  of  receiving  the  Rev.  Daniel 
Wilson  (now  bishop  of  Calcutta)  as  her  g^ost  at  Bar- 
leywood,  where  his  solemn  and  impressive  prayers  and 
expositions  of  Scripture  formed  one  of  the  last  of  her 
earthly  consolations. 

In  consequence  of  the  irregularities  of  her  over-in- 
dolged  servants,  she  was  compelled  to  leave  her  house  in 
the  country,  and  retired  to  Clifton,  where,  after  on  abode 
of  five  years  more,  she  yielded  to  the  repeated  assaults 
of  a  catarrhal  malady— her  old  and  frequent  obstinate 
constitutional  enemy.    In  the  winter  of  1832,  the  powers 
of  her  mind  became  sensibly  impaired,  and  although  fre- 
quent parox3rsms  of  delirium  ensued,  her  "  frame- woric 
of  mortality  "  did  not  give  way  until  the  following  au- 
tumn.   No  language  can  paint  with  more  affecting  sim- 
plicity of  beauty  the  last  hours  of  Mrs  Hannah  More,  than 
those  in  which  they  have  been  described  to  Mr  Roberts, 
her  oft-quoted  biographer,  by  a  Mend  who  continued 
with  her  to  the  end.   **  During  this  illness  of  ten  months, 
the  time  was  past,  in  a  series  of  alternations,  between 
restiessness  and  composure,  long  sleeps,  and  long  wake- 
fulness, with  occasional  great  excitements,  elevated  and 
sunken  spirits.     At  lengfth  nature  seemed  to  shrink 
from  further  conflict,  and  the  time  of  her  deliverance 
drew  near.    On  Friday,  the  6th  of  September,  1833,  we 
offered  up  the  morning  family  devotion  by  her  bed-side  s 
she  was  silent,  and  apparentiy  attentive,  with  her  bands 
devoutiy  lifted  up.    From  eight  in  the  evening  of  thia 
day,  till  nearly  nine,  I  sat  watching  her.    Her  face  was 
smooth  and  glowing ;  there  was  an  unusual  brightness  In 
its  expression.    At  about  ten,  the  symptoms  of  speedy 
departure  could  not  be  doubted.    She  feU  into  a  dosing 
sleep,  and  slight  convulsions  succeeded,  which  seemed  to 
be  attended  with  no  pain.    Contrary  to  expectation,  she 
survived  the  night.     She  continued  till  ten  minutes 
after  one,  when  I  saw  the  last  gentie  breath  escape ;  and 
one  more  was  added  '  to  that  multitude  which  no  man 
can  number,  who  sing  the  praises  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.' " 

We  suttJoin  a  few  desultory  observations  on  the  gen- 
eral tendency  and  style  of  her  miscellaneous  writings. 
The  structure  of  her  poetry  is  frequentiy  too  Johnsonian, 
too  much  laboured  and  precise ;  a  smooth  and  melodious 


IIA^fNAII  MOKE.  i&iK 

renification  ia  not  poetry.  Her  eariiett  prodactioiM,  m 
hare  been  those  of  most  jaroiile  Mithon,  were  poeUeali 
a  correct  ear,  a  lively  imagtaistion,  and  an  intiittato  knovr- 
ledge  of  the  works  of  the  best  EoglUi  poets,  natnrally 
directed  her  first  tentatiTe  wanderings  to  the  primrose 
psths  of  Parnassus ;  with  whatever  snoeess  she  may  haTO 
wooed  the  Nine,  it  is  weO  ascertained  that  her  matner 
jndgmrat  did  not  contemj^ate  with  conplaeaney  the 
yontiifnl  eflfoaions  of  her  mose.  They  attracted,.lK»w- 
ever,  (as  has  been  already  inddentally  noticed,)  amoof 
the  learned  coteries  of  the  day,  much  attrition  and  a 
considerable  share  <^  popular  and  cootempocary  praise, 
nnlike  the  ordinary  fiite<rf  living  genius,  ^^tidi  complains 
with  reason  that  tiie  stingy  fi^ensers  of  literary  laorels, 
by  their  tardy  and  parsimonious  ap^anse,  can 

'*  Bestow  a  gariand  only  on  s  Ucr." 

Having  already  recorded  our  disapprobatioQ  of  resorting 
to  scriptural  sources  for  dramatic  sutifects,  we  shall  only 
further  observe,  that  although  in  the  **  Sacred  Dramaa** 
we  do  not  recognise  those  sublimer  flights  into  the 
regions  of  poetic  inspiration,  whidi  have  immortattied 
the  works  of  later  bards,  yet  is  thore  in  them  moch  to 
command  our  admiration,  and  they  must  be  judged  with 
reference  to  ttie  times  and  circumstances  in  wUdi  they 
appeared.  Perhaps  her  principal  defects  are,  that  she 
indulges  too  fineely  in  meta{^or,  which  is  a  dangerous 
fignre  to  tamper  with,  and  puts  too  often  and  too  graphi- 
cally before  us,  the  vocational  and  didactic  mannerism 
of  a  schoolmi^ress.  But  whatever  fsults  a  churlish 
criticism  may  ascribe  to  the  style  of  her  onnpositions,  in 
casting  up  the  account  and  acfjusting  the  balance  of  her 
perfections  and  her  faults,  the  former  will  appear  c<m- 
qricnously  predominant.  Those  works  cannot  be  fsiriy 
charged  with  glaring  imperfections,  which  have  found 
their  way  to  so  many  foreign  countries,  and  made  such 
powerful  imivessiiMis  on  so  many  minds;  which  have 
advocated  so  forcibly  the  interests  of  Piety  and  Morality, 
and  extorted  such  and  so  many  unequivocal  testimoniflda 
of  excellence,  from  so  many  competent  commentators 
and  distinguished  scholars.  In  the  dedication  of  her 
Dramas  to  tiie  Duchess  of  Beaufort,  she  says  that  she 
has  **  written  them  with  an  humble  wish  to  promote  the 
love  of  piety  and  virtue  in  young  persons.''  Thii  Vndee^ 


xxiv  MEMOIR,  &c. 

appears  to  have  been  the  great  reigning  object  of  all  her 
works.  In  every  line  tliat  flowed  from  her  prolific 
pen,  that  object  is  still  conspicuously  paramount.  That 
object  was  to  reader  virtue  and  worth  more  influential 
by  placing  them  in  broad  contrast  with  impiety  and  vice, 
and  to  bring  out  in  strong  relief  the  indwelling  beauty 
of  a  christian  life.  Her  religious  opinions  were  sincerely 
and  consistently  entertained,  and  her  faith  exhibited  as 
a  living  principle,  not  a  conformity  with  barren  and 
merely  ritual  externals. 

The  complexional  tendency  of  all  her  prose  works  as 
satisfactorily  illustrates  the  unremitting  agency  of  reli- 
gion on  her  mind.  With  what  an  ardent  and  resolute 
devotedness  did  she  assail,  even  in  London,  tlie  strong- 
holds of  privileged  debauchery  and  patrician  vice? 
With  what  a  masculine  energy  did  she  inculcate  and 
exemplify  the  truth,  that  to  be  religious,  it  is  not  indis- 
pensable to  be  disagreeable?  How  perseveringly  and 
systematically  did  she  continue  her  exertions  (exertions 
abandoned  only  with  her  life,)  in  that  great  metropoli- 
tan repertory  of  depravity,  to  counteract  those  opinions 
and  habits  which  had  almost  discarded  the  mask  of  a 
decorous  propriety?  She  must  have  been  a  bold  and. 
skilful  enchantress,  thus,  by  the  mere  wafture  of  her 
moral  wand,  to  have  opened  a  fashionable  entrance  into 
London,  for  the  message  of  gospel  truth ;  sacrificing,  as 
she  did,  the  ei\joyment  of  what  was  most  dear  of  all 
things  to  her  contemplative  mind — ^retirement  and  soli- 
tude.— For  in  her  own  words : 

**  Fearftil  of  fame,  unwilling  to  be  known, 

She  lougbt  but  Heaven's  applauses  and  her  nw^  " 


SACRED    DRAMAS 


INTRODUCTfON. 


O  roR  the  sacred  eaaergj  whkh  struck 

The  harp  of  Jesse's  son !  or  for  a  vgtak 

Of  that  celestial  flame  which  toochM  the  lips 

Of  blessed  Isaiah  :*  when  tiie  seraphim 

With  living  fire  descended,  and  hte  sool 

I^m  sin's  poUutioii  paxg'd  I  or  one  ftint  ray, 

If  human  things  to  hearenly  I  may  join. 

Of  that  pore  spirit  which  inflam'd  the  breast 

Of  Milton,  God's  own  poet !  when,  retir'd 

In  fisSr  entimsiastie  ykkm  rapt. 

The  nightly  vuUant  deign*d  bless  his  couch 

With  inspiration,  such  as  neyer  flow'd 

From  Addale  or  Aganippe's  fount ! 

Then,  when  the  sacred  fire  wittin  him  burnt. 

He  sfnke  as  man  or  angel  might  have  qtoke. 

When  man  was  pure,  and  angels  were  his  guests. 

It  win  not  be.    Nor  pn^het's  burning  zeal, 
N<H'  muse  of  fire,  nor  yet  to  sweep  tiie  strings 
With  sacred  enei^y,  to  me  belongs ; 
Nor  with  Miltonie  hand  to  touch  the  chcnrds 
That  wake  to  ecstasy.    From  me,  alas  I 
The  secret  source  of  harmony  is  Ud ; 
The  magic  powers  which  catch  the  rayish'd  soul 
In  melody^  sweet  mace^  and  the  dear  streams 
Which  to  pure  £sncy's  je^  untested  springs 
Enchanted  lead.    Of  these  I  little  know ! 
Yet,  all  unknowing,  dare  Thy  aid  inroke. 
Spirit  op  Truth  t  to  bless  these  worthless  lays : 
Nor  impious  is  the  hope ;  for  Thou  hast  said. 
That  none  who  ask  in  faith  should  ask  la  yain. 

You  I  inyoke  not  now,  ye  fabled  Nine  1 
I  not  iuToke  you,  though  you  well  were  sought 
In  Greece  and  Latium,  sought  by  deathless  bards, 

•  Utiah  yL 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

Whose  syren  song  enduuits;  and  shall  enchant, 
Through  Time's  wide-circling  round,  though  folse  their 

fiiith. 
And  less  than  human  were  the  gods  they  sung. 
Though  false  their  faith,  they  taught  the  best  they  knew ; 
And  (blush,  O  Christians !)  liv'd  above  their  fidth. 
They  would  have  blessed  the  beam,  and  hail*d  the  day« 
Which  chas'd  the  moral  darkness  from  their  souls. 
Oh !  had  their  minds  receivM  the  clearer  ray 
Of  revelation,  they  had  leam'd  to  scorn 
Their  rites  impure,  their  less  than  human  gods. 
Their  wild  mythology's  fantastic  mace. 

Pure  Plato  I  how  had  thy  chaste  spfait  hail'd 
A  faith  so  fitted  to  thy  moral  sense  i 
What  hadst  thou  felt,  to  see  the  fair  romance 
Of  high  imagination,  the  bright  dream 
Of  thy  pure  fancy,  more  than  realiz'd ! 
Sublime  enthusiast !  thou  hadst  blest  a  scheme 
Fair,  good,  and  perfect.    How  had  thy  wn^  soul 
Caught  fire,  and  burnt  with  a  diviner  flame ! 
For  e'en  thy  fair  idea  ne'er  conceiv'd 
Such  plenitude  of  bliss,  such  boundless  love. 
As  Deity  made  visible  to  sense. 
Unhi^py  Brutus !  philosophic  mind  I 
Great  'midst  the  errors  of  the  Stoic  school  \ 
How  had  thy  kindling  spirit  joy'd  to  fiind 
That  thy  lov'd  virtue  was  no  empty  name ; 
Nor  hadst  thou  met  the  vision  at  Philipid ; 
Nor  hadst  thou  sheath'd  thy  bloody  dagger's  point 
Or  in  the  breast  of  Csesar  or  thy  own. 

The  pagan  page  how  far  more  wise  than  ours ! 
They  with  the  gods  they  worshipp'd  grac'd  their  song ; 
Our  song  we  grace  with  gods  we  disbelieve ! 
Retain  the  manners,  but  reject  the  creed. 
Shall  fiction  only  raise  poetic  flame. 
And  shall  no  altars  blaze,  O  Truth,  to  thee  ? 
Shall  folsehood  only  please,  and  fable  charm  ? 
And  shall  eternal  Truth  neglected  lie. 
Because  immortal,  slighted,  or  profan'd  ? 
Truth  has  our  rev'rence  only,  not  our  love  ; 
Our  praise,  but  not  our  heart ;  a  deity 
Confess'd,  but  shunn'd ;  acknowledged,  nor  adored  | 
Alarm'd  we  dread  her  penetrating  beams ; 
She  comes  too  near  us,  and  too  brightly  shines. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Why  shon  to  make  our  doty  oar  ddiglit  ? 
Let  pleasure  be  the  motiye,  disallow 
All  h%fa  incentiTeB  drawn  from  Godls  oommaod ; 
Where  shall  we  trace,  through  aU  the  page  profane, 
A  lireHer  pleasore  and  a  purer  so<iroe 
Of  ionoc«it  debg^t,  than  the  ihir  book 
Of  holy  Truth  presents  ?  for  ardent  youth. 
The  sprightly  narratiye ;  for  years  mature. 
The  mcnal  document,  in  sober  robe 
Of  graire  phUoet^y  amy'd :  whicfa  aU 
Had  heard  with  admiration,  had  embraced 
With  rapture,  had  tiie  dMides  oi  Academe, 
Or  the  leam*d  Porch  produced  it :— Tomes  had  then 
Been  mult^^tod  on  tomes,  to  draw  the  reil 
Of  graceful  allegory,  to  anf<dd 
Some  hidden  source  of  beauty,  now  not  fielt ! 

Do  not  the  powers  of  soul-endumting  song. 
Strong  imagery,  b<4d  figure,  erery  diarm 
Of  eastern  flight  sublime,  apt  metaphor. 
And  all  the  graces  in  thy  lovely  train. 
Divine  Simplicity !  assemble  all 
In  Sion's  songs,  and  b<rid  Isaiah's  strain  f 

Why  should  the  classic  eye  deUgfat  to  trace 
The  tale  corrupted  fixHn  its  prime  pure  source. 
How  Pyrrha  and  the  lism'd  Thessalian  king 
Restor'd  the  ruinM  race  of  lost  mankind ; 
Yet  turn,  incurious,  fixHn  the  patriarch  sav'd. 
The  rescued  remnant  of  a  ddug*d  wcurkK? 
Why  are  we  taught,  deHgfated  to  recount 
Alddes'  labours,  yet  n^^ect  to  note 
Heroic  Samson  ^midst  a  life  of  toil 
Herculean?  pain  and  peril  marking  both, 
A  life  eventful  and  disastrous  death. 
Can  all  the  tales  which  Grecian  story  yields ; 
Can  all  the  names  the  Roman  page  records. 
Of  wondrous  friendship  and  surpassing  love ; 
Can  gallant  Theseus  and  his  brave  compeer, 
Orestes  and  the  partner  of  his  toUs ; 
Achates  and  his  friend ;  Euryalus 
And  blooming  Nisus,  pleasant  in  their  lives 
And  undivided  by  the  stroke  of  death ; 
Can  each,  can  all,  a  lovelier  (dcture  yield 
Of  virtuous  friendship :  can  they  all  present 
A  tendemass  more  touching  than  the  lovi; 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

Of  Jonathan  and  David  ?— Speak,  ye  young. 

Who,  undebauch'd  as  yet  by  fashion's  Iwe, 

And  iinsoi^iistiGate,  unbiass'd  judge. 

Say,  is  your  quick  attention  more  aroused 

By  the  red  plagues  which  wasted  smitten  Thebes, 

Than  heaven's  ayenging  hand  on  Pharaoh's  host  ? 

Or  do  the  vagrant  Trqjans,  driven  by  fiette 

On  adverse  shores  successive,  yield  a  theme 

More  grateful  to  the  eager  appetite 

Of  young  impatience,  than  the  wandering  tribes 

The  Hebrew  leader  through  the  desert  led  ? 

The  beauteou9  maid,*  (though  tender  is  the  tale,) 

Whose  guiltless  blood  on  Aulis*  altar  streamed, 

Smites  not  the  bosom  with  a  softer  pang 

Than  her  in  fate,  how  sadly  similar. 

The  Gileaditish  virgin— victims  both 

Of  vows  unsanctifted. 

Such  are  the  lovely  themes  which  court  the  bard, 
Scarce  yet  essay'd  in  verse-^or  verse  how  meet ! 
While  heav^-descended  song,  forgetting  oft 
Her  sacred  dignity  and  high  descent, 
Debases  her  fair  origin ;  oft  spreads 
Corruption's  deadly  bane,  pollutes  the  heart 
Of  innocence,  and  with  unJiallow'd  hand 
Presents  the  poison'd  chalice,  to  the  brim 
Fill'd  with  dcdidous  ruin,  ministering 
Th*  unwholesome  rapture  to  the  fever'd  taste, 
Willie  its  fell  venom,  with  malignant  power, 
Strikes  at  the  root  of  virtue,  withering  all 
Her  vital  energy.    Oh  I  for  some  balm 
Of  sovereign  power,  to  raise  the  drooping  muse 
To  all  the  heidth  of  virtue  I  to  infuse 
A  gen'rons  warmth,  to  rouse  a  holy  zeal. 
And  give  her  high  conceptions  of  herself, 
Her  dignity,  her  worth,  her  aim,  her  end ! 

For  me.  Eternal  Spirit,  let  thy  word 
My  path  illume  I  O  thou  compassionate  God ! 
Thou  know'st  our  frame,  thou  kno w'st  we  are  but  dust ; 
Fh>m  dust,  a  seraph's  zeal  thou  wilt  not  seek. 
Nor  wilt  thou  ask  an  angel's  purity. 
But  hear,  and  hearing,  pardon ;  as  I  strive, 
Though  with  a  feeble  voice  and  flagging  wing, 
A  glowing  heart,  but  powerless  hand  to  paint 

*  Tphigraia. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  fidth  of  favour'd  man  to  hearen ;  to  tfaif 
The  ways  inscmtable  of  heayen  to  man. 
Maj  I»  by  thy  celestial  guidance  led. 
Fix  deep  in  my  own  heart  the  truths  I  teach  I 
In  my  own  life  transcribe  whate'er  of  good 
To  others  I  propose  i  and  by  thy  role 
Correct  th*  irregalar»«  reform  the  wrong. 
Exalt  the  low,  and  Inightoi  the  obscure ! 
Still  may  I  note  how  all  th*  agreeing  parts 
Of  this  consunmiate  system,  join  to  frame 
One  fair,  one  finish'd,  one  harmonious  who1<* 
Trace  the  dose  links  which  form  the  perfect  I'i.aiii 
In  beautiful  connexion ;  mark  the  scale 
Whose  nice  gradations,  with  inrogression  true. 
For  ever  rising,  end  in  Deitt  ! 

*  What  in  me  is  dark 
inomine  I  what  is  low,  lalae  and  sapponl 

Paradim  icM, 


» 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES 
SI  ^octety  Stama. 


Let  HM  aaatK  ««ra«I  PfovidMct, 

And  J«itify  tk*  wmya  of  Ood  to  mui. — PrnmUm  LtL 


PERSONS  OF  THE  DRAMA. 


HBBRBW  WOMBN. 

Joefaebed,  Mother  of  Moset. 
MlrUm,  his  SMer,  a  Prophet- 


BOTPTIANI. 

The  PrineeH,  Kiof  Phanwb't 

daufhter. 
Melita ;  and  other  ^ftfTMlanM, 

aeene.~^On  Iht  barOu  itfUke  NUe, 

The  aobjeet  is  taken  firom  the  8d  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodtu. 


PART  I. 


JOOHEBBD,  MlBIAM. 

Joch,  Why  was  my  prayer  accepted  ?  why  did  Heaven 
In  anger  hear  me,  when  I  ask'd  a  son? 
Ye  dames  of  Egypt !  ye  triumphant  mothers ! 
You  no  imperial  tyrant  marks  for  min ; 
Yon  are  not  doom'd  to  see  the  babes  you  bore, 
The  babes  you  fondly  nurture,  bleed  before  you! 
You  taste  the  transports  of  a  mother*s  love, 
Without  a  mother's  anguish !  wretched  Israel ! 
Can  I  forbear  to  mourn  the  different  lot 
Of  thy  sad  daughters !  —  Why  did  God's  own  hand 
Bescue  his  diosen  race  by  Joseph's  care  ? 
Joseph !  th*  elected  instrument  of  Heaven, 
Decreed  to  save  illustrious  Abraham's  sons. 
What  time  the  famine  raged  in  Canaan's  land. 
Israel,  who  then  was  spared,  must  perish  now  ! 

Thou  great  mysterious  Power,  who  hast  involv'd 
Thy  wise  decrees  in  darkness,  to  perplex 
The  pride  of  human  wisdom  to  confound 


10 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES. 


\\ 


The  daring  scrutiny,  and  prove  the  £uth 
Of  thy  presuming  creatures  I  hear  me  now : 
O  vindicate  thy  honour ;  clear  this  doubt, 
Teach  me  to  trace  this  maze  of  Providence : 
Why  save  the  fetthers,  if  the  sons  must  perish  ? 

Mir.  Ah  me,  my  mother !  whence  these  floods  of  grief 

Joeh.  My  son !  my  son  I  I  cannot  speak  the  rest. 
Ye  who  have  sons,  can  only  know  my  fondness  I 
Ye  who  have  lost  them,  or  who  fear  to  lose. 
Can  only  know  my  pangs !  none  else  can  guess  them. 
A  mother's  sorrows  cannot  be  conceiv*d 
But  by  a  mother. — Would  I  were  not  one  I 

Mir.  With  earnest  prayers  thou  didst  request  this  soi 
And  Heaven  has  granted  him. 

Joeh.  O  sad  estate 

Of  human  wretchedness ;  so  weak  is  man, 
So  ignorant  and  blind,  that  did  not  God 
Sometimes  withhold  in  mercy  what  we  ask. 
We  should  be  ruin'd  at  our  own  request. 


I*- 


Too  wen  thou  know'st,  my  child,  the  stem  decree 
Of  Egjrpt's  cruel  king,  hard-hearted  Pharaoh ; 
"  That  every  male,  of  Hebrew  mother  bom, 
«*  Must  die."    Oh !  do  I  live  to  tell  it  thee  ? 
Must  die  a  bloody  death !    My  child,  my  son, 
My  youngest  bom,  my  darling  must  be  slain. 

Mir.  The  helpless  innocent  I  and  must  he  die  ? 

Joeh.  No :  if  a  mother's  tears,  a  mother's  prayers, 
A  mother's  fond  precautions,  can  prevail, 
He  shall  not  die.    I  have  a  thought,  my  Sfiriam, 
And  sure  the  God  of  merdes  who  inspir'd. 
Will  bless  the  secret  purpose  of  my  soul. 
To  save  his  precious  life. 

Mir.  Hop'st  thou  that  Pharaoli- 

Joch.  I  have  no  hope  in  Pharaoh,  much  in  God ; 
Much  in  the  Rock  of  ages. 

Mir.  Think,  O  think. 

What  perils  thou  already  hast  incurr'd. 
And  shun  the  greater  which  may  yet  remain. 
Three  months,  three  dangerous  months  thou  hast  pre 

senr'd 
Thy  infisnt's  life,  and  in  thy  house  coneeal'd  him ! 
Should  Pharaoh  know  I 

Joeh.  Oh !  let  the  tyrant  know, 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES.  11 

And  feel  what  he  inflicti  I    Tes,  hear  me,  Hearen  I 
Send  thy  right-aiming'  thonderfoolts— But  hush. 
My  imptona  nrarmnn  I    Is  it  not  thy  wiU  ; 
Thou,  infivite  in  mercy  ?    Thoa  permitt'st 
This  seeming  eril  for  tome  latent  good. 
Ves*  1  will  land  thy  grace,  andblees  thy  goodness 
For  what  I  hare,  and  not  arraign  thy  wisdom 
For  what  I  fear  to  lose.    O,  I  wiU  bless  thee. 
That  Aaron  will  be  qMur'd  I  that  my  first-born 
Liires  safe  and  nndistarb'd  1  that  he  was  giren  me 
Befive  this  impions  persecution  raged  I 

Mir,  And  yet-who  knows,  bat  the  fell  tyrants  rag# 
May  reach  hit  predons  life. 

Joch,  I  fear  for  him. 

For  thee,  for  all.    A  doting  parent  lives 
In  many  lives ;  through  many  a  nerve  she  feels ; 
From  child  to  child  the  quick  affectl<ms  spread. 
For  ever  wandMng,  yet  for  ever  fix'd. 
Nor  does  division  WMtken,  nor  the  force 
Of  constant  operation  e'er  exhaust 
Parental  love.    All  other  passions  change 
VfVatk  dianging  drcumstaoces ;  rise  or  faO, 
Dependent  on  their  olject ;  claim  returns ; 
live  on  red^nrocation,  and  expire 
Unfed  by  hope.    A  mother's  fondness  reigns 
Without  a  rival,  and  witiiout  an  end. 

Mir,  But  say  what  Heaven  inspires  to  save  thy  son  ? 

Joeh.  Since  the  dear  fatal  mom  which  gave  him  birtli, 
I  have  revolv'd  in  my  distracted  mind 
Each  means  to  save  his  life :  and  many  a  thought 
"Whidi  fondness  prompted,  prudence  has  opposed 
As  perilous  and  rash.    With  these  poor  hands 
IVe  l^ramed  a  little  ark  of  slender  reeds ; 
With  pitch  and  slime  I  have  secured  the  sides. 
In  this  frail  cradle  I  intend  to  lay 
My  little  helpless  infant,  and  expose  him 
Upon  the  banks  of  KHe. 

Mir.  "Tis  fuU  of  danger. 

Joch,  *Tis  danger  to  expose,  and  death  to  keep  him. 

Mir,  Yet,  oh !  reflect.    Should  the  fierce  crocodile. 
The  native  and  the  tyrant  of  the  Nile, 
Seize  the  defenceless  infant ! 

Joeh.  Oh,  forbear ! 

Spare  my  fond  heart    Yet  not  the  crocodile. 


12  MOSES  IN  THB  BULRUSHES. 

Nor  all  the  deadly  monsters  of  the  deep^ 
To  me  are  half  so  terrible  as  Pharaoh, 
That  heathen  king,  that  royal  murderer ! 

Mir.  Should  he  escape,  which  yet  I  dare  not  hope^ 
Each  sea-bom  monster,  yet  the  winds  and  waves 
He  cannot  'scape. 

Joch,  Know,  God  is  everywhere; 

Not  to  one  narrow,  partial  spot  con&ied ; 
No,  not  to  chosen  Israel :  he  extends 
Through  all  the  vast  infinitude  of  spiace : 
At  his  command  the  furious  tempests  rise^^ 
The  blasting  of  the  breath  of  his  displeasure. 
He  tells  the  world  of  waters  when  to  roar ; 
And,  at  his  bidding,  winds  and  seas  are  calm : 
In  him,  not  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  I  trust ; 
In  him,  whose  promise  never  yet  has  fail'd, 
I  place  my  confidence. 

Mir.  "What  must  I  do  ? 

Command  thy  daughter ;  for  thy  words  have  waked 
An  holy  boldness  in  my  youthful  breast. 

Joch,  Go  then,  my  Ifiiiam,  go,  and  take  the  infant. 
Buried  in  harmless  slumbers,  there  he  lies : 
Let  me  not  see  him— spare  my  heart  that  pang. 
Yet  sure,  one  little  look  may  be  indulged. 
And  I  may  feast  my  fondness  with  his  smiles. 
And  snatch  one  last,  last  kiss. — No  more,  my  heart ; 
That  rapture  would  be  fatal— I  should  keep  him. 
I  could  not  doom  to  death  the  babe  I  clasp'd : 
Did  ever  mother  kill  her  sleeping  boy? 
I  dare  not  hazard  it— the  task  be  thine. 
Oh,  do  not  wake  my  child ;  remove  him  softly ; 
And  gentiy  lay  him  on  the  river's  brink. 

Mir.  Did  those  magidans,  whom  the  sons  of  Egypt 
C  onsult  and  think  all-^potent,  join  their  skill ; 
And  was  it  great  as  Egypt's  sons  believe ; 
Yet  all  their  secret  wizard  arts  combined. 
To  save  this  little  ark  of  bulrushes, 
Thus  fearfully  exposed,  could  not  effect  it. 
Their  spells,  their  incantations,  and  dire  charms 
Could  not  preserve  it. 

Joch.  Know  this  ark  is  charm'd 

With  incantations  Pharaoh  ne'er  employed ; 
Vnth  spells  which  impious  Egypt  never  knew : 
Witti  invocations  to  the  living  God, 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES.  13 

I  twisted  every  dender  reed  together, 
Aod  with  a  prayer  did  every  ozier  weave. 

Mir.  I  go. 

Jodt,  Yet  ere  thoa  go'st,  observe  me  well : 

When  thoa  hast  laid  him  in  his  watery  bed, 
O  leave  him  not;  bat  at  a  distance  wait. 
And  marlc  what  Heaven*s  high  will  det«rmines  for  him. 
Lay  him  among  the  flags  on  yonder  beach. 
Just  where  the  royal  gardens  meet  the  Nile. 
i  dare  not  follow  him,  sospidcm's  eye 
Would  note  my  wild  demeanour  I    Ifiriam,  yes. 
The  mother's  fondness  woald  betray  the  child. 
Farewell  I    God  of  my  fathers,  tdi  protect  him ! 


PART  II. 

'Enter  Misiam,  aSter  having  deposited  the  child. 

Mir.  Yb8,  I  have  laid  him  in  his  watery  bed. 
His  watery  grave,  I  fear ! — I  tremble  still ; 
It  was  a  crael  task— stiJl  I  most  weep  I 
But,  ah,  my  mother  1  who  shall  soothe  thy  griefe  ? 
The  flags  and  sea- weeds  will  awhile  sustaiu 
Their  precious  load ;  bat  it  must  sink  ere  long ! 
Sweet  babe,  farewell  I    Yet  think  not  I  will  leave  thee ; 
No,  I  will  watch  thee  till  the  greedy  waves 
Devour  thy  little  bark :  I'll  sit  me  down. 
And  sing  to  thee,  sweet  babe ;  thou  canst  not  hear ; 
Bat  'twill  amuse  me,  while  I  watdi  thy  fittte. 

iShe  tit»  down  on  a  bankj  and  tings. 

SONG. 

I. 

Thou  who  canst  make  the  feeble  strong, 

O  God  of  Israel,  hear  my  song  I 
Not  mine  such  notes  as  Egypt's  daughters  raise : 
"Hs  Thee,  O  God  of  hosts,  I  strive  to  praise. 

II. 
Ye  winds,  the  servants  of  the  Lord, 
Ye  waves  obedient  to  his  word. 


14  MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES. 

O  spare  the  babe  committed  to  your  trust ; 
And  Israel  shall  confess  the  Lord  is  jnst ! 

in. 

Though  doom'd  to  find  an  eariy  grave^ 
This  in&ot.  Lord,  thy  power  can  save. 
And  he,  whose  death's  decreed  by  Pfaaraoht  hand. 
May  rise  a  prophet  to  redeem  the  land. 

iShe  rises,  and  looks  out 
What  female  form  bends  hitherward  hflr  steps? 
Of  rojral  port  she  seems ;  perhaps  some  friend, 
Ri^'d  by  the  guardian  care  of  bounteous  heaven, 
To  prop  the  Cslling  house  of  Levi. — Soft ! 
in  listen  unperceiv'd;  these  trees  will  hide  me. 

[She  stands  behind. 

Enter  the  Fsincbss  of  Egypt,  attended  by  a  train  qf 

Ladies. 

Prin.  No  farther,  virgins ;  here  I  mean  to  rest, 
To  taste  the  pleasant  coolness  of  the  breeze ; 
Perhaps  to  bathe  in  this  translucent  stream. 
Did  not  our  holy  law  *  enjoin  th*  ablutioa 
I^requent  and  regular,  it  still  were  needful 
To  mitigate  the  fervours  of  our  dime. 
Melita,  stay— the  rest  at  distance  wait. 

iThejfatt  go  out  except  one. 
The  Frincbss  tooks  out. 
Sure,  or  I  much  mistake,  or  I  perceive 
Upon  the  sedgy  margin  of  the  Nile 
A  chest;  entangled  in  the  reeds  it  seems : 
Discem'st  thou  aught  ? 
Mel,  Somethingv  but  what  I  know  not. 

Prin,  Qo,  and  examine  what  this  sight  may  mean. 

iExitmaid. 
Mir.  Cbehind.J  O  blest  beyond  my  hopes !  he  is  dis* 
covered; 
My  brother  will  be  sav*d  I  who  is  this  stranger  ? 
Ah!  *tb  the  princess,  cruel  Pharaoh's  daughter ; 
If  she  resemble  her  tnhnmftti  sire, 
She  must  be  cruel  too :  yet  fame  reports  her 
Most  merciful  and  mild.— Great  Lord  of  all, 

•  Tbe  ancient  EsjrptUni  used  to  wuh  their  bodies  four  times 
evciy  twenty- four  boun. 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES.  15 

By  whose  good  Spirit  bounteous  thoo^ts  are  giren. 
And  deeds  of  love  perfonn'd— be  gracioos  now. 
And  tooch  her  sool  with  mercy ! 

Be-enter  Mblita. 

Frin.  WeIl,MeUta! 

Hast  thoa  discover'd  what  the  vessel  is  I 

M^  Oh,  Princess,  I  have  seal  the  strangest  sight ! 
Within  the  vessel  lies  a  sleeping  babe, 
A  fairer  infimt  have  I  never  seen  I 

Prin.  Who  knows  bat  some  unhappy  Hebrew  w<mian 
Has  thus  expos'd  her  in&nt,  to  evade 
The  stem  decree  of  my  too  orud  sire. 
Unhi^py  mothers !  oft  my  heart  has  Ued 
In  secret  anguish  o'er  your  slaughter'd  sons ; 
Powerless  to  save,  yet  hating  to  destroy. 

MeL  Should  tills  be  so,  my  Princess  Imows  the  danger. 

Frin.  No  danger  should  deter  from  acts  of  mercy. 

Mir,  (behind.)  A  thousand  blessings  on  her  princely 
head  I 

Prm.  Too  much  the  sons  of  Jacob  have  endured 
From  royal  Pharaoh's  unrelenting  hate ; 
Too  much  our  house  has  crusfa'd  their  alien  race. 
1st  not  enough  that  crud  taslcmasters 
Grind  them  by  hard  oppression  ?  not  enough 
That  iron  bondage  bows  their  spirits  down  ? 
Ist  not  enough  my  sire  his  greatness  owes. 
His  palaces,  his  fanes  magnificent. 
Those  structures  which  the  world  with  wonder  views 
To  much  insulted  Israel's  patient  race  ? 
To  them  his  growing  cities  owe  their  splendour: 
Their  t<rfls  fair  Rameses  and  Pythom  built ; 
And  shall  we  fill  the  measure  of  our  crimes, 
And  crown  our  guilt  with  murder  ?  and  shall  I 
Sanction  the  sin  I  hate  ?  forbid  it,  Mercy  \ 

Mel.  I  know  thy  royal  father  fears  the  strength 
Of  this  still  growing  race,  who  flourish  more 
The  more  they  are  oppressed :  he  dreads  their  numbers. 

Prin.  Apis  forbid!  Pharaoh  afraid  of  Israeli 
Yet  should  this  outcast  race,  this  hapless  people. 
E'er  grow  to  such  a  formidable  greatness, 
(Which  all  the  gods  avert  whom  Egypt  worships,) 
This  infimt's  life  can  never  serve  their  cause. 
Nor  can  his  single  death  prevent  their  greatness. 


16  MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES. 

JM.  Trust  not  to  that  rain  hope.    By  weakest  means 
And  most  unlikely  instruments,  full  oft 
Are  great  events  produced.    This  rescued  child 
Perhaps  may  live  to  serve  his  upstart  race 
Mwe  than  an  host. 

Prin,  How  ill  does  it  beseem 

Thy  tender  years  and  gentle  womanhood. 
To  steel  thy  breast  to  pity's  sacred  touch ! 
So  weak,  so  unprotected  is  our  sex. 
So  constantly  expos'd,  so  very  helpless. 
That  did  not  heav*n  itself  ei^oin  compassion. 
Yet  human  policy  should  make  us  kind. 
Lest  in  the  rapid  turn  of  fortune's  wheel, 
We  live  to  need  the  pity  we  refuse. 
Yes,  I  will  save  him— Mercy,  thou  hast  conquered ! 
Lead  on — and  from  the  rushes  we'll  remove 
The  feeble  ark  which  cradles  this  poor  babe. 

[  The  Princess  and  her  Maid  go  out. 

Miriam  comet  fotvoard. 

How  poor  were  words  to  speak  my  boundless  joy 
The  princess  will  protect  him ;  bless  her,  heaven ! 
[She  hok»  after  the  Princeu,  and  describes  her  €tction. 
With  what  impatient  step  she  seeks  the  shore  ! 
Now  she  approaches  where  the  ark  is  laid ! 
With  what  compassion,  with  what  angel  sweetness 
She  bends  to  look  upon  the  infant's  face ! 
She  takes  his  little  hand  in  hers— he  wakes — 
She  smiles  upon  him — ^hark,  alas !  he  cries ; — 
Weep  on,  sweet  babe  I  weep  on,  till  thou  hast  toudi*d 
Each  chord  of  pity,  wakenM  every  sense 
Of  melting  sympattiy,  and  stolen  her  soul ! 
She  takes  him  in  her  arms — O  lovely  Princess ! 
How  goodness  brightens  beauty !  now  she  clasps  him 
With  fondness  to  her  heart,  she  gives  him  now 
With  tender  caution  to  her  damsel's  arms ; 
She  points  her  to  the  palace,  and  again 
This  way  the  Princess  bends  her  gracious  steps  ; 
1  he  viri^  train  retire,  and  bear  the  child. 

Re-enter  the  Primcbss. 

Prin,  Did  ever  innocence  and  infant  beauty 
Plead  with  such  dumb  but  powerful  eloquence  ? 
If  I,  a  stranger,  feel  these  soft  emotions. 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES.  17 

What  must  the  mother  who  expoe'd  him  feel ! 
Go,  fetch  a  woman  of  the  Hebrew  race, 
That  Bhe  may  nurse  the  babe :— and,  by  her  garb^ 
Lo,  foch  a  one  is  here  ! 

Mir.  Princess,  all  haU ! 

Forgiye  the  bold  introdon  of  thy  servant, 
Who  stands  a  charmed  spectator  of  thy  goodness. 

Prin.  I  haye  redeem*d  an  infant  from  the  wares. 
Whom  I  intend  to  nurture  as  mine  own. 

Mir»  My  transports  will  betray  me !  iaside]  GenYons 
IMncess  I 

Frin.  Know*st  fhon  a  matron  of  the  Hebrew  race 
To  whom  I  may  confide  him  ? 

Mir.  Wen  I  know 

A  prudent  matrtm  of  the  house  of  Levi ; 
Her  name  is  Jodiebed,  the  wife  of  Amram ; 
Of  gentle  manners,  fam^d  throughout  her  tribe 
For  soft  humanity ;  full  well  I  know 
That  she  will  rear  him  with  a  mother's  love. 
Ijiside]  Oh  truly  spoke !  a  mother's  love  indeed ! 
To  her  despairing  arms  I  mean  to  give 
This  precious  trust ;  the  nurse  shall  be  the  mother ! 

Prin.  With  speed  conduct  this  matron  to  the  palace. 
Yes,  I  will  raise  him  up  to  princely  greatness. 
And  he  shall  be  my  son ;  111  have  him  train*d 
By  choicest  sages,  in  the  deepest  l<ure 
Of  Egypt's  sa^ent  sons ;— his  name  be  Motets 
Fixt  1  have  drawn  him  firom  the  perilous  flood. 

IThetf  go  out.    She  kneels. 

Thou  Great  Unseen !  who  causcst  gentle  deeds. 
And  Bmil*st  on  what  thou  causest  j  thus  I  bless  thee. 
That  thou  did^  deign  consult  the  tender  make 
Of  yielding  human  hearts,  when  thou  ordain'dst 
Humanity  a  virtue  I  didst  thou  make  it 
A  rigorous  exercise  to  counteract 
Some  strong  desire  within  s  to  war  and  fight 
Against  the  pow'rs  of  nature ;  but  did^st  bend 
The  nat'ral  bias  of  the  soul  to  mercy : 
Then  mad*st  that  mercy  duty !  Gradous  Power 
Mad'st  the  keen  rapture  exquisite  as  right ; 
Beyond  the  joys  of  sense ;  as  pleasure  sweet. 
As  reason  vig'rous,  end  as  instinct  strong ! 


18  MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES. 

PART  III. 

Enter  Jochbbbo. 

Joch.   Tve  almost  reached  the  place— with  caatiuiis 
steps 
I  must  approach  the  spot  where  he  Is  laid, 
Lest  from  the  royal  gardens  any  'spy  me. 
—Poor  babe  !  ere  this,  the  pressing  calls  of  hanger 
Have  broke  thy  short  repose ;  the  chilling  waves. 
Ere  this,  have  drenchM  thy  little  shiv'ring  limbs. 
What  most  my  babe  have  soffer'd  I — No  one  sees  me  ! 
Bat  soft,  does  no  one  listen  ? — Ah  I  how  luurd. 
How  very  hard  for  fondness  to  be  pradent  I 
Now  is  the  moment  to  embrace  and  feed  him. 

iShe  lookt  out. 
Where's  Miriam  ?  she  has  left  her  little  charge, 
Perhaps  through  fear ;  perhaps  she  was  d^ected. 
How  wild  is  thought !  how  terrible  coqjectare  I 
A  mother's  fondness  frames  a  thousand  fears. 
With  thrilling  nerve  feels  every  real  ill. 
And  shapes  imagined  miseries  into  being. 

[She  looks  towards  the  river. 
Ah  me  !  where  is  he  ?  soul-distracting  sight ! 
He  is  not  there— he's  lost,  he's  gone,  he's  drown'd  t 
Toss'd  by  each  beating  sui^e,  my  infant  floats. 
Ck>ld,  cold,  and  wat'ry  is  thy  grave,  my  child ! 

0  no— I  see  the  ark-^transporting  sight ! 

iShe  goes  towards  it. 

1  have  it  here — Alas,  the  ark  is  empty  I 
The  casket's  left,  the  precious  gem  is  gone 
You  spar'd  him,  pityixig  spirits  of  the  deep  I 
But  vain  your  mercy ;  some  insatiato  beast. 
Cruel  as  Pharaoh,  took  the  life  you  spar'd— 
And  I  shall  never,  never  see  my  boy  I 

Enter  Miriam. 
Joch.  Ck>me  and  lunent  with  me  thy  brother's  loss  I 
Mir.  Come  and  adore  with  me  the  God  of  Jacob  I 
Joeh.  Bliriam— the  child  is  dead  I 
Mir.  He  lives !  he  lives  I 

Joch.  Imposdble — Oh,  do  not  mock  my  grief ! 

Seest  thou  that  empty  vessel  ? 
Mir.  From  tliat  vessel 

Th'  Egyptian  Princess  took  him. 


MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES.  19 

Joch.  Phanu^'s  daughter? 

Then  stiU  he  will  be  sfaun :  a  bloodier  death 
Will  tenninate  Ida  woea. 

Mir,  HiBlifeisiafe; 

For  know,  she  means  to  rear  him  as  her  own. 

Joch,  {FaUi  on  her  knee*  in  rapture.) 
To  God,  the  Lord,  the  glory  be  ascribed  I 
O  magnify'd  for  erw  be  tbt  might,    . 
Who  mock'st  all  hnmao  forethought  I  who  o^errul'st 
The  hearts  of  sinners  to  perform  thy  work. 
Defeating  their  own  purpose ;  who  canst  plant 
Unlook*d-for  mercy  in  a  heathen's  heart, 
And  from  the  depth  of  eril  bring  forth  good !  [She  rises. 

Mir.  O  blest  event,  beyond  our  warmest  hopes  I 

Joch.  What  I  shall  my  son  be  nurtar'd  in  a  court, 
In  princely  grandeor  bred  ?  tau^t  eyery  art 
And  every  w<mdrous  sdence  Egypt  knows  ? 
Yet,  ah  I  I  tremUe,  Miriam ;  should  he  learn. 
With  Egypt's  polished  arts  her  baneful  fiaith  I 

0  worse  exchange  for  death  ]  yes,  should  he  leam 
In  yon  proud  palace  to  disown  His  hand 

Who  thus  has  saved  him :  should  he  e'er  embrace 
(As  sure  he  will,  if  bred  in  Pharaoh's  court) 
The  gross  idolatries  which  Egypt  owns, 
Her  graven  images,  her  brutish  gods. 
Then  shall  I  wish  he  had  not  been  preserv'd 
To  shame  his  fathers,  and  deny  his  faith. 

Mir.  Then  to  dispel  thy  fears  and  crown  thy  joy, 
Hear  farther  wcmders. — Know,  the  gen'rons  Princess 
To  thine  own  care  thy  darling  child  commits. 

JocJi,  Speak,  while  my  joy  will  give  me  leave  to  listen ! 

Mir,  By  her  commisaion'd,  thou  behold'st  me  here, 
To  seek  a  matron  <^  the  Hebrew  race 
To  nurse  him :  thou,  my  mother,  art  that  matron. 

1  said  I  knew  thee  well ;  that  thou  wouldst  rear  him 
E>n  with  a  mother's  fondness ;  she  who  bare  him 
(I  told  the  Princess)  would  not  love  him  more. 

Joch.  Fountain  of  mercy  I  whose  pervading  eye 
Can  look  within  and  read  what  passes  there, 
Acc^  my  thoughts  for  thanks !  I  have  no  words. 
My  soul,  o'erfraug^  with  gratitude,  rejects 
The  aid  of  language — Lord !  behold  my  heart. 

Mir.  Yes,  thou  shalt  pour  into  his  infant  mind 
The  purest  precepts  of  the  purest  faith. 


20  MOSES  IN  THE  BULRUSHES. 

Joe*.  Of  I  wiUlHlUa  tender  aonl  with  Tirtae, 
And  warm  hia  bosom  with  devotion's  llamel 
Aid  me,  oriestial  SfMiit  I  with  thy  grace, 
And  be  my  labooTB  with  thy  influence  crown'd  I 
Withoat  it  they  were  vain.    Then,  then,  my  Mii-Um^ 
When  he  is  f umish'd,  'gainst  the  evil  day. 
With  God's  wliole  armour,*  girt  with  sacred  truth. 
And  as  a  breas^tlate  wearing  righteousness, 
Arm'd  with  the  Spirit  of  Qod,  the  shield  of  faith. 
And  with  the  hdmet  of  salratiim  crowned, 
Inur'd  to  watching  and  disposM  to  prayer ; 
Thttn  may  I  send  him  to  a  dangYous  court. 
And  safely  trust  him  in  a  perlous  world. 
Too  full  of  tempting  snares  and  fond  delusions  I 
Mir.  May  bounteous  Heaven  thy  pious  cares  reward ! 
Joeh.  O  Amram  I  O  my  husband !  when  thou  com'st 
Wearied  at  night,  to  rest  thee  from  the  toils 
Impost  by  haughty  Pharaoh,  what  a  tale 
Have  I  to  teU  theel    Yes :  thy  darting  son 
Was  lost,  and  is  restor'd ;  was  dead,  and  Uves  I 

Mir,  How  joyful  shall  we  spend  the  live-long  night 
In  praises  to  Jehovah ;  who  thus  mocks 
All  human  foresight,  and  converts  the  means 
Of  seeming  ruin  into  great  deliverance  I 
Joch.  Had  not  my  child  been  doomed  to  such  strange 
perils 
As  a  fond  mother  trembles  to  recall. 
He  had  not  been  preserv*d. 

Mir.  And  mark  still  forther ; 

Had  he  been  sav'd  by  any  other  hand. 
He  had  been  still  exposM  to  equal  ruin. 

Jo^  Then  let  us  join  to  bless  the  hand  of  Heaven, 
That  this  poor  outcast  of  the  house  of  Israel, 
CondemnM  to  die  by  Pharaoh,  kept  in  secret 
By  my  advent*Jrous  fondness ;  then  expos'd 
E'en  by  tiiat  very  fondness  which  concealed  him. 
Is  now,  to  All  the  wondrous  round  of  mercy, 
Preserv'd  from  perishing  by  Pharaoh's  daughter, 
Saved  by  the  very  hand  which  sought  to  crush  him ! 
l^Hse  and  unaearehaUe  are  all  thy  ways, 
Thou  Ood  of  merdesl— Lead  me  to  my  chfldi 

*  t  ThsH.  V.    Bphtt.  tL 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH: 

21  Sbtictt}f  Stams. 


O  bicahMnM  mill*  fait, 
VKmUnt  « m  I«  StifiiMr  uom. 
Qmi  da  boHM  knn  ntMd  n  voit. 
El  4M  M  Din  daIgM  inMnui*  loi-mfiM! 
Loia  da  nanda  tt*H  i  da  loaa  laa  don*  daa  Cmu, 
II  ait  ond  dte  aa  aaiaaaata ; 
Et  da  mdeluni  I'abord  eoatagiaas 

N'a]|fen  pviat  aoa  inaocaaca^^rMI*. 


PERSONS  OF  TUB  DRAMA. 

Sanl,  Kioff  of  IsraeL 
Aboer,  his  Oeneral. 
Jeaae. 

At>iiuul«b.     jSoMofJetM. 

The  Scene  Uatnthe  Camp  in  the  VaUey  ef  Blah^  and  the 

aif/iuent  Plain. 

The  Kubjcetis  taken  nrotn  the  SeTcnteenth  Chapter  of  the  Flnt 

Book  of  Samuel. 


David,  SonorJ€ 
Goliath,  the  PhiUatine  Olant. 
PhilUtinet,  InaeUtca.  &e.  left 
Chonu  of  Hebreir  Womeii. 


PART  I. 

Scene.— A  ShephertTi  Tent  on  a  Plain, 
Davtdf  under  a  ipreading  tree,  play$  on  hie  harp  and  thtgu 

I. 

Obkat  Lord  of  all  things  !  Power  divine ! 
Breathe  on  this  erring  heart  of  mine 

Thy  grace  serene  and  pure ; 
Defend  my  frail,  my  erring  youth, 
And  teach  me  this  important  truth. 

The  humble  are  secure  i 


«2  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

II. 
Teach  me  to  bless  my  lowly  lot, 
CiMifin'd  to  this  paternal  cot. 

Remote  from  regal  state  t 
Content  to  court  the  cooling  glade, 
Inhale  the  breeze,  eigoy  the  shade. 

And  love  my  humble  fate. 

III. 

No  anxious  vigils  here  I  keep. 

No  dreams  of  gold  distract  my  sleep, 

Nor  lead  my  heart  astray ; 
Nor  blasting  envy's  tainted  gale 
Pollutes  the  pleasures  of  the  vale. 

To  vex  my  harmless  day. 

IV. 

Yon  tower,  which  rears  its  head  so  high. 
And  bids  defiance  to  the  sky. 

Invites  the  hostile  winds : 
Yon  branching  oak  extending  wide. 
Provokes  destruction  by  its  pride. 

And  courts  the  fall  it  finds. 

V. 

Then  let  me  shun  th*  ambitious  deed,     * 
And  all  the  dangerous  paths  which  lead 

To  honours  falsely  won  : 
Lord !  in  thy  sure  protection  blest. 
Submissive  will  I  ever  rest, 

And  may  thy  will  be  done  ! 

{He  laya  down  hi*  harp  and  titet. 

Dao.   Methinks  this  shepherd's  life  were  dull  and 
tasteless 
Without  the  charm  of  soothing  song  or  harp : 
With  it,  not  undelightful  is  the  haunt 
Of  wood,  or  lonely  grove,  or  russet  plain. 
Made  vocal  by  the  muse.    With  this  lov*d  harp. 
This  daily  solace  of  my  cares,  I  soothM 
The  melancholy  monarch,  when  he  lay 
Smit  by  the  chill  and  spirit-quenching  hand 
Of  black  despair.    God  of  my  fathers,  hear  roe  ! 
Here  I  devote  my  harp,  my  verso,  myself. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  23 

To  thy  blest  service  !  gladly  to  proclaim 

Glory  to  God  on  high,  on  earth  goodwill 

To  man ;  to  poor  my  grateful  sool  before  thee ; 

To  dng  thy  ponrer,  thy  wisdom,  and  thy  love. 

And  ev*ry  gradoos  attribute ;  to  paint 

The  charms  of  heaven-bom  Tirtoe  f  So  shall  I 

I  Thonfl^  with  long  interval  of  worth)  aspire 

To  imitate  the  work  of  saints  above. 

Of  cherub  and  of  seraphim.    My  heart. 

My  talents,  all  1  am,  and  all  I  have. 

Is  thine,  O  Father  I  GracioBS  L<»d,  accept 

The  hnmble  dedicatloa  1    Ol^'d  gifts 

Of  slanghter*d  boUs  and  goats  sacrillcal 

Thoa  hast  refused :  bat,  lo^  I  come,  O  Lord ! 

To  do  thy  will ;  the  living  sacrifice 

Of  an  obedient  heart  I  lay  before  thee : 

This  humble  off*ring  more  shall  please  thee.  Lord, 

Than  hOTued  boUoeks,  ceremonial  rites. 

New  mo<ni8,  and  sabbMhs,  passovers,  and  fests  I 

Yet  those  I  too  will  keep ;  but  not  in  Heu 

Of  holiness  substantial,  inward  worth ; 

As  commutation  cheap  for  pious  deeds 

And  purity  of  Itfe,  but  as  the  types 

Of  better  things ;  as  fidr  external  signs 

Of  inward  holiness  and  secret  truth. 

But  see,  my  fotiier,  good  old  Jesse,  comes  ! 
To  cheer  the  setting  evMikig  of  whose  life. 
Content,  a  simple  diepherd  here  I  dweU, 
Though  Israel  is  in  arms ;  and  royal  Saul, 
Bncamp'd  in  yonder  fidd,  defie?  FhiUstia. 

Jbssb,  David. 

J«f .  Blest  be  the  gracious  Power  who  gave  my  age 
To  boast  a  son  like  thee  1    Thou  art  the  staff 
Which  inrops  my  bending  years,  and  makes  me  bear 
Tlie  heavy  burden  of  dedining  age 
With  fond  complacence.    How  unlike  thy  fote, 
O  venerable  Eli  i    But  two  sons. 
But  only  two  to  gild  the  dim  remains 
Of  life's  departing  day,  and  bless  thy  age, 
And  both  were  curses  to  thee !    Witness,  Heaven, 
In  all  the  cruel  catalogue  of  puns 
Humanity  turns  o*er,  if  there  be  one 


24  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

So  terrible  to  hainan  tenderness 
As  an  unnatural  child  I 

Dav.  Oh  I  my  lor *d  father  1 

Long*  may^t  thoa  live,  in  years  and  honours  rich ; 
To  taste  and  to  communicate  the  joys 
The  thousand  fond  endearing  charities 
Of  tenderness  domestic ;  nature's  best 
And  loveliest  gift,  with  which  she  well  atones 
The  niggard  boon  of  fortune. 

Jet.  01  my  son  1 

Of  a|l  the  graces  which  adorn  thy  youth, 
I,  with  a  father's  fondness,  most  commend 
Thy  tried  humility.    For  though  the  seer 
Pour'd  on  thy  diosen  head  the  sacred  oil 
In  sign  of  future  greatness,  in  sure  pledge 
Of  highest  dignity,  yet  here  thou  dwell'st 
Content  with  toiC  and  careless  of  repose ; 
And  (harder  still  for  an  ingenuous  mind) 
Ck>ntent  to  be  obscure ;  content  to  watdi. 
With  careful  eye,  thine  humble  fsither^s  flock  1 
Oh  earthly  emblem  of  celestial  things  i 
So  Israel's  shepherd  watches  o'er  his  fold : 
The  weak  ones  in  his  fostering  bosom  bears : 
And  gently  leads,  in  his  sustaining  hand. 
The  feeble  ones  with  young. 

Dav.  Know'st  thou,  ray  fother, 

Aught  firom  the  fleld?  for  though  so  near  the  camp. 
Though  war's  proud  ensigns  stream  on  yonder  plain. 
And  all  Fhilistia*s  swarming  hosts  encamp, 
Oppos'd  to  royal  Saul,  beneath  whose  banners 
My  brothers  lift  the  spear,  I  have  not  left 
My  fleecy  charge,  by  thee  committed  to  me. 
To  leam  the  various  fortune  of  the  war. 

Jes.  And  wisely  hast  thou  done.    Thrice  happy  realm, 
Who  shall  submit  one  day  to  his  command 
Who  can  so  well  obey  i    Obedience  leads 
To  certain  honours.    Not  the  towering  wing 
Of  eagle-plum*d  ambition  mounts  so  surely 
To  fortune's  highest  summit  as  obedience. 

{A  diitamt  wund  qftntmpeU, 
But  why  that  sudden  ardour,  O  my  son  ? 
That  trumpet's  sound  (though  so  remote  its  voice 
We  hardly  catch  the  edio  as  it  dies) 
Has  rous'd  the  mantUng  crimson  in  thy  cheek, 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  85 

Kindled  the  martial  spirit  in  thine  eye ; 
And  my  young  shepherd  feeb  an  hero^  fire  I 

Dav,  Thoa  hast  not  told  l^e  posture  of  the  war ; 
And  much  my  beating  bosom  pants  to  hear. 

Je$»  Uncertain  is  the  fortune  of  the  field. 
I  tremble  for  thy  brothers,  thus  expos'd 
To  constant  peril ;  nor  for  them  alone 
Does  the  quick  feeling  agonise  my  heart. 
I  feel  f<»'  all ! — I  mourn  that  ling'ring  war 
Stm  hangs  his  banner  o'er  my  native  land. 
Beloved  Jerusalem  1    Owarl  what  art  thou  i 
At  once  the  proof  and  scourge  of  man^s  feirn  state  I 
After  the  brightest  conquest,  what  appears 
Of  all  thy  f^oriee  I  for  the  ranquish'd,  chains  1 
For  the  proud  victor,  what  ?    Alas  I  to  reign 
O'er  desolated  nations  I  a  drear  waste. 
By  one  man*s  crime,  by  one  man's  lust  <rf  power. 
Unpeopled  I    Ravaged  fields  assume  the  placH 
Of  smiling  harvests,  and  oncnltur'd  plains 
Succeed  the  fertile  vineyard ;  barren  waste 
Deforms  the  spot  once  ridi  with  luscious  fig 
And  the  fitt  oUve. — ^Devastation  reigns. 
Here,  rifled  temples  are  the  cavem'd  dens 
Of  savage  beasts,  or  haunt  of  birds  obscene : 
There,  poplous  dties  blacken  in  the  sun, 
And,  in  the  gen*ral  wreck,  proud  palaces 
Lie  undistinguish'd,  save  by  the  dun  smoke 
Of  recent  conflagration.    When  the  song 
Of  dear-bought  Joy,  with  many  a  triumph  swell'd, 
Salutes  the  victor's  ear,  and  soothes  his  pride. 
How  is  the  grateful  harmony  pro&n'd 
With  the  sad  dissonance  at  virgins*  cries. 
Who  mourn  their  brothers  slain  I  of  matrons  hoar, 
Who  clasp  their  wither'd  hands,  and  fondly  ask. 
With  iteration  shrill,  their  slaughter'd  sons ! 
How  is  the  laurel's  verdure  stain'd  with  blood, 
And  soil'd  with  widow's  tears  I 

Dav,  Thrice  mournful  truth  f 

Yet  when  our  country^  sacred  rights  are  menaced ; 
Her  firm  foundations  shaken  to  their  base ; 
When  all  we  love,  and  all  that  we  revere. 
Our  hearths  and  altars,  children,  parents,  wives, 
Our  liberties  and  laws,  Uie  throne  they  guard, 
Are  scom'd  and  trampled  on— then,  then,  my  father  \ 


26  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

*Ti8  then  religion's  voice ;  then  God  himself 
Commands  us  to  defend  his  injured  name, 
And  think  the  rict'ry  cheaply  bought  with  life. 
*Twere  then  inglorious  weakness,  mean  self-lore, 
To  lie  inactive,  when  the  stirring  voice 
Of  the  shrill  trumpet  wakes  the  patriot  youth. 
And  with  heroic  valour,  bids  them  dare 
The  foul  idolatrous  bands,  e*en  to  the  death. 

Jet.  God  and  thy  country  claim  the  life  they  gave ; 
No  other  cause  can  sanctify  resentment. 

Dan,  Sure  virtuous  friendship  is  a  noble  cause  I 
Oh !  were  the  princely  Jonathan  in  danger, 
How  would  I  die,  well  pleasM,  in  his  defence  I 
When,  'twas  long  since,  then  but  a  stripling  boy, 
I  made  short  sojourn  in  his  father's  palace, 
(At  first  to  soothe  his  troubled  mind  with  song. 
His  armour-bearer  next,)  I  well  remember 
The  gracious  bounties  of  the  gallant  prince. 
How  would  he  sit,  attentive  to  my  strain. 
While  to  my  harp  I  sung  the  harmless  joys 
Which  crown  a  shepherdt  life  I    How  would  he  cry, 
Bless'd  youth !  far  happier  in  thy  native  worth, 
Far  richer  in  the  talent  Heaven  has  lent  thee, 
Than  if  a  crown  hung  o'er  thy  anxious  brow. 
The  jealous  monarch  mark'd  our  growing  friendship ; 
And  as  my  favour  grew  with  those  about  him. 
His  royal  bounty  lessened,  till  at  Imigth, 
For  Bethlehem's  safer  shades  I  left  the  court. 
Nor  would  these  alter'd  features  now  be  known. 
Grown  into  manly  strength ;  nor  this  chang'd  form, 
Enlarg'd  with  age,  and  clad  in  russet  weed. 

Jet.  I  have  employment  for  thee,  my  lov'd  son ! 
Will  please  thy  active  spirit.    Go,  my  boy ! 
Haste  to  the  field  of  war,  to  yonder  camp, 
Where  in  the  vale  of  Elah  mighty  Saul 
Commands  the  hosts  of  Israel.    Greet  thy  brothers : 
Observe  their  deeds,  note  their  demeanour  well. 
And  mark  if  on  their  actions  wisdom  waits. 
Bear  to  them  too  (for  well  the  waste  of  war 
Will  make  it  needful)  such  plain  healthful  viands 
As  furnish  out  our  frugal  shepherd's  meal. 
And  to  the  valiant  captain  of  their  host 
Present  such  rural  gifts  as  suit  our  fortune : 
Heap'd  on  the  board  within  my  tent  thoult  find  tliom. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  27 

Dav.  "With  joy  I'll  bear  thy  presents  to  my  brothers ; 
And  to  the  rallant  captain  of  their  host 
The  mral  gifts  thy  gratitude  assigns  him. 
Delightful  task  1— for  I  shall  view  the  camp  I 
"What  transport  to  behold  the  tented  field. 
The  pointed  spear,  the  Maze  of  shields  and  arms. 
And  all  the  proad  accoatrements  of  war ! 
Bat,  oh  I  far  dearer  transport  would  it  yield  me, 
Cioold  this  right  arm  alone  avenge  the  cause 
Of  ii^ar*d  Israel  I  could  my  single  death 
Preserve  the  guiltless  thousands  doomed  to  bleed  I 

Jet.  Let  not  thy  youth  be  daxxled,  O  my  son  1 
With  deeds  of  b<dd  emprise,  as  yaloor  only 
Were  virtue,  and  the  gentle  arts  of  peace. 
Of  truth,  and  justice,  were  not  worth  thy  care. 
When  thou  shalt  view  the  splendours  of  the  war. 
The  gay  caparison,  the  burnished  shield. 
The  idnme-crown*d  helmet,  and  the  glitt'ring  spear, 
Sotnrn  not  the  humble  virtues  of  the  sliade. 
Nor  think  that  Heaven  views  only  witii  applause 
The  active  merit  and  the  busy  toil 
Of  heroes,  statesmen,  and  the  bustling  sons 
Of  public  care.    These  have  their  just  reward, 
In  wealth,  in  honours,  and  the  well-eam'd  fame 
Their  high  achievements  bring.    *Tis  in  this  view 
That  virtue  is  her  proper  recompense : 
Wealth,  as  its  natmral  consequence,  will  flow 
From  industry :  toil  with  success  is  crown*d : 
From  splendid  actions  high  renown  will  spring. 
Such  is  the  usual  course  of  human  things ; 
For  Wbdom  Infinite  permits,  that  thus 
Effects  to  causes  be  proportionate. 
And  natural  ends  by  natural  means  achiey'd. 
But  in  the  future  estimate  which  Heaven 
Will  make  of  things  terrestrial,  know,  my  son, 
rhat  no  inferior  blessing  is  reservM 
For  the  mild  pasrive  virtues :  meek  content, 
Heroic  self-denial,  nobler  for 
rhan  all  th*  achievements  noisy  fame  reports, 
When  her  shrill  trump  proclaims  the  proud  success 
iVhieh  desolates  the  nations.    But,  on  earth, 
rhese  are  not  always  prosperous— mark  the  cause : 
Sternal  Justice  keeps  them  for  the  bliss 
K  final  recompense,  for  the  dread  day 


28  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Of  general  retribution.    O  my  son  I 
The  oetentatioos  virtues  which  still  press 
For  notice  and  for  praise ;  the  brilliant  deeds 
Which  live  but  in  the  eye  of  observation. 
These  have  their  meed  at  once.    But  there's  a  joy 
To  the  fond  votaries  of  fame  unknown. 
To  hear  the  still  small  voice  of  conscience  speak 
Its  whispering  plaudit  to  the  silent  soul. 
Heaven  notes  the  sigh  afflicted  goodness  heaves ; 
Hears  the  low  plaint  by  human  ear  unheard. 
And  firom  the  cheek  of  patient  sorrow  wipes 
The  tear,  by  mortal  eye  unseen  or  scom'd. 

Dav.  As  Hermon's  dews  their  grateful  freshness  shed. 
And  cheer  the  herbage,  and  the  flowers  renew. 
So  do  thy  words  a  quickening  balm  infuse. 
And  gratefiQ  sink  in  my  delighted  souL 

Jet.  Go  then,  my  child  I  and  may  the  gradous  God 
Who  blessM  our  fathers,  bless  my  much  lov'd  son  I 

Dav.  Farewell,  my  father !— and  of  this  be  sure. 
That  not  one  precept  from  thy  honoured  lips 
Shall  fell  by  me  unnotic'd ;  not  one  grace. 
One  venerable  virtue  which  adorns 
Thy  daily  life,  but  I,  with  watchful  care 
And  due  observance,  will  in  mine  transplant  it. 

iExit  David. 

Jet.  He's  gone  I  and  stiU  my  aching  eyes  pursue 
And  strain  their  orbs  still  longer  to  behold  him. 
Oh !  who  can  tell  when  I  may  next  embrace  him  ? 
Who  can  declare  the  counsels  of  the  Lord  ? 
Or  when  the  moment,  pre-ordainM  by  Heaven 
To  fill  his  great  designs,  may  come  ?    Tliis  son, 
This  blessing  of  my  age,  is  set  apart 
For  high  exploits ;  the  chosen  instrument 
Of  all-disposing  Heav'n  for  mighty  deeds. 
Still  I  recall  the  day,  and  to  my  mind 
The  scene  is  ever  present,  when  the  see. 
Illustrious  Samuel,  to  the  humble  shades 
Of  Bethlehem  came,  pretending  sacrifice. 
To  screen  his  errand  from  the  jealous  king. 
He  sanctified  us  first,  me  and  my  sons ; 
For  sanctity  increas'd  should  still  precede 
Increase  of  dignity.    When  he  dedar'd 
He  came  commlssion'd  from  on  high,  to  find, 
Among  the  sons  of  Jesse,  Israel's  king, 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  29 

Astonidunent  entranced  my  wondering  soul  t 
Yet  WM  it  not  a  wild  tomoltaoiu  bUss ; 
Such  rash  delight  as  promised  honoors  yield 
To  lig^t  vain  minds :  no,  twas  a  doobtfal  joy. 
Chastised  by  timYons  Tirtue,  lest  a  gift 
So  sjtondid  and  so  dangYoos  might  destroy 
Him  it  was  meairt  to  raise.    My  eldest  bom, 
EUab,  tall  of  statore,  I  presented ; 
But  God,  who  Judges  not  by  ontwaord  form. 
But  tries  the  heart,  forbade  the  holy  prophet 
To  choose  my  eldest  bom.    For  Saul,  he  said. 
Gave  proof,  that  &ir  proportion,  and  the  grace 
Of  limb  or  feature,  iU  repidd  the  want 
Of  -virtue.    All  my  other  sons  aHke 
By  Samuel  were  n^ected ;  till,  at  last. 
On  my  young  boy,  on  Darid^s  chosen  head. 
The  prophet  pour*d  the  consecrated  oiL 
Yet  ne*er  did  jftHo  elate  him,  ne'er  did  scorn 
For  his  n^octed  elders  swell  his  heart 
Not  in  such  gentle  diarity  to  him 
His  haughtier  brothers  Uto  ;  but  all  he  pardons. 
To  meditation,  and  to  humble  toil. 
To  prayer  and  praise  devoted,  here  he  dwells. 
Ohl  may  the  graces  which  adorn  retreat 
One  day  delight  a  court  I  record  his  name 
With  saints  and  prophets,  dignify  his  race, 
And  may  the  sacred  songs  Mb  leisure  frames 
Instruct  mankind,  and  sanctify  a  worid ! 


PART  II. 


ScBNB — The  Camp. 
Eliab,  Abinadab,  Abnbb,  Israblitbs. 

El.  Stni  is  th*  event  of  this  long  war  uncertain ; 
Still  do  the  adverse  hosts  oa.  either  side, 
Protract,  withjingering  caution,  an  encounter, 
Which  must  to  one  be  fataL 

Abin,  This  descent, 

Thus  to  the  very  confines  of  our  land. 


30  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Proclaims  the  sanguine  hope  that  fires  the  foe. 
In  Ephes-dammim  boldly  they  encamp : 
Th*  ondrcumcia'd  Philistines  i^tch  their  tents 
On  Judah's  hallow'd  earth. 

El,  Eull  forty  days 

Has  the  insulting  giant,  proud  Goliath, 
The  champion  of  Philistia,  fiercely  challenged. 
Some  Israelitish  foe.    But  who  so  vain 
To  dare  such  force  unequal  ?  who  so  bent 
On  sure  destruction,  to  accept  his  terms, 
And  rush  on  death,  beneath  the  giant  force 
Of  his  enormous  bulk  ? 

Abin,  *TiB  near  the  time 

When  in  th'  a4jacent  valley  which  divides 
Th'  opposing  armies,  he  is  wont  to  make 
His  daily  challenge. 

El.  Much  I  marvel,  brother. 

No  greetings  from  our  father  reach  our  ears. 
With  ease  and  plenty  bless'd,  he  little  recks 
The  daily  hardships  which  his  sons  endure. 
But  see  !  behold  his  darling  boy  approaches  I 

Jbin.   How,  David  here  I  whence  this  unlook'd-for 
guest  ? 

EL  A  spy  upon  our  actions  ;  sent,  no  doubt. 
To  scan  our  deeds,  with  beardless  gravity 
Affecting  wisdom ;  to  observe  each  word. 
To  magnify  the  venial  faults  of  youth. 
And  construe  harmless  mirth  to  foul  offence. 

Enter  David. 

Dav.  All  hail,  my  dearest  brothers ! 

El.  Means  thy  greeting 

True  love,  or  arrogant  scorn  ? 

Dav.  Oh,  most  true  love  I 

Sweet  as  the  precious  ointment  which  bedew*d 
The  sacred  head  of  Aaron,  and  descended 
Upon  his  hallowed  vest ;  so  sweet,  my  brothers, 
Is  fond  fraternal  amity :  such  love 
As  my  touch'd  bosom  feels  at  your  approach. 

El.  Still  that  fine  glozing  speech,  those  holy  saws 
And  all  that  trick  of  studied  sanctity. 
Of  smooth-tum*d  periods  and  trim  eloquence,    • 
Which  charms  thy  doting  father  I    But  confess, 
What  dost  thou  here  ?    Is  it  to  soothe  thy  pride. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  31 

And  gratify  thy  rain  desire  to  roam 

In  quest  of  pleasores  unallowM  ?  or  eomlst  thou, 

A  willing  spy,  to  note  thy  brothers*  deeds  ? 

Where  hast  thoo  left  those  few  poor  straggling  sheep^ 

More  suited  to  thy  ign<nance  and  years 

The  care  of  those,  than  here  to  wander  idly : 

Why  earnest  thou  hither  ? 

Dav.  Is  Hiere  not  a  cause  ? 

Why  that  diqdeasure  kindling  in  thine  eye. 
My  angry  bnyther  ?  why  those  taunts  unkind  ? 
Not  idly  bent  on  sport;  not  to  delight 
Mine  eye  with  all  this  gay  parade  of  war ; 
To  gratify  a  roving  appetite. 
Or  fondly  to  indulge  a  curious  ear 
With  any  tale  of  nunour,  am  I  come ; 
But  to  vg^arore  myself  a  loving  brother. 
I  bring  the  Messing  of  your  aged  sire, 
"^^th  gifts  of  such  plain  cates  and  rural  viands 
As  suit  his  ftngal  fortune.    Tell  me  now. 
Where  the  Ixrid  captain  of  your  host  encamps  ? 

El.  WherefMre  hiquire  ?  what  boots  it  thee  to  know  ? 
Behold  him  there :  great  Abner,  fam'd  in  arms. 

Dao.  I  bring  thee,  mighty  Abner,  from  my  father, 
(A  rimfde  shepherd  swain  in  yonder  vale,) 
Such  humble  gifts  as  shepho'd  swains  bestow. 

jib.  Thanks,  gentle  youth  I  with  pleasure  I  receive 
The  grateful  otTriag.    Why  does  thy  quick  eye 
Thus  wander  with  unsatisfied  delight  ? 

Dav.  New  as  I  am  to  all  the  trade  of  war. 
Each  sound  has  novelty ;  each  thing  I  see 
Attracts  att«:ition ;  every  noise  I  hear 
Awakes  confnsM  emotions ;  indistinct. 
Yet  lull  of  charming  tumult  sweet  distractions. 
•Tis  all  delightful  hurry  I  oh  I  the  joy 
Of  young  ideas  painted  on  the  mind. 
In  the  warm  ^wing  colours  ftaaej  spreads 
On  olgects  not  yet  known,  when  all  is  new. 
And  all  is  lovely  I  Ah  I  what  warlike  sound 
Salutes  my  ravish'd  ear  ?  [  Sound  qf  trumpet. 

Jib.  'Tis  the  Philistine, 

Proclaiming,  by  his  herald,  through  the  ranks, 
His  near  approach.  Bach'moming  he  repeats 
Wb  challenge  to  our  bands. 

Dav,  Hal  what  Philistine? 


32  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Whoteho? 

EL  Vfhenfon  ask  ?  for  thy  raw  yooU^ 

And  nutic  ignorance,  twere  fitter  leiurn 
Some  roral  art  I  some  secret  to  prevent 
Contagion  in  thy  flocks ;  some  better  means 
To  save  their  fleece  immaculate.    These  mean  arts 
Of  soft  inglorioos  peace  Ihr  better  snit 
Thy  low  obscurity,  than  thus  to  seek 
High  things  pertaining  to  exploits  of  arms. 

Dav,  Urg'd  as  I  am,  I  will  not  answer  thee. 
Who  conquers  his  own  spirit,  O  my  brother ! 
He  is  the  only  conqueror. — AgiUn 
That  shout  mysterious!    Pray  you,  (to  jibner.)  tell  me 

who 
This  proud  Philistine  is,  who  sends  defiance 
To  Israel's  hardy  chieftataisf 

jib.  Stranger  youth ! 

So  lovely  and  so  mild  is  thy  demeanour. 
So  gentle  and  so  patient ;  such  the  ahr 
Of  candour  and  of  courage  which  adorns 
Thy  blooming  features,  thou  hast  won  my  lore ; 
And  I  will  teU  thee. 

Dav.  Mighty  Abner,  thanks  I 

jib.  Thrice,  and  no  more,  he  sounds,  his  daily  rule  ! 
This  man  of  war,  this  champion  of  Philistia, 
Is  of  the  sons  of  Anak's  giant  race : 
Goliath  is  his  name.    His  fearftd  stature^ 
Unparellerd  in  Israel,  measures  more 
Than  twice  three  cubits.    On  his  towVhig  head 
A  helm  of  bumish'd  brass  the  g^ant  wears. 
So  ponderous,  it  would  crush  the  stoutest  man 
In  all  our  hosts.    A  coat  of  mailed  armour 
Guards  his  capacious  trunk  !  compared  with  which 
The  amplest  oak  that  spreads  his  rugged  arms 
In  Bashan*s  groves,  were  small.    About  his  neck 
A  shining  corslet  hangs.    On  his  vast  thigh 
The  plaited  cuirass,  firmly  jointed,  stands. 
But  who  shall  tell  tiie  wonden  of  his  spear. 
And  hope  to  gain  belief  i    Of  massive  iron 
Its  temper*d  frame ;  not  less  than  the  broad  beam 
To  which  the  busy  weaver  hangs  his  loom  ; 
Not  to  be  wielded  by  a  mortal  hand. 
Save  by  his  own.    An  armour-beaier  walka 
Before  thiff  mighty  cliamfdon,  in  his  hand 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  8S 

Bearing  ti>e  giant's  shield.    Thrice  evYy  nuHrn 
His  herald  sounds  the  trampet  of  defiance  I 
OfTring  at  once  to  end  the  long-drawn  war 
In  single  combat,  'gainst  that  hardy  foe 
Who  dares  encounter  him. 

Doo.  Say,  mighty  Abner, 

What  are  the  haogfaty  terms  of  his  defiance  ? 

jib.  Proudly  he  stalks  around  th*  extremest  boonda 
Of  Elah*s  Tale.    His  herald  sounds  the  note 
Of  offer'd  battle.    Then  the  furious  giant, 
l^th  Budi  a  voice  as  firom  the  troubled  sky 
In  Yollied  thunder  breaks,  thus  sends  his  challenge ; 
**  Why  do  yon  set  your  battle  in  array, 
Ye  men  of  Israel  ?    Wherefore  waste  the  lives 
Of  needless  thousands?    Why  protract  a  war 
WUdi  may  at  once  be  ended?    Are  not  you 
Servants  to  Saul  your  king?  and  am  not  I, 
With  triumph  let  me  speak  it,  a  Philistine  ?  -i 

Choose  out  a  man  from  all  your  armed  hosts. 
Of  courage  most  approv'd,  and  I  will  meet  him ; 
His  single  arm  to  mine.    Th*  event  of  this 
ShaU  fix  the  fate  of  Israel  and  Philistia. 
If  victory  &vour  him,  then  will  we  live 
Your  tributary  slaves ;  but  if  my  arm 
Be  crown'd  witii  c<mquest,  you  shall  then  live  ours : 
Give  me  a  man,  if  your  eifeminate  bands 
A  man  can  boast.    Your  armies  I  defy  V* 

JDav.  What  shall  be  done  to  him  who  shall  subdue 
Tills  vile  idolater  ? 

Ji.  He  shall  receive 

Such  ample  bonntieB,  such  profuse  rewards. 
As  might  infiame  the  old,  or  warm  the  coward. 
Were  not  the  odds  so  desperate. 

Dav,  Say,  what  are  they? 

Jb.  The  royal  Saul  has  promised  that  bold  hero 
Who  should  encounter  and  subdue  Goliath, 
All  dignity  and  &vour ;  that  his  house 
Shall  be  set  free  from  tribute,  and  ennobled 
With  the  first  honours  Israel  has  to  give. 
And  for  the  gallant  oonqoenv  himself. 
No  less  a  reemnpensethan  the  fisir  princess, 
Our  monarch'^  peeriess  daughter. 

Dav.  Beauteous  Ifiehalt 

It  is  indeed  a  boon  which  kings  might  strive  fott 

c2 


34  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

And  has  none  answer'd  yet  this  bold  defiance  ? 

What  I  all  this  goodly  host  of  Israelites ! 

Gtod's  own  pecdliar  people!  all  afraid 

T*  assert  God's  ii^ar*d  honour  and  their  own  ? 

Where  is  the  king,  who,  in  his  early  youth 

Wrought  deeds  of  fame  ?    Where  princely  Jc  nathan  ? 

Not  so  the  gallant  youth  Philistia  fear'd 

At  Bozez  and  at  Seneh }«  when  tiie  earth 

Shook  from  her  deep  foundations,  to  behold 

The  wondYous  carnage  of  his  single  hand 

On  the  undrcumdsed.    When  he  exclaimed. 

With  glorious  confidence — "  Shall  numbers  awe  me  ? 

God  will  protect  his  own :  with  him  to  save. 

It  boots  not,  friends,  by  many  or  by  few/* 

This  was  an  hero !    Why  does  he  delay 

To  meet  this  boaster  ?    For  thy  courtesy, 

Thrice  noble  Abner,  I  am  bound  to  thank  thee ! 

Would'st  thou  complete  thy  gen'rous  offices  ? 

I  dare  not  ask  it. 

Ah.  Speak  thy  wishes  freely : 

My  soul  inclines  to  serve  thee. 

Dav.  Then,  O  Abner, 

Conduct  me  to  the  king !    There  is  a  cause 
Will  justify  this  boldness  I 

EL  Braggard,  hold  I 

Ab.  I  take  thee  at  thy  word;  and  will,  with  speed* 
Conduct  thee  to  my  royal  master's  presence. 
In  yonder  tent  the  anxious  monarch  waits 
Th'  event  of  this  day's  challenge. 

Dav.  Noble  Abner, 

Accept  my  thanks.    Now  to  thy  private  ear. 
If  so  thy  grace  permit,  I  will  unfold 
My  secret  soul,  and  ease  my  lab'ring  breast. 
Which  pants  with  high  designs,  and  beats  for  glory. 

*  1  flamuel  zIt. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  35 


PART  III. 


Scnm—SattTt  Tent. 

Saul.  Vfhj  was  I  made  a  king?  what  I  have  gain'd 
In  envied  gnatneu  and  uneasy  power, 
Fve  lost  in  peace  of  mind,  in  rirtae  lost ! 
"Why  did  deceitfol  transports  fire  my  soul 
"When  Samuel  placed  upon  my  yontiifnl  brow 
The  crown  of  Israel  ?  I  had  imown  content, 
Nay,  happiness,  if  happiness  unmixM 
To  mortal  man  wore  imown,  had  I  stiU  liy'd 
Among  the  humble  tents  of  Benjamin. 
A  shepherd'roccupation  was  my  joy. 
And  every  guiltless  day  was  crown'd  with  peace. 
But  now,  a  sullen  doud  for  ever  hangs 
O'er  the  flint  sunshine  of  my  brightest  hours, 
Dark'ning  the  golden  promise  of  the  mom. 
I  ne'er  shall  taste  the  dear  domestic  joys 
My  meanest  subjects  know.    True,  I  have  sons, 
"Whose  yirtues  would  have  charm*d  a  private  man. 
And  drawn  down  blessings  on  their  humble  sire. 
I  love  their  virtues  too ;  but  *tis  a  love 
Which  jealousy  has  poison*d.    Jonathan 
Is  all  a  father's  fondness  could  conceive 
Of  amiable  and  good — Of  that  no  more  I 
He  is  too  popular ;  the  people  dote 
Upon  the  ingenuous  graces  of  his  youth. 
Cnrs*d  popularity !  which  makes  a  fisther 
Detest  the  merit  of  a  son  he  loves. 
How  did  their  fond  idolatry,  perforce. 
Rescue  his  sentenced  life,  when  doom'd  by  lot 
To  perish  at  Beth-aven,*  for  the  breach 
Of  strict  iiOanction,  that,  of  all  my  bands. 
Not  one  that  day  should  taste  of  food  and  live  I 
My  sutiijects  clamour  at  this  tedious  war. 
Yet  of  my  numYous  armed  ohieft,  not  one 
Has  courage  to  engage  this  man  of  Oath. 
Oh  for  a  chamj^on  bold  enough  to  fisce 

*  1  Samuel  xir. 


36  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

This  giant-boMter,  whose  repeated  threats 
Strike  through  my  inmost  soul !    There  was  a  timo 
Of  that  no  more ! — I  am  not  what  I  was. 
Should  valiant  Jonathan  accept  the  challenge, 
'Twoold  but  increase  his  influence,  raise  liis  fame. 
And  make  the  crown  sit  loosely  on  my  brow. 
lU  could  my  wounded  spirit  brook  the  voice 
Of  harsh  comparison  'twixt  sire  and  son. 

Saul,  Abnbr. 

Ab.  What  meditation  holds  thee  thus  engag'd^ 
O  king  I  and  keeps  thine  active  spirit  bound  ; 
When  busy  war  far  other  cares  demands 
Than  ruminating  thought  and  pale  deqMor  ? 

Saul.  Abner,  draw  near.    My  weary  soul  sinks  down 
Beneath  tlie  heavy  pressure  of  misfortune. 
Oh  for  that  spirit  which  inflamM  my  breast 
With  sudden  fervour,  when,  among  the  seers 
And  holy  sages  my  prophetic  voice 
Was  heard  attentive,  and  th*  astonish*d  throng, 
Wond'ring,  exclaim'd,— "  Is  Saul  among  the  propliet*?* 
Where's  that  bold  arm  which  quell'd  th'  Aroalekite,. 
And  nobly  spared  fierce  Agag  and  his  flocks  ? 
*l'is  past !  the  light  of  Israel  now  is  quench'd  i 
Shorn  of  his  beams,  my  sun  of  glory  sets  I 
Kise  Moab,  Edom,  angry  Ammon,  rise ! 
Come  Gaza,  Ashdod  come  I  let  Ekron  boast, 
And  Askelon  rejoice,  for  Saul  is-^iothing. 

Ab.  I  bring  thee  news,  O  king  I 

Saul.  My  valiant  nnde  I 

What  can  avail  thy  news  ?  A  soul  oppressed 
Refuses  still  to  hear  the  charmer^s  voice, 
Howe'er  enticingly  he  charm.    What  news 
Can  soothe  my  sickly  soul,  while  Gath's  fell  giant 
Repeats  each  morning  to  my  frighten^  hosts 
His  daring  challenge,  none  accepting  it  ? 

Ab.  It  is  accepted. 

Saul.  Ha !  by  whom  ?  how  ?  when  ? 

\Vhat  prince,  what  gen'ral,  what  illustrious  horo^ 
What  veteran  chiefs  what  warricN:  of  renowx!. 
Will  dare  to  meet  the  haughty  foe's  defiance  ? 
Speak,  my  brave  gen'ral  I  noble  Aimer,  speak  t 

Ab,  No  prince,  no  warrior,  no  illustrious  chief. 
No  Tehran  hero  dares  acccy;>t  tbe  challenge ; 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  37 

Bat  what  will  moTe  thy  wonder,  mighty  king. 
One  trained  to  peaceful  deeds,  and  new  to  an», 
A  simple  she^ierd  swain  1 

Saul.  O  mockery ! 

No  more  of  this  light  tale,  it  suits  but  ill 
Thy  bearded  grayity :  or  rather  tell  it 
To  credulous  age,  or  weak  beUering  women ; 
They  love  whate*er  is  marvellous,  and  dote 
On  deeds  prodigious  and  incredible. 
Which  sober  sense  rejects.    I  lang^  to  think 
Of  thy  extrayagance.    A  shepherd's  boy 
Encounter  him  whom  nations  dread  to  meet ! 

jib.  Is  yalour,  then,  peculiar  to  high  birth  ? 
If  heaT*n  had  so  decreed,  know,  scornful  king. 
That  Saul  the  Beqjandte  Iiad  never  reign'd. 
No  1 — glory  darts  her  soul-pervading  ray 
On  thrones  and  cottages,  regardless  still 
Of  all  the  artifidal,  nice  distinctioiis 
Vain  human  customs  make. 

SauL  Where  is  this  youth  ? 

Jib.  l^thout  thy  tent  he  waits.    Sud&  humble  sweet* 
ness, 
Flr*d  with  the  secret  conscience  of  desert ; 
Such  manly  bearing,  tempered  with  such  softness, 
And  so  adorned  with  evYy  outward  charm 
Of  graceful  form  and  feature,  saw  I  never. 

SauL  Bring  me  the  youth. 

jib.  He  waits  thy  royal  ideasure. 

lExit  AsNBa. 

Saul.  What  must  I  thfaik  ?    Abner  hUosdyf  is  brave, 
And  sldU'd  in  human  kind :  nov  does  he  Judge 
So  lightly,  to  be  caught  by  q»edous  words 
And  frand'ft  smooth  artiflee,  where  there  not  marks 
Of  wortii  intrinaie.    But,  behold,  he  comes ! 
The  youth  too  with  him  I    Justly  did  he  praise 
The  candour  wUdi  adorns  has  open  brow. 

Be'enter  Abnbb  and  David. 

Dav.  Hail,  mighty  king!' 
jib.  Behold  thy  proflferM  champion ! 

Saul.  Art  thou  the  youth  whose  high  heroic  zeal 
Aspires  to  meet  the  giant  son  of  Anak  ? 
Dav.  If  so  the  Idng  permit. 
Saul,  ImpostiUe  I 


38  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Why,  what  experience  has  thy  yoath  of  anna  ? 
Where,  strifding,  didst  thoa  learn  the  trade  of  war  ? 
Beneath  what  hoary  vet'ran  hast  thoa  senr'd  ? 
What  feats  hast  thoa  achiev'd,  what  daring  deeds  ? 
What  well-ranged  phalanx,  say»  what  diarging  hosts. 
What  hard campidgns,  what  sieges  hast  tiioaseen? 
Hast  thoa  e'er  scaled  the  dty*s  rampired  wall. 
Or  horl'd  the  missile  dart,  or  learned  to  poise 
The  warrior's  deathf  al  spear  ?    The  use  of  targe. 
Of  helm  and  buckler,  is  to  thee  unknown. 

Dao.  Arras  I  have  seldom  seen.    I  littie  imow 
Of  war's  proud  discipline.    The  trumpet's  dang. 
The  shock  of  charging  hosts,  the  rampired  wall, 
Th*  embattled  phalanx,  and  the  warrior's  q>ear. 
The  use  of  targe  and  helm,  to  me  is  new. 
My  zeal  for  God,  my  patriot  love  of  Israel, 
My  rev'rence  for  my  king— behold  my  claims  1 

Saul.  But,  gentle  youth !  thou  hast  no  fome  in  armtk 
Renown,  with  her  shrill  clarion,  never  bore 
Thy  honour'd  name  to  many  a  land  remote ; 
From  the  fair  regions  where  Euphrates  laves 
Assyria's  borders,  to  the  distant  Nile. 

Dav.  True,  mighty  king !    I  am  indeed  alike 
Unbless'd  by  fortune,  and  to  fame  unknown ; 
A  lowly  shepherd-swain  of  Judah's  tribe : 
But  greatness  ever  springs  from  low  beginnings. 
That  very  Nile  thou  mention'st,  whose  broad  stream 
Bears  fruitfulness  and  health  through  many  a  clime. 
From  an  unknown,  penurious,  scanty  source 
Took  its  first  rise.    The  forest  oak,  which  shades 
Thy  sultry  troops  in  many  a  toilsome  march. 
Once  an  unheeded  acorn  lay.    O  king  1 
Who  ne'er  begins  can  never  aught  achieve 
Of  glorious.    Thoa  thyself  wast  once  nnknown 
Till  fiEtir  occasion  brought  thy  worth  to  light. 
Far  higher  views  inspire  my  yoathful  heart 
Than  human  praise :  I  seek  to  vindicate 
Th'  insnited  honour  of  the  God  I  serve.   - 

M.  *Ti8  nobly  said. 

SauL  I  love  thy  sfririt,  youth  I 

Bat  dare  not  trost  thy  inexperienced  arm 
Against  a  giant's  might.    The  sight  of  blood, 
Thoogfa  brave  thoa  feel'st  when  peril  is  not  nigh, 
WOl  pale  thy  ardent  cheek. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  39 

Dav,  Not  to,  O  king  I 

This  youthful  arm  has  been  imbrued  in  blood. 
Though  yet  no  blood  of  man  has  erer  stained  it. 
Thy  servant's  occupation  is  a  shepherd. 
'With  jealous  care  I  watch'd  my  father's.flock : 
A  brindled  lion  and  a  furious  bear 
forth  from  the  thicket  rushed  upon  the  fold. 
Seized  a  young  lamb,  and  tore  their  bleating  spoil 
Urg*d  by  compassion  for  my  helpless  charge, 
I  felt  a  new-born  rigour  nerye  my  arm ; 
And  eager  on  the  foaming  monsters  rushed. 
The  fiunish'd  lion  by  his  grisly  beard, 
BnragM,  I  caught,  and  smote  him  to  the  ground. 
The  panting  monster  struggling  in  my  gripe, 
Shook  terribly  his  bristling  mane,  and  lashed 
His  own  gaunt,  gory  sides ;  fiercely  he  ground 
His  gnashing  teeth,  and  roll'd  his  starting  eyes. 
Bloodshot  with  agony ;  then  with  a  groan. 
That  wak*d  the  echoes  of  the  mountain,  died. 
Nor  did  his  grim  associate  *Bcape  my  arm ; 
Thy  servant  slew  the  lion  and  the  bear ; 
I  kiird  them  both,  and  bore  their  shaggy  tpoUs 
In  triumph  home :  and  shall  I  fear  to  meet 
The  nndrcumds'd  Philistine  1  No :  that  God 
Who  sav*d  me  firtMn  the  bear's  destructive  fang 
And  hungry  lion^s  jaw,  will  not  he  save  me 
From  this  idolater  ? 

Saul.  HewilllhewiUl 

Go,  noble  youth  I  be  valiant  and  be  bless'd  1 
The  God  thou  serv'st  will  shield  thee  in  the  fight. 
And  nerve  thy  arm  with  more  than  mortal  strengfb. 

Ab.  So  the  bold  Nazarite*  a  lion  slew : 
An  earnest  of  his  victories  o'er  Philistia  i 

Said.  Go,  Abner,  see  the  youth  be  well  equipp'd 
With  shield  and  ^ear.    Be  it  thy  care  to  grace  hlia 
With  all  the  fit  accontrements  of  war. 
The  choicest  mail  from  my  rich  armoury  take, 
And  gird  upon  his  thigh  my  own  tried  sword. 
Of  noblest  tempered  steel. 

jib,  I  shall  obey. 

Dav.  Pardon,  O  king  I  the  coat  of  plated  mail 
These  limbs  have  never  known ;  it  would  not  shield, 
*Twould  but  encumber  one  who  never  felt 
The  weight  of  armour. 

*  Ssmaon.     See  Judf  ea,  cbap.  xIt. 


40  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

SauL  Take  thy  wish,  my  wm  • 

Thy  tword,  thai,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  gxiard  thee  I 


PART  V. 


ScBNB — Another  part  of  the  Camp, 

Dav.  (kneeling)  Eternal  justice  !  in  whose  awful  scale 
Th*  event  of  battle  hang«  I  Eternal  Truth  t 
Whose  beam  illumines  all !  Eternal  Mercy ! 
If,  by  thy  attributes  I  may,  nnblam'd. 
Address  thee ;  Lord  of  glory  I  hear  me  now ; 

0  teach  these  hands  to  war,  these  arms  to  fight  I 
Thou  ever  present  help  in  time  of  need ! 

Let  thy  broad  mercy,  as  a  shield,  defend. 
And  let  thine  everlasting  arms  support  me ! 
Strong  in  thy  streng^,  in  thy  protection  safe. 
Then,  though  the  heattien  rage,  I  shall  not  fear. 
Jbhovah,  be  my  buckler !  Mighty  Lord  I 
Thou  who  hast  deignM  by  hnmUe  instruments 
To  manifest  the  wonders  of  thy  might, 
Be  present  with  me  now  I  'Tis  thine  own  cause ! 
Thy  wisdom  sees  events,  thy  goodness  plans 
Schemes  baiSing  our  conception — and,  'tis  still 
Omnipotence  which  executes  the  deed 
Of  hy^h  design,  though  by  a  feeble  arm ! 

1  fecTa  secret  impulse  drive  me  on ; 

And  my  soul  springs  impatient  for  the  fight ! 
'Tis  not  the  heated  spirits  or  warm  blood 
Of  sanguine  youth  with  which  my  bosom  bums ; 
And  though  I  thirst  to  meet  th*  insulting  foe. 
And  pant  for  glory,  'tis  not,  witness  heaven ! 
'Tis  not  the  sinful  lust  of  fading  fiune. 
The  perishable  pndse  of  mortal  man  ; 
His  praise  I  covet,  whose  applause  is  life. 

David,  Eliab,  Israblitbs. 

Et,  "What  do  I  hear  ?  thou  truant  I  thou  hast  dar*d 
E'en  to  the  awfui  presence  of  the  king 
Bea:  thy  presumption  I 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  41 

Dav,  He  who  fears  the  Lord 

Shall  b<ridly  stand  before  tb.e  ttuce  of  Idngs, 
And  shall  not  be  ashamed. 

EL  Bat  ^Riiat  wild  dream 

Has  urfed  thee  to  tiiis  deed  of  deq»erate  rashness  ? 
llioa  mean'st,  so  I  have  leam'd,  to  meet  OoUath, 
His  single  arm  to  thine. 

Dost.  "Tla  what  I  purpose, 

E*eu  on  thto  spot.    Eadi  mwnoit  I  expect 
Ills  wishM  approach. 

EL  Oo  home ;  retom,  for  shame ! 

Nor  madly  draw  destroetlon  on  tbj  head. 
Thy  doting  &ther,  when  thy  shepherd's  coat, 
Drenched  in  thy  blood,  is  brought  him,  win  lament, 
And  rend  his  farrowed  cheek  and  rilver  hair, 
As  if  some  mighty  loss  had  tooch'd  his  age ; 
And  moom,  e'en  as  the  partial  patriarch  moam*d 
'When  Joseph's  bloody  garment  he  recelT'd 
From  his  less  dear,  not  less  deserving,  sons. 
But  whence  this  glittering  ornament  which  hangs 
Useless  npon  thy  thigh  ? 

Dav,  'lis  the  ldng*s  gift 

But  thoa  art  right ;  it  suits  not  me,  my  brother  I 
Nor  sword  I  mean  to  use,  nor  spear  to  poise. 
Lest  men  shoold  say  I  put  my  trust  in  arms. 
Not  in  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

EL  Then  thou  indeed 

Art  bent  to  seek  thy  death  ? 

Dav.  And  what  is  death  ? 

Is  it  so  tertiUe  to  die,  my  brother  ? 
Or  grant  It  terrible,  Is  it  for  that 
The  less  InoTitable  ?  If,  indeed. 
We  could  by  stratagem  elude  liie  blow. 
When  some  hi|^  duty  calls  us  forth  to  die, 
And  thus  f<Hr  ever  shun  it,  and  escape 
The  universal  lot,— then  fond  self-love. 
Then  cautious  prudence,  boldly  might  produce 
Their  fine-spun  arguments,  their  leam'd  harangues. 
Their  cobweb  arts,  their  phrase  sophistical, 
Thefar  subtile  doubts,  and  all  the  specious  tricks 
Of  sdfish  canning  labouring  for  its  end. 
But  sfaMie,  howe'er  protracted,  death  will  come, 

Why  fondly  stitdy,  with  ingenious  pains. 
To  pat  it  off  ?— To  breathe  a  little  longer 


4Sf  DAVID  AND  OOLIATH. 

Is  to  defer  our  fate,  but  not  to  Bhun  it. 

Small  gain !  which  wisdom,  with  indifferent  eye^ 

Beholds.    Why  wish  to  drink  the  bitter  dregs 

Of  life's  exhaosted  chalice,  whose  last  runnings, 

E'en  at  the  best,  are  T^;»id !  Why  not  die 

( If  heaven  so  will)  in  manhood's  opening  bloom. 

When  all  the  flush  of  life  is  gay  about  us ; 

When  sprightly  youth,  with  many  a  new-born  joy. 

Solicits  every  sense  I  so  may  we  tiien 

Present  a  sacrifice,  unmeet  indeed, 

(Ah,  how  unmeet !)  but  less  unworthy  far. 

Than  the  world's  leavings ;  than  a  worn-out  heart, 

By  vice  enfeebled,  and  by  vain  desires 

Sunk  and  exhausted ! 

El.  Hark  I  I  hear  a  sound 

Of  multitudes  approaching  1 

Dao.  "Us  the  giant  1 

I  see  him  not,  but  hear  his  measured  pace. 

El.  Look,  where  his  pondVous  shield  is  borne  btfora 
himi 

Dav.  Like  a  broad  moon  its  ample  disk  protends. 
But  soft !— what  unknown  prodigy  appears  ? 
A  moving  mountain  cased  in  polished  brass  I 

El.  (getting  behind  Da\w) 
How's  this  ?  thou  dost  not  tremble.    Thy  firm  joints 
Betray  no  fear ;  thy  accents  are  not  broken ; 
Thy  cheek  retains  its  red ;  thine  eye  its  lustre  \ 
He  comes  more  near  1    Dost  thou  not  fear  him  now  F 

Dav.  No. 

The  vast  colossal  statue  nor  inspires 
Respect  nor  fear.    Mere  magnitude  of  form, 
Without  proportion^  intellect  and  valour. 
Strikes  not  my  soul  with  reverence  or  with  awe. 

El.  Near,  and  more  near,  he  comes  I  I  hold  it  rash 
To  stay  so  near  him,  and  expose  a  life 
Which  may  hereafter  serve  the  state.    Farewell. 

{Exit. 

[Goliath  advances,  clad  in  complete  armour.  One 
bearing  his  shield  precedes  him.  The  opposing  armies 
are  seen  at  a  distance^  draum  up  on  each  side  of  the 
valley.  Goliath  begins,  to  speak  before  he  comes  on* 
David  stands  in  the  same  placet  with  an  air  qf  tti- 
difference.} 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  43 

Gol.  Where  is  the  mighty  man  of  war,  who  dures 
Accept  the  cballenge  of  Fhilistia's  chief  ? 
What  yictor  king,  what  general  drenched  in  blood. 
Claims  this  high  priTilege  ?  What  are  his  rights  ? 
What  proud  credentials  does  the  boaster  bring 
To  prove  his  claim?  What  cities  laid  in  ashes  ? 
What  min*d  proyinces  ?  What  slaughtered  realms  ? 
What  heads  of  heroes  and  what  hearts  oi  king, 
In  battle  kill'd,  or  at  his  altars  shun. 
Has  he  to  boast  ?  Is  his  bri^t  armoury 
Thick  set  with  spears,  and  swords,  and  eoats  of  mail 
Of  yanquish'd  nations,  by  his  single  arm 
Subdued  ?  Where  is  the  mortal  man  so  bold. 
So  much  a  wretdi,  so  out  of  love  with  life. 
To  dare  the  weight  of  tills  uplifted  spear. 
Which  never  fell  innoxious  ?  Yet  I  swear, 
1  grudge  the  glory  to  his  parting  soul 
To  foil  by  this  rig^t  hand.    *Twill  sweeten  death, 
To  know  he  had  the  honour  to  contend 
With  the  dread  son  of  Anak.    Latest  time 
From  blank  oblivion  shall  retrieve  his  name 
Who  dar*d  to  perish  in  unequal  fight 
With  Oath's  triumphant  champion.    Ck>me,  advance. 
Fhilistia's  gods  to  Israel's.    Sound,  my  herald^ 
Sound  for  the  battle  straight. 

[  Herald  totmds  the  trumpet. 

Dao.  Behold  Uiy  foe  I 

Gol.  I  see  him  not. 

Dav.  Behold  him  here  I 

Gbl.  Say,  where  ? 

Direct  my  right.    I  do  not  war  with  boys. 

Dav.  I  stand  prepared ;  thy  single  arm  to  mine. 

Gok  Why,  this  is  mockery,  minion  I  it  may  chance 
To  cost  thee  dear.    Sport  not  with  things  above  thee  t 
But  tell  me  who  of  all  this  numerous  host 
Expects  his  death  from  me  ?    Which  is  the  man 
Whom  Israel  sends  to  meet  my  bold  defiance  ? 

Dav.  The  election  of  my  sov'reign  falls  on  me. 

Gol.  On  thee !  On  thee !  By  Dagon,  'tis  too  much ! 
Thou  curled  minion  1  thou  a  nation^s  dtiampion  I 
*Twould  move  my  mirth  at  any  other  time ; 
But  trifling's  out  of  tune.    Begone,  light  boy ! 
And  tempt  me  not  too  far. 


44  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Dan.  I  do  defy  thee. 

Thou  foul  idolater  I    Hast  thou  not  Bcom*d 
The  anniea  of  the  lirlng  God  I  senre  ? 
By  me  he  will  avenge  upon  thy  head 
Thy  nation^s  sins  and  thine.    ArmM  witii  his  name, 
Unshrinking,  I  dare  meet  the  stoutest  foe 
That  ever  ln^*d  his  hostile  spear  in  blood. 

Got.  Cinmicalfy.J  Indeed  I  *ti8  wondrous  welL    Now, 
by  my  gods. 
The  stripling  plays  the  orator  I    Vain  boy  t 
Keep  close  to  thi^  same  Uoodless  war  of  words. 
And  thou  shalt  still  be  safe.    Tongue- valiant  warrior  t 
Where  is  thy  sylvan  crook,  with  garlands  hung, 
Of  idle  field-flowers  ?    Where  thy  wanton  harp, 
Thou  dainty-finger'd  hero?  better  strike 
Its  notes  lascivious,  or  the  lolling  lute 
Touch  softly,  than  provoke  the  trumpet's  rage. 
I  will  not  stain  the  honour  of  my  q;iear 
With  thy  inglorious  blood.    Shall  that  fair  cheek 
Be  scarr'd  with  wounds  unseemly  ?    Rather  go, 
And  hold  fond  dalliance  with  the  Syrian  maids ; 
To  wanton  measures  dance,  and  let  them  braid 
The  bright  luxuriance  of  thy  golden  hahr ; 
They,  for  their  lost  Adonis,  may  mistake 
Thy  dainty  form. 

Dao.  Peace,  thou  unhallowed  railer ! 

O  tell  it  not  in  Gath,  nor  let  the  sound 
Reach  Askelon,  how  once  your  slaughtered  lords 
By  mighty  Samson  *  found  one  common  grave : 
When  his  broad  shoulder  the  firm  pillars  heav'd, 
And  to  its  base  the  tott'ring  fabric  shook. 

Gol.  Insulting  boy  1  perhaps  thou  hast  not  heard 
The  infamy  of  that  inglorious  day. 
When  your  weak  hosts  at  Ebenezerf  pitched 
Their  quick-abandon'd  tents  ?    Then,  when  your  ark. 
Your  talisman,  your  charm,  your  boasted  pledge 
Of  safety  and  success,  was  tamely  lost  I 
And  yet  not  tamely,  since  by  me  'twas  won. 
When  with  this  good  right  arm  I  thinn'd  your  ranks» 
And  bravely  crush'd,  beneath  a  single  blow. 
The  chosen  guardians  of  this  vaunted  shrine, 

*  Judges  xvl.  1 1  Samuel  t. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  45 

Hophni  •  and  Phinehas.    The  fam'd  ark  itself 
I  bore  to  Ashdod. 

Dav.  I  remember  too, 

Since  thou  poroTok^st  th*  unwelcome  truth,  how  all 
Your  blushing  priests  beheld  their  idor«  sluune. 
When  prostrate  Dagon  fell  before  the  ark. 
And  your  frail  god  was  shiverU    Then  Philistia, 
idolatrous  Philistia,  flew  for  succour. 
To  Israelis  help,  and  all  her  smitten  nobles 
Confess'd  the  I/<nrd  was  Ood ;  and  the  blessed  ark, 
Cdadly,  with  reyerential  awe  restor'd. 

Got.  By  Ashdod's  fiune,  thou  liest.    Now  will  I  meet 
thee. 
Thou  insect  warrior,  since  thou  dar'st  me  thus  I 
Already  I  behold  thy  mangled  limbs, 
Dtsseyer'd  each  from  each,  ere  long  to  feed 
The  fierce  blood-snuflbig  rulture.    Hark  me  well. 
Around  my  spear  111  twist  thy  shining  locks. 
And  toss  in  air  thy  head  all  gash'd  with  wounds, 
Thy  lip  yet  quiv'ring  with  the  dire  convulsion 
Of  recent  death  I — Art  thou  not  terrified  ? 

Dao,  No : 

True  courage  is  not  mor^d  by  breath  of  words : 
While  the  rash  brayery  of  boiling  blood. 
Impetuous,  knows  no  settled  principle. 
A  fey'rish  tide,  it  has  its  ebbs  and  fiows. 
As  spirits  rise  or  fall,  as  wine  infiames. 
Or  drcnmstances  change.    But  inborn  courage, 
The  generous  child  of  fortitude  and  &ith. 
Holds  its  firm  empire  in  the  constant  soiil ; 
And,  like  the  stedfsst  pole-star,  never  once 
From  the  same  fix'd  and  frdthfol  point  declines. 

OoL  The  curses  of  Fhilistia'S  gods  be  on  thee  I 
This  fine-drawn  speech  is  meant  to  lengthen  out 
That  little  life  thy  words  pretend  to  scorn. 

Dav,  Hat  say^st  thou  so?    Come  on  then.    Mark  ut 
wen. 
Thou  com'st  to  me  with  swOTd,  and  spear,  and  shield  :— 
In  the  dread  name  of  Israelis  God  I  come ; 
The  living  Lord  of  hosts,  whom  thou  deftest  t 
Yet  though  no  shield  I  bring,  no  arms  except 

*  ComnMDtatori  ny,  that  the  Chaldee  Taraphraie  makes  Goliath 
boast  that  be  had  killed  Hopbnl  and  Phlnebat,  and  taken  the  ark 
prisoner. 


46 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 


These  five  smooth  stones  I  gather'd  firom  the  brook. 
With  such  ft  simple  sling  as  shepherds  use, — 
Yet  all  exposed,  defenceless  as  I  am. 
The  God  I  senre  shall  give  thee  up  a  prey 
To  my  victorions  arm.    This  day  I  mean 
To  make  th'  undrcnmcised  tribes  confess 
There  is  a  God  in  Israel.    I  will  give  thee, 
S(Hte  of  thy  vaunted  strength  and  giant  bolk, 
To  glut  the  carrion  kites.    Nor  thee  alone ; 
The  mangled  carcases  of  your  thick  hosts 
ShaU  spread  the  plains  of  Elah,  tiU  Fhilistia» 
Through  all  her  trembling  tents  and  flying  bands. 
Shall  own  that  Judah*s  God  is  God  indeed ! 
— I  dare  thee  to  the  trial. 

Gol.  Follow  me — 

In  this  good  spear  I  trust. 

Dav.  I  trust  in  heaven ! 

The  Qod  of  battle  stimulates  my  arm, 
And  fires  my  soul  with  ardour  not  its  own. 


PART  V. 


Scene— -TA*  Tent  of  Saul. 

Saul,  (rising  from  his  couch.)  Oh !  that  I  knew  the 
black  and  midnight  arts 
Of  wizard  sorcery !  that  I  could  call 
The  slumbering  spirit  from  the  shades  of  hell ! 
Or,  like  Chaldean  sages,  could  foreknow 
Th*  event  of  things  unacted  I    I  might  then 
Anticipate  my  fortune.    How  I'm  fallen  I 
The  sport  of  vain  chimeras,  the  weak  slave 
Of  fear  and  fancy ;  coveting  to  know 
The  arts  obscene,  which  foul  diviners  use. 
Thick  blood  and  moping  melancholy  lead 
To  balefol  superstition,— that  fell  flend. 
Whose  withering  charms  blast  the  fair  bloom  of  virtne. 
Why  did  my  wounded  pride  with  scorn  r^ect 
The  wholesome  truths  which  holy  Samuel  told  me  ? 
Why  drive  him  from  my  presence  ?  he  might  now 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  47 

Ridse  my  sunk  booI,  and  my  benighted  mind  . 

Enlighten  with  religion's  cheering  ray. 

He  dared  to  menace  me  with  loss  of  empire ; 

And  I,  for  that  bold  honesty,  dismiss'd  Mm. 

"  Another  shall  possess  thy  throne,**  he  cried : 

**  A  stranger  I"    This  unwelcome  prophecy 

Has  lined  my  crown,  and  strewed  my  couch,  with  tlioms. 

Each  ray  of  op'&ing  merit  I  discern 

In  friend  or  foe,  distracts  my  troubled  soul. 

Lest  he  should  prove  my  rival    But  thU  mom, 

E*en  my  young  champion,  lovely  as  ho  lm>k'd 

In  blooming  valour,  struck  me  to  the  boul 

With  jealousy's  barbed  dart.    O  jf  aUmsy. 

Thou  ngUest  fiend  of  hell  i  thy  deadly  venom 

Preys  on  my  vitals,  turns  the  healthful  hue 

Of  my  fresh  cheek  to  haf^^ard  sallowness. 

And  drinks  my  spirit  ufKl 

[Aflouruh  oftrumpeti^  ihouHngt  ^e. 
What  sounds  are  those  ? 
The  combat  is  decided.    Hark  i  again 
Those  shouts  proclaim  it  I  Now,  O  Ood  of  Jacob, 
If  yet  thou  hast  not  quite  withdrawn  from  Saul 
Thy  light  and  favour,  prosper  me  this  once  I 
But  Abner  comes  t    1  dread  to  hear  his  tale  t 
Fair  hope,  with  smiling  face  but  Bngoring  foot, 
Has  long  deceivM  me. 

jib.  King  of  Israel,  hail  I 

Now  thou  art  king  indeed.    The  youth  has  conquered : 
OoUath's  dead. 

Said.  Oh  speak  thy  tale  again. 

Lest  my  fond  ears  deceive  me  I 

jib.  Thy  young  champion 

Hath  slain  the  giant. 

Saul.  Then  God  is  gradous  still. 

In  spite  of  my  offences  I    But,  good  Abner ! 
How  was  it  ?    Tell  me  all.    Where  is  my  champion  ? 
Quick  let  me  press  him  to  my  grateful  heart. 
And  pay  him  a  king*8  thanks.    And  yet,  who  knows, 
This  forward  fiiend  may  prove  an  active  foe ! 
No  more  of  that.    Tell  me  the  whole,  brave  Abner  I 
And  paint  the  glorious  acts  of  my  young  hero ! 

jib.  Full  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  they  stood : 
Th*  opposing  armies  ranged  on  either  side 
In  proud  array.    The  haughty  giant  8talk*d, 


48  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Stately  across  the  valley.    Next,  the  youth 

Vntii  modest  confidence  advanced.    Nor  pomp. 

Not  gay  parade,  nor  martial  ornament. 

His  graceful  form  adom*d.    Goliath  straight. 

With  solemn  state,  began  the  busy  work 

Of  dreadful  preparati<m.    In  one  place 

His  €lo«ely-jointed  mail  an  opYdng  left 

For  air,  and  only  one :  the  watchful  youth 

Harked  that  the  beaver  of  his  helm  was  up. 

Meanwhile  the  giant  such  a  blow  devised 

As  would  have  crushed  him.    This  the  youth  perceived. 

And  firom  his  well-directed  sliqg  quick  hurl'd, 

With  dext'rous  aim,  a  st<Mie,  which  sunk,  deep  lodg'd, 

lu  the  capacious  forehead  of  the  foe. 

Then  wiUi  a  cry,  as  loud  and  terrible 

As  Libyan  lions  roaring  for  their  young. 

Quite  stunn'd,  the  furious  giant  staggered,  reel'd. 

And  fell :  the  mighty  mass  of  man  fell  prone. 

"^^th  its  own  weight  his  shattered  bulk  was  bruis'd. 

His  clattering  arms  rang  dreadful  through  the  field. 

And  the  firm  basis  of  the  solid  earth 

Shook.    Choked  with  blood  and  dust,  he  curs'd  his  gods, 

And  died  blaspheming  I    Straight  the  victor  youth 

Drew  from  its  sheath  the  giant's  ponderous  sword. 

And  from  th'  enormous  trunk  the  gory  head 

Furious  in  death  he  severed.    The  grim  visage 

Looked  threat*ning  still,  and  still  frowned  horribly. 

SauL  O,  glorious  deed  I    O,  valiant  conqueror  I 

jib.  The  youth  so  calm  appear'd,  so  nobly  firm. 
So  cool,  yet  so  intrepid,  that  these  eyes 
Ne'er  saw  such  temperate  valour  so  chastised 
By  modesty. 

Saul.  Thou  dwell*8t  upon  his  praise 

With  needless  drcumstance.    'Twas  nobly  done ; 
But  others  too  have  fought ! 

jib.  None,  none  so  bravely. 

Saul.  What  followed  next? 

jib.  The  shouting  Israelites 

On  the  Philistines  rushed,  and  still  pursue 
Their  routed  remnants.    In  dismay,  their  bands 
Disordered  fly,  while  shouts  of  loud  acclaim 
Pursue  their  brave  deliverer.    Lo,  he  comes  I 
Bearing  the  giant's  head  and  shining  sword. 
His  well-earned  trophies. 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  49 


Saul,  Abnbr,  David. 

[David  bectring  Goliath's  head  and  tword.    He  kneels, 
and  lays  both  at  Saul's  feet.} 

Saul.  Welcome  to  my  heart. 

My  glorious  champion  I  Hy  deliverer,  welcome! 
How  shall  I  speak  the  swelling  gratitude 
Of  my  full  heart !  or  give  thee  the  high  praise 
Thy  gallant  deeds  deserve! 

Dav.  O  mighty  Idng ! 

Sweet  is  the  breath  ctf  praise  when  given  by  those 
Whose  own  hi§^  merit  claims  the  praise  they  give. 
But  let  not  this  one  prosperous  event. 
By  Heav'n  directed,  be  ascrib'd  to  me ; 
I  might  have  fought  with  equal  skill  and  courage. 
And  not  have  gain'd  this  conquest ;  then  had  shame. 
Harsh  obloquy,  and  foul  disgrace  befsU^n  me : 
But  prospYons  fortune  gains  the  jHraise  of  valour. 

Saul.  I  like  not  this.    In  every  thing  superior  I 
He  soars  above  me  (aside.)  Modest  youth,  thoutt  right. 
And  fortune,  as  thou  say*ftt^  deserves  the  praise 
We  give  to  human  valour. 

Dav.  Rather  say 

The  God  of  hosts  deserves  it 

Saul.  Ten  me,  youth. 

What  is  thy  name,  and  what  thy  father's  house  ? 

Dav.  My  name  is  David ;  Jesse  is  my  sire ; 
An  humble  Bethldiemite  of  Judah*s  tribe. 

Saul.  David,  the  scm  of  Jesse  I    Sure,  that  name 
Has  been  familiar  to  me.    Nay,  thy  voice. 
Thy  form,  and  features,  1  remember  too^ 
Though  fistnt  and  indistioictiy. 

jib.  In  this  hero 

Behold  thy  sweet  murieian ;  he  whose  harp 
ExpellM  the  melancholy  fiend,  whose  power 
Bnslav'd  thy  spirit. 

Saul.  This  the  modest  youth. 

Whom  for  his  skill  and  virtues  I  preferred 
To  bear  my  armour  ? 

Dav.  I  am  he,  O  king ! 

Saul.  Why  this  concealment  ?  tell  me,  valiant  David, 
Why  didst  thou  hide  thy  birth  and  name  till  now ! 

Dav.  O  king  t  I  would  not  aught  from  favour  claim. 
Or  on  remember'd  services  presume ; 

V 


60  DAVID  AND  GOLIATH. 

Bat  on  the  strength  of  ray  own  aetioni  stand, 
Ungraced  and  antnpported. 

Ab.    ■  WeU  bo  merits 

The  honours  which  await  him.    Why,  O  Idng, 
Dost  thoa  dday  to  bless  his  doubting  heart 
With  his  weU-eamM  rewards  ?    Thy  lorely  daughter. 
By  right  of  conquest  his  1 

Smd  (to  David. J  True :  thoa  liast  won  ker. 

She  shall  be  thine.    Yes,  a  ldng*s  word  is  past. 

Dav.  O  boundless  blessing !  What !  shall  she  be  oaine^ 
For  whom  contending  monarchs  mi|^  renotmce 
Their  slighted  crowns  1 

{Sound*  cif  mutical  instnimeuti  heard  at  a  distance. 
Shouting  and  tinging.  A  grand  procession.  Chorus 
eS  Helnrew  unmenJ] 

Saul.  How*s  this  ?  what  sounds  e#  Joy 

Salute  my  ears?    What  means  tiiia  needless  pomp? 
This  merry  sound  of  tabret  and  of  harp  ? 
What  mean  these  idle  instruments  of  triumph  ? 
These  women,  who  in  fair  proeesdon  move, 
Making  sweet  melody  ? 

tb.  To  pay  due  honour 

To  David  are  they  come. 

SatU  (aside. J  A  rival*s  praise 

Is  discord  to  my  ear !    They  might  have  spared 
This  idle  pageantry :  it  wounds  my  sonl  I 

[Martial  symphony:  after  which  Chorus  qf  Women 

sing.} 

I. 

Prepare  I  your  festal  rites  prepare  I 

Let  your  briomphs  rend  the  air  I 

Idol  gods  shaU  reign  no  more : 

We  the  living  Lord  adore  1 
Let  heathen  hosts  on  human  helps  repose. 
Since  Israel's  Ood  has  routed  Israel's  foes. 

II. 

Let  remotest  nations  know 
Proud  6<riiath*s  overthrow. 
FaUen,  FUlistia,  is  thy  trust, 
Dagon  mingles  with  the  dustt 


DAVID  AND  GOLIATH.  61 

Who  feacB  the  Lord  of  glory,  need  not  fear 
The  braien  armour  or  the  lifted  spear. 

IIL 

See  the  routed  squadrons  fly  I 
Hark !  their  clamours  rend  the  sky ! 
Blood  and  carnage  stain  the  field  I 
See,  the  yanquish'd  nati<Mi8  jrield  I 
Dismay  and  terror  fill  the  fi1ghten*d  land. 
While  conquering  Darid  routs  the  trembling  band. 

IV. 

Lo!  upon  the  tented  field 

Royal  Saul  has  thousands  kill'd  I 

Lo !  upon  th*  ensanguin'd  plain 

David  has  ten  thousand  slain ! 
Let  mighty  Saul  his  Tanqulsh*d  thousands  tell. 
While  tenfold  triumphs  DaTid'b  rictories  sweU. 


BELSHAZZAR: 

21  £acreti  ISrama* 


Hrw  an  thon  fallen  from  ho'tm,  O  Lncifw,  Son  of  the  Morning !    How  art 
tbom  eat  duwa  to  the  gioeuii,  wbo  didat  we^ee  the  nations. — ftaimk. 


PERSONS  OF  THE  DRAMA. 

Belihmar,  King  of  Babylon.      I  Daniel,  the  Jewiih  prophet. 
Nitoerit,  the  Queen- Mother.        I  CaptiTe  Jews,  See.  Sec 
Courtiers,  Astrologers,  Parasites.  I 

Soetu—Babykm,     Tbne—Night. 
The  subject  Is  taken  fh>m  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  the  Prophet  Daniel. 


PART  I. 

ScKNE— Near  the  Palace  of  Babylon, 

Damibl  and  Captitb  Jews. 

Dan,  Parent  of  life  and  light  I  sole  Source  of  good « 
Whose  tender  merdes  through  the  tide  of  time. 
In  long  soocessiye  order,  have  sostain'd. 
And  8ay*d  the  sons  of  Israel  1  Thou,  whose  powY 
Deliyer'd  righteous  Noah  from  the  flood. 
The  whelming  flood,  the  grave  of  human  kind ! 
Oh  Thou,  whose  guardian  care  and  outstretch'd  hand 
Rescued  young  Isaac  from  the  lifted  arm, 
Rais*d  at  thy  bidding,  to  devote  a  son. 
An  only  son,  doomM  by  his  sire  to  die : 
(O  saving  fidth,  by  such  obedience  prov*d ! 
O  blest  obedience,  hallow'd  thus  by  faith  1 ) 
Thou,  who  in  mercy  sav^dst  the  choeen  race 
In  the  wild  desert,  and  didst  there  sustain  them 
By  wonder-working  love,  though  they  rebell'd 


BELSHAZZAR.  53 

And  munnorM  at  the  miracles  that  sav^d  them ! 
Oh  hear  thy  senrant  Daniel !  hear  and  help  1 
Tlioa,  whose  almighty  pow*r  did  after  raise 
SucceaaiTe  leaders  to  defend  oar  race : 
Who  sentest  Taliant  Joshoa  to  the  field. 
Thy  people's  champion,  to  the  conquering  field. 
Where  liie  revolving  planet  of  the  night. 
Suspended  in  her  radiant  round,  was  stayed ; 
And  the  bright  sun,  arrested  in  his  course. 
Stupendously  stood  still  1 

Chorus  op  Jbws. 

I. 

What  ailed  thee,  that  thou  stood'st  still, 
O  sun !  nor  did  thy  fiaming  orb  decline  t 
And  thou,  O  moon  I  bi  Ajalon's  low  vale. 
Why  didst  thou  long  before  thy  period  shine ! 

II. 

Was  it  at  Joshua^  dread  command. 
The  leader  of  the  IsraeUtish  band  ? 
Yes— at  a  mortal's  Udding  both  stood  still : 
'Twas  Joshua's  word,  but  'twas  Jehovah's  wiU. 

III. 

What  all-controlling  hand  had  force 
To  stop  eternal  nature's  constant  course  ? 
The  wand'ring  moon  to  one  fix'd  spot  confine. 
But  His  whose  fiat  gave  them  first  to  shine  ? 

Dan.  O  Thou!  who,  when  thy  discontented  host, 
llred  of  Jehovah*s  rule,  desired  a  Idng, 
In  anger  gav'st  them  Saul ;  and  then  again 
Didst  wrest  the  regal  sceptre  from  his  hand 
To  give  it  David— David,  best  belov'd ! 
lUnstrions  David  I  poet,  prophet,  king ; 
Thou  who  didst  suffer  Solomon  the  wise 
To  build  a  glorious  temple  to  thy  name, — 
O  hear  thy  servants,  and  fox^ve  us  too  I 
If,  by  severe  necessity  compelled. 
We  worship  here— we  have  qo  temple  now  t 
Altar  or  sanctuary,  none  is  left. 


54  BELSHAZZAB 


CuoRus  OF  Jews. 

O  Jttdah !  let  thy  captive  sons  deplore 

Thy  far-fam'd  temple's  now  no  more ! 
Fall'n  is  thy  sacred  fane,  thy  glory  gone  I 
Fall'n  is  thy  temple,  Solomon ! 

Ne'er  did  barbaric  kings  bdiold. 
With  all  their  shining  gems,  their  bomishM  gold, 

A  fane  so  perfect,  bright,  and  fair ; 
For  God  himself  was  wont  t'  inhabit  tliere. 

Between  the  cherubim  his  glory  stood, 
While  the  high-priest  alone  the  dazzling  splendour 
view'd. 

How  fondly  did  the  Tyrian  artist  strive 

His  name  to  latest  time  should  live ! 
Sudi  wealth  the^'stranger  wonder*d  to  behold : 
Gold  were  the  tablets,  and  the  vases  gold. 

Of  cedar  such  an  ample  stcNre, 
Exhausted  Lebanon  could  yield  no  more. 
Bending  before  the  Ruler  of  the  sky, 

Well  might  the  royal  founder  cry, 
Fill'd  with  an  holy  dread,  a  reverent  fear, 
Will  God  in  very  deed  inhabit  hare  ? 

The  heaven  of  heavens  beneath  his  feet, 
Is  for  the  bright  inhabitant  unmeet : 

Archangels  prostrate  wait  his  high  commands, 
And  will  he  deign  to  dwell  in  temples  made  with  baais  ? 

Dan.    Yes,  thou  art  ever  present,  Fow*r  St^nreme ! 
Not  drcumscrib'd  by  time,  not  fix*d  to  space. 
Confined  to  altars,  nor  to  temples  bound. 
In  wealth,  in  want,  in  freedom,  or  in  chains. 
In  dungeons  or  on  thrones,  the  faithful  find  thee  ! 
E'en  in  the  burning  cauldron  thou  wast  near 
To  Shadrach  and  the  holy  brotherhood : 
The  unhurt  martyrs  bless'd  thee  in  the  flames ; 
They  sought  and  found  Thee  j  call'd,  and  Thou  wast 
there. 

First  Jew.  How  changed  our  state!  Judah,  thy  glory^ 
fUlenl 
Thy  joys  for  hard  captivity  exchang'd ! 
And  thy  sad  sons  breathe  the  polluted  air 
Of  Baboon,  where  deities  obscene 


BELSHAZZAB.  65 

Insult  the  liring  God ;  and  to  his  servants* 
The  priests  of  wretched  idols  made  with  hands, 
Shew  contomelious  scorn. 

Dan.  'Tis  heaven's  Ugh  will. 

Second  Jew.  If  I  forget  thee,  O  Jenualem ! 
If  I  not  fondly  cherish  thy  lov'd  image, 
E*en  in  the  giddy  hoar  of  thooghtless  mirUi ; 
If  I  not  rather  view  thy  prostrate  waUs 
Tlian  haughty  Babylon's  imperial  towers» 
Then  may  my  tongae  refuse  to  frame  the  strains 
Of  sweetest  harmony ;  my  rude  right  hand 
Forget,  with  sounds  symphonioas,  to  accord 
The  harp  of  Jesse's  sou  to  8i<MD*s  songs. 

Pint  Jew.  Oft  on  Euphrates*  ever  verdant  baalcs, 
Where  droajpltng  willows  form  a  mournful  shade. 
With  all  the  pride  which  proep'rous  fortunes  give. 
And  all  th*  unfeeling  mirth  of  happy  men, 
Th*  insulting  Babj^onians  ask  a  song ; 
Such  songs  as  erst  in  better  days  wore  song 
By  Korah's  sens,  or  heavon-taught  As^>h,  set 
To  loftiest  measures ;  then  our  bursting  hearts 
Feel  all  their  woes  afresh ;  the  galling  chain 
Of  bondage  crushes  then  the  free-bom  soul 
With  writhing  anguidi  {  from  the  trembling  Up 
Th*  unfinishM  cadence  £b11s  ;  and  the  Ug  tear. 
While  it  relieves,  betrays  the  wo-fiwight  soul. 
For  who  can  view  Ecq»hrates*  pleasant  stream. 
Its  droofring  willows,  and  its  verdant  banks, 
And  not  to  wounded  memory  recall 
The  [riny  groves  of  fertile  Palestine, 
The  vales  of  Solyma,  and  Jordan's  stream ! 

Dan.  Firm  foith  and  deep  submlasion  to  high  Heaven 
Will  teadi  us  to  endure,  without  a  murmur. 
What  seems  so  hard.    Think  what  the  holy  host 
Of  patriarchs,  saints,  and  prophets  have  sustain'd 
In  tiie  blest  cause  of  truth  1    And  diall  not  we, 
O  men  of  Judah,  dare  what  these  have  dared. 
And  boldly  pass  through  the  refining  fire 
Of  fierce  aillietion  ?    Yes,  be  witness.  Heaven ! 
Old  as  I  am,  I  will  not  shrink  at  death. 
Come  in  wluit  shape  he  may,  if  God  so  will. 
By  peril  to  confirm  and  prove  my  fiedth. 
Oh  I    I  would  dare  yon  den  of  hungry  Uons, 
Rather  Uian  pause  to  fill  the  task  assign'd 


56  BBLSHAZZAR. 

By  wisdom  infinite.    Nor  think  I  boast : 
Not  in  myself,  but  in  thy  strength  I  trust. 
Spirit  of  God! 

Firtt  Jew.       Prophet,  thy  words  support. 
And  raise  our  sinking  souls. 

Dan,  Behold  yon  palace ; 

There  proud  Belshasaar  keeps  his  wanton  court ! 
I  knew  it  once  beneath  another  lord. 
His  grandsire,  •  who  subdued  Jehoiadiin, 
And  hither  brought  sad  Judah's  captive  teibes ; 
And  with  them  brought  the  ridi  and  predous  reUcs 
Of  our  fiuned  temple ;  idl  the  holy  treasure. 
The  golden  rases,  and  the  sacred  cups. 
Which  graced,  in  hapi^er  times,  the  sanctuary. 

Second  Jew.    May  Ha,  to  whose  blest  use  they  were 
devoted. 
Preserve  them  from  pollution ;  and  once  more, 
In  his  own  gradous  time,  restore  the  temple ! 

Dein.  I,  with  some  favoured  youths  of  Jewish  race. 
Was  lodg'd  in  tiie  king's  palace,  and  instructed 
In  all  the  various  learning  of  the  east : 
But  Hb,  on  whose  great  name  our  fathers  cali'd. 
Preserved  us  from  the  perils  of  a  court, 
Wam'd  us  to  g^uard  our  youthful  appetites. 
And  still  with  holy  fortitude  rcgect 
The  pampering  viands  luxury  presented ; 
Fell  luxury !  more  perilous  to  youth 
Than  storms  or  quicksands,  poverty  or  chains. 

Second  Jew.    He  who  can  guard  *gainst  the  low  baits 
of  sense, 
VfSl  find  temptation's  arrows  hurtless  strike 
Against  the  brasen  shidd  of  temperance. 
For  'tis  th*  inferior  ^>petites  enthral 
The  man,  and  quendi  th*  immortal  light  within  him  ; 
The  senses  take  the  soul  an  easy  prey. 
And  sink  th*  impris<m*d  spirit  into  brute. 

Dan.  Twice,  t  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  did  I  expound 
The  visions  of  the  king ;  his  soul  was  touched. 
And  twice  did  he  repent,  and  prostrate  fall 
Before  the  God  of  Daniel :  yet  again, 
Power,  flattery,  and  prosperity  undid  him. 

*  Nebaehadnezzar. 
i  Daniel  chap.  ii.  and  iv 


BELSHAZZAa  57 

When  firom  the  lofty  ramparts  of  hia  palace 
He  yiew'd  the  Bplendoors  of  the  royal  city, 
That  magarine  of  wealth,  which  proud  Eaphrates 
Wafts  from  each  distant  comer  of  the  earth ; 
When  he  b^eld  the  adamantine  towers, 
The  braxen  gates,  the  bulwarks  of  his  strength. 
The  poident  gardens,  art's  stupendous  work, 
The  wonder  of  the  world !  the  proud  Chaldean, 
Ifad  with  th*  intoxicating  fumes  which  rise 
When  unctmtroU'd  ambition  grasps  at  once 
Dominion  absolute  and  boundless  wealth, 
Fof^ot  lie  was  a  man,  foi^ot  his  Ood  I 
**  This  mighty  Babylon  is  mine,"  he  cried ; 
**  My  wondrous  power,  my  godlike  arm  achiey^d  it. 
'*  I  scorn  submission :  own  no  Deity 
**  Abore  my  own."    WhUe  the  blasphemer  spoke, 
The  wrath  of  Hearen  inflicted  instant  rengeanca. 
Stripp'd  him  of  tiiat  bright  reason  he  abused. 
And  drore  him  from  the  dieerful  haunts  of  men, 
A  naked,  wretched,  helpless,  senseless  thing ; 
Ck>mpanion  of  the  bmte»,  his  equals  now. 
Fint  Jew,  Nor  does  his  impious  grandson,  proud  Bel- 
shaEzar, 
Fall  short  of  his  offences  ?  nay,  he  wants 
The  raliant  spirit  and  the  actire  soul 
Of  his  progenitor ;  for  pleasure's  slave. 
Though  bound  in  silken  chains,  and  only  tied 
In  flowery  fetters,  seeming  light  and  loose. 
Is  more  subdued  than  the  radi  casual  victim 
Of  anger  or  ambition  :  these  indeed 
Bom  with  a  fiercer  but  a  short-lived  fire ; 
While  pleasure  with  a  constant  flame  consumes. 
War  days  her  thousands,  but  destructive  pleasure. 
More  fell,  more  fistal,  her  ten  thousands  slays : 
The  young  luxurious  Idng  she  fondly  woos 
In  every  shape  of  am'rous  blandishment ; 
With  adulation  smooth  ensnares  his  soul ; 
With  love  betrays  him,  and  with  wine  inflames. 
She  strews  her  magic  poppies  o'er  his  couch. 
And  with  delicious  opiates  charms  him  down. 
In  fatal  slumbers  bound.    Though  Babylon 
Is  now  invested  by  the  warlike  troops 
Of  royal  Cyrus,  Perua's  valiant  prince ; 
Who,  in  conjunction  with  the  Median  king. 


5S  BELSHAZZAR. 

DarioB,  ftmed  for  conquest,  now  preparefl 
To  storm  the  city ;  not  th*  impending  hcMrrors 
Which  erer  wait  a  siege  have  power  to  wake 
To  thought  or  sense  th*  intoxicated  king. 

Dan,  E*en  in  this  night  of  oniversal  dread» 
A  mighty  army  threatening  at  the  gates  i 
This  rery  night,  as  if  in  scorn  at  danger, 
The  dissolute  Belshazzar  holds  a  feast 
Magnificently  impious,  meant  to  honour 
Belus,  the  favourite  Babylonish  idol. 
Lewd  parasites  compose  his  wanton  cx>urt« 
Whose  impious  flatt'ries  soothe  his  monstrous  crimes. 
They  justify  his  vices,  and  extol 
His  boastful  phrase,  as  if  he  were  some  god. 
Whate'er  he  says,  they  say ;  what  he  commands. 
Implicitly  they  do ;  they  echo  back 
His  blasphemies  with  shouts  of  loud  acclaim ; 
And  when  he  wounds  the  tortured  ear  of  virtue. 
They  cry  **  All  hail  1  Belshazsar,  Uve  for  ever  I" 
To-night  a  thousand  nobles  fill  his  hall. 
Princes,  and  all  the  dames  who  grace  Uie  court ; 
All  but  his  virtuous  mother,  sage  Mtocris : 
Ah !  how  unlike  the  impious  king  her  son  I 
She  never  mingles  in  the  midnight  fray. 
Nor  crowns  the  guilty  banquet  with  her  presence. 
The  royal  fair  is  rich  in  evYy  virtue 
Which  can  adorn  the  queen,  or  grace  the  woman ; 
But  for  the  wisdom  of  her  prudent  counsels 
This  wretched  empire  had  been  long  undone. 
Not  fam'd  Semiramis,  Assyria's  pride. 
Could  boast  a  brighter  mind  or  firmer  soul ; 
Beneath  the  gentle  reign  of  Merodach,* 
Her  royal  lord,  our  nation  tasted  peace. 
Our  captive  monarch,  sad  Jehoiaohin, 
Grown  grey  in  a  close  prison's  horrid  gloom. 
He  freed  from  bondage ;  brought  the  hoary  king 
To  taste  once  more  the  long-forgotten  sweets 
Of  liberty  and  light,  sustained  his  age, 
Four*d  in  his  wounds  the  lenient  balm  of  kindness. 
And  blest  his  setting  hour  of  life  with  peace. 

[Sound  of  trumpets  it  heard  at  a  distance. 
First  Jew.  That  sound  proclaims  the  banquet  is  begun. 

*  2  Kinff  XXV. 


BBLSHAZZAR.  60 

Second  Jew,  Hsric  1  thelicentioaf  uproT  grows  more 
load. 
The  yanlted  roof  reioandfl  with  ehoats  of  mirth, 
And  the  firm  palace  ahakes  I  Retire,  my  friends ; 
This  madness  is  not  meet  for  sober  ears. 
If  any  of  our  race  were  fbond  so  near, 
*Twoald  but  expose  vs  to  the  mde  attack 
Of  rUuddry  obsesne  and  impious  Jests 
From  these  mad  sons  of  BcJial,  more  inflamed 
To  deeds  of  riot  by  tlie  wanton  feast 

Dan,  Here  part  we  then  1  bnt  when  again  to  meet 
Who  knows,  sare  HeaT*n  ?  Yet,  O  my  friends  t  1  fed 
An  impulse  more  than  hnman  stir  my  breast. 
Rapt  in  prophetic  vision,*  I  behold 
TUngs  hid  as  yet  from  mortal  right.    I  see 
The  dart  of  rengeaoce  tremble  in  the  air, 
Ere  long  to  pierce  the  impions  king.    B*en  now 
The  desfriating  angel  stalks  abroad. 
And  brandishes  aloft  the  two-edg*d  sword 
Of  retribution  keen ;  he  soon  will  strike. 
And  Babylon  shall  weep  as  Sion  wept. 
Pass  but  a  little  while,  and  you  shall  see 
This  queen  of  cities  prostrate  on  the  earth. 
This  haughty  mistress  of  the  kneeling  world. 
How  shall  she  sit  dishonourM  in  the  dust. 
In  tamish'd  pomp  and  solitary  wo  I 
How  shall  she  shroud  her  glories  in  the  dark. 
And  in  opprobrious  silence  hide  her  head  1 
LAment,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Chaldea  I 
For  thou  shalt  fell  I  imperial  queen,  shalt  fell  t 
No  more  Sidonian  robes  shall  grace  thy  limbs. 
To  purple  garments,  sackdoth  shall  succeed ; 
And  sordid  dust  and  ashes  shall  supply 
The  odVous  nard  and  cassia.    Thou,  who  siudst 
I  AM,  and  there  is  none  besides  me :  thou. 
E'en  thou,  imperial  Babylon,  shalt  fall ! 
Thy  glory  quite  ecUpsM  t    The  pleasant  sound 
Of  viol  and  of  harp  shall  charm  no  more  1 
Nor  song  of  Syrian  damsels  shall  be  heard. 
Responsive  to  the  lute's  luxurious  note : 
But  the  loud  bittern^  cry,  the  raven*8  croak, 
The  bat's  fell  scream,  the  lonely  owrs  dull  fisaiaU 

*  See  the  prophedca  of  lasiah,  xlvii.  and  others. 


60  BELSHAZZAR. 

And  eyVy  hideous  bird,  with  ominous  shriek. 
Shall  scare  afirighted  silence  from  thy  walls : 
While  desolation,  snatching  from  the  hand 
Of  time  the  scythe  of  rain,  sits  aloft. 
Or  stalks  in  dreadful  miyesty  abroad, 
I  see  th*  exterminating  fiend  adrance, ' 
Br^n  now  I  see  her  glare  with  horrid  joy. 
See  towers  imperial  mooldYing  at  her  touch ; 
She  glances  on  the  broken  battlement, 
S^e  eyes  the  crumbling  column,  and  eo^oys 
The  work  of  ages  prostrate  in  the  dust — 
Then,  pointing  to  the  mischiefB  she  has  made^ 
Exulting  cries.  This  once  was  Babylon  I 


PART  II. 


Scehe.— The  Court  of  Belshcuezar.  The  King  seated 
on  a  magnificent  throne.  Prince*,  Nobles^  and  Atten- 
dants. Ladies  (nf  the  Court.  Music,  A  superb  Banquet, 

First  Court,    (rises  and  kneels.)    Hail,  mighty  king. 
Second  Court.  Belshazzar,  lire  for  erer ; 

Third  Court.    Sun  of  the  world,  and  light  of  kings,  all 

haill 
Fourth  Court.    With  lowly  rev'rence,  such  as  bast  be- 

comes 
The  humblest  creatures  of  imperial  power, 
Behold  a  thousand  nobles  bend  before  thee  I 
Princes  far  fom'd,  and  dames  of  high  descent : 
Yet  all  this  pride  of  wealth,  this  boast  of  beauty, 
Shrinks  into  nought  before  thine  awful  eye  I 
And  Uves  or  dies  as  the  king  frowns  or  smiles  I 

Bel,  This  is  such  homage  as  becomes  your  lore. 
And  suits  the  mighty  monarch  nf  mankind. 

Fi/lh  Court.  The  bending  world  should  prostrate  thus 
before  thee ; 
And  pay  not  only  praise  but  adoration  t 

Bel.    {rises  and  comes  forward,)    Let  dull  philosophy 
preach  self-denial ; 
Let  envious  poverty  and  snarling  a^^e 


BELSHAZZAR.  Gl 

Frondly  dedaiin  agiunst  the  joys  they  know  not. 

Let  the  deladed  Jews,  who  fondly  hope 

Some  fonded  heav^  hereafter,  mortify 

And  lose  the  actual  blessings  of  this  world 

To  purchase  others  which  may  never  come. 

Out  gods  may  promise  less,  but  give  us  more. 

HI  could  my  ardent  spirit  be  content 

With  meagre  abstinence  and  hungry  hope. 

Let  those  misjudging  Israelites,  who  want 

The  nimUe  spirits  and  the  active  soul. 

Gall  their  blunt  feelings  virtue :  let  them  drudge. 

In  r^nkr  progression,  through  the  round 

Of  formal  duty  and  of  daily  toil ; 

And,  when  they  want  the  genius  to  be  happy, 

Believe  their  harsh  austerity  is  goodness. 

If  there  be  gods,  they  meant  we  should  e^joy : 

Why  give  us  else  these  tastes  and  appetites  ? 

And  why  the  means  to  crown  them  with  indulgence  ? 

To  burst  the  feeble  bonds  which  hold  the  vulgar, 

Is  noble  daring. 

Fint  Court,  And  is  therefore  worthy 

The  high  imperial  spirit  of  Belshazcar. 

Second  Court,  Behold  a  banquet  which  the  gods 

might  share ! 

Bel.  To-night,  my  friends,  your  monarch  shall  be 
blest 
Yfitb.  every  various  joy ;  to-night  is  ours ; 
Nor  shall  the  envious  gods,  who  view  our  bliss 
And  sicken  as  they  view,  to-night  disturb  us. 
Bring  all  the  richest  spices  of  the  East ; 
The  odorous  cassia  and  the  drooping  myrrh. 
The  liquid  amber  and  the  fragrant  gums ; 
Rob  Oilead  of  its  balms,  Belshaxzar  bids. 
And  leave  the  Arabian  groves  without  an  odour. 
Bring  freshest  flowYs,  exhaust  the  blooming  spring. 
Twine  the  green  myrtle  with  the  short-liv'd  rose } 
And  ever,  as  the  blushing  garland  fades. 
Well  learn  to  snatch  the  fugitive  delight. 
And  grasp  the  flying  joy  ere  it  escape  us. 
Ck>me— fill  the  smiling  goblet  for  the  king ; 
Belshaicar  will  not  let  a  moment  pass 
Unmark'd  by  some  ei^oyment !  The  full  bowl 
Let  every  guest  partake  I 

[Courtiers  kneel  and  drink. 


6S  BBLSHAZZAR. 

nm  Ctmrt,  Hei«'s  to  the  king! 

light  of  tlM  woiM.  and  glory  of  tlw  oirtl^ 
^'hosewordbfiito! 

BeL  Tes ;  we  are  Ukest  gods 

What  we  have  power,  and  nm  it.    What  is  wealth 
Bat  the  rieh  means  to  gratify  desire  ? 
I  will  not  have  a  widi,  a  hope,  a  thought. 
That  shall  not  know  findtion.    What  is  em^re  ? 
The  pririlege  to  punish  and  eivoy ; 
To  feel  oar  powor  in  makittg  otimrs  fear  it ; 
To  taste  of  pleasore's  cup  till  we  grow  giddy. 
And  think  ovurselres  inunortal  I  This  is  empire  I 
My  ancestors  scarce  tasted  of  its  joys : 
Shut  from  the  sprightly  worid,  and  all  its  diarms. 
In  cambrous  miiiesty,  hi  sullen  state 
And  dull  unsocial  dignity  they  liv*d ; 
Far  from  the  sight  of  an  admiring  worid. 
That  world,  whose  gaae  makes  half  the  charms  of 

greatness; 
They  nothing  knew  of  empire  but  the  name. 
Or  saw  it  in  the  looks  of  trembling  slaves  i 
And  all  they  felt  of  royalty  was  care. 
But  I  will  see  and  know  of  it  myself; 
Youth,  wealth,  and  greatness  court  me  to  be  blest. 
And  power  and  pleasure  draw  with  equal  force 
And  sweet  attraction :  both  I  wUl  embrace 
In  quick  succession ;  this  is  pleasure's  day ; 
Ambition  will  huve  time  to  reign  hereafter ; 
It  is  the  proper  appetite  of  age. 
The  lust  of  power  shall  lord  it  uncontrolled. 
When  all  the  generous  feelings  g^ow  obtuse. 
And  stem  dominion  holds  with  rigid  hand 
His  iron  rein,  and  sits  and  sways  alone. 
But  youth  is  i^easure*s  hour ! 

First  Court.  Perish  the  slave 

Who  with  (^dons  counsel  would  oppose 
The  king's  desire,  whose  lightest  wish  is  law  ! 

Bel.  Now  strike  the  loud-toned  lyre  and  softer  lute ; 
Let  me  have  music,  with  the  nobler  aid 
Of  poesy.    Where  are  those  cunning  men 
Who  bcNSst,  by  diosen  sounds,  and  measur'd  sweetness, 
To  set  the  busy  spirits  in  a  flame. 
And  cool  them  at  their  will  ?  who  know  the  art 
To  call  the  hidden  powers  of  numbers  forth. 


BELSHAZZAB.  63 

And  make  thmt  pUaat  instrument,  the  mind. 

Yield  to  the  powerful  sympathy  of  sound. 

Obedient  to  the  master's  artful  hand  ? 

Such  magic  is  in  song  1  Then  giye  me  song ; 

Yet  not  at  first  such  soul-dissolving  strains 

As  melt  the  soften'd  sense ;  but  such  bold  measures 

As  may  inflame  my  spirit  to  despise 

Th*  amMtious  Persian,  that  presumptuous  boy 

Who  rashly  dares  e*en  now  invest  our  city. 

And  menaces  th*  invincible  Belshazzar. 

iA  grand  concert  of  music,  qfter  which  an  ode.] 

In  vain  shall  Persian  Cyrus  dare 
yfith  great  Belshazzar  wage  unequal  war ; 

In  vain  Darius  shall  combine, 
Daiins,  leader  oi  the  Median  line ; 
While  fair  Euphrates*  stream  our  walls  protects, 
And  great  Belshazzar's  self  our  fate  directs, 

War  and  fiunine  threat  in  vain. 

While  this  demi-god  shall  reign ! 
Let  Persia^  prostrate  king  confess  his  power, 
And  Media's  monarch  dread  his  vengeful  hour. 

On  Dura*s*  amfrie  plain  behold 
Immortal  Belus,t  whom  the  nations  own ; 
Sublime  he  stands  in  bumish'd  gold. 
And  richest  offerings  his  bright  altars  crown. 
To-night  his  deity  we  here  adore, 
And  due  libations  speak  his  mighty  power. 

Yet  Belus*  self  not  more  we  own 
Than  great  Belshazzar  on  Chaldea's  throne. 

Great  Belshazzar  like  a  god, 

Rules  the  nations  with  a  nod  I 

*  Daniel  UL 
t  See  a  very  fine  description  of  the  temple  of  this  idol. 

The  towYing  fane 

Of  Bel,  Chaldean  Jove,  surpassinf  far 

That  Doric  temple,  which  the  Elean  chleh 

Rais'd  to  their  thunderer  flrom  the  spoils  of  war ; 

Or  ttiat  Ionic,  where  th'  Bphesian  bow'd 

To  Dian.  qaecn  of  beaTcn.    Bight  towers  arise, 

Baeh  above  each,  ImmeasaraMe  height, 

A  monwnent,  at  mee.  of  eastern  pride 

And  slavish  superstitioo,  fte. 

Judah  Ratorrd,  book  i. 


64  BELSHAZZAR. 

To  great  Belshaztar  be  the  goblet  crown'd ! 
Bebhazcar^  name  the  echoing  rooh  reboand ! 

Bel.  Enough  1  the  kindling  rapture  fires  my  brain. 
And  my  heart  dances  to  the  flattering  sounds. 
I  feel  myself  a  god  I  why  not  a  god  ? 
What  were  the  deities  our  fathers  worshlpp'd  ? 
What  was  great  Nimrod,  our  imperial  founder  ? 
What  greater  Belus,  to  whose  pow'r  divine 
We  raise  to-night  the  banquet  and  the  song ; 
But  youthful  heroes,  mortal,  like  myself. 
Who  by  their  daring  eam'd  divinity  ? 
They  were  but  men :  nay,  some  were  less  than  men. 
Though  now  reverM  as  gods.    What  was  Anubis, 
Whom  Egypt's  sapient  sons  adore  ?    A  dog ! 
And  shall  not  I,  young,  valiant,  and  a  king. 
Dare  more  ?  do  more  ?  exceed  the  boldest  flights 
Of  my  progenitors  ? — Fill  me  more  \«ine. 
To  cherish  and  exalt  the  young  idea !  Cf^  drinks.  J 
Ne'er  did  Olympian  Jupiter  himself 
Quaff  such  immortal  draughts. 

First  Court.  What  could  that  Canaan, 

That  heaven  in  hope,  that  nothing  in  possession. 
That  air-built  bliss  of  the  deluded  Jews, 
That  promis'd  land  of  milk  and  flowing  honey ; 
What  could  that  fanded  Paradise  bestow 
To  match  these  generous  juices  ? 

JBel.  •        "  Hold— enough! 

TiMm  hast  rousM  a  thought.  By  Heav*n,  I  will  eivjoy  it : 
A  glorious  thought !  which  will  exalt  to  rapture 
The  pleasures  of  the  banquet,  and  bestow 
A  yet  untastod  relish  of  delight. 

First  Court.  What  means  the  king  ? 

Bel.  The  Jews !  saidst  thou  the  Jews  ? 

First  Court.    I  spoke  of  tliat  undone,  that  outcnst 
people. 
Those  tributary  creatures  of  thy  power. 
The  captives  of  thy  will,  whose  very  breath 
Hangs  on  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  the  king. 

Bel.  When  that  abandon'd  race  was  hither  brought. 
Were  not  the  choicest  treasures  of  their  temple, 
(Devoted  to  their  God,  and  held  most  precious,) 
Among  the  spoils  which  graced  Nebassar*s  *  triumph. 
And  lodg'd  in  Babylon  ? 

«  Tbename  of  Nebuchadnezxar  not  being  reducible  to  vcisr,  1 


BELSUAZZAR.  65 

Firsi- Court,  O  king  I  they  were. 

Second  Court.    Hie  Jews,  with  supentitioiu  awe  be 
hold 
These  Bacred  symbols  of  their  ancient  foith : 
Nor  has  captivity  abated  aoght 
The  rey'rent  love  they  bear  these  holy  relics. 
Though  we  deride  their  law,  and  scorn  their  persons. 
Yet  never  have  we  yet  to  human  use 
Devoted  these  rich  vessels  set  apart 
To  sacred  purposes. 

Bel.  Ijoytobearit! 

Go — ^fetch  them  hither.    They  shall  grace  our  banquet. 
Does  no  one  stir  ?    Belshazzar  disobey'd  ? 
And  yet  you  live  ?     Whence  comes  tiiis  strange  reluc- 
tance? 
This  new-bom  rev'rence  for  the  helpless  Jews? 
This  fear  to  iiiijnre  those  who  can't  revenge  it  ? 
Send  to  the  sacred  treasury  in  haste, 
I/Ct  all  be  hither  brought ;— who  uiswers  dies. 

[  They  go  out. 
The  mantling  wine  a  higher  joy  will  yield, 
Four'd  f^rom  the  precious  flagons  which  adom'd 
Their  iiar-fom'd  temple,  now  in  ashes  laid. 
Oh !  'twill  exalt  the  pleasure  into  transport 
To  gall  those  whining,  praying  Israelites ! 
I  laugh  to  think  what  wild  dismay  will  seize  them. 
When  they  shall  leam  the  use  that  has  been  made 
Of  all  their  holy  trumpery  I 

[  The  vessels  are  brought  in. 
Second  Court.  It  comes ; 

A  goodly  shew !  how  bright  with  gold  and  gems ! 
Far  fitter  for  a  youthful  monarch's  board 
Than  the  cold  shrine  of  an  unheeding  God. 

Bel,  Fill  me  that  massy  goblet  to  the  brim. 
Now,  Abraham !  let  thy  wretched  race  expect 
The  foble  of  their  faith  to  be  fulfilled ; 
Their  second  temple,  and  their  promised  king ! 
Now  will  they  see  the  God  they  vainly  serve 
Is  impotent  to  help ;  for,  had  he  pow'r 
To  hear  and  grant  ttieir  pray*r,  he  would  prevent 
This  profemation. 

have  adopted  that  of  Nebamar.  on  the  authority  of  the  ingenicu  aud 

lesraed  anthor  of  Judah  Eestored. 

E 


66 


BELSHAZZAR. 


lAs  the  king  is  going  to  drinks  thunder  w  heard 
itarttfrom  the  throne,  tpiet  a  hand,  which  writet 
the  vfott  these  words,  mbnb,  mbnk,  tbkbl,  upbai 
He  lets  fall  the  gobtet,  and  stands  in  an  attitu* 
speechless  horror.    All  start  and  seem  terrified,} 

First  Court,  (after  a  longpatise.J    Oh,  tnuueeiK 

horror  1 
Second  Court.   What  may  this  mean?    The  kio 

greatly  moved  1 
Third  Court.    Nor  is  it  strange— who  onappall^d 
view  it  ? 
Tliose  sacred  cups !  I  doubt  weVe  gone  too  far ! 
First  Court.  Observe  the  fear-struck  king  I  his  si 
ing  eyes 
Roll  horribly.    Thrice  he  essay'd  to  speak. 
And  thrice  his  tongue  refus'd. 

Bel.  (in  a  low  trenMing  voice.  J  Ye  mystic  words 
Thon  semblance  of  a  hand  1  illusive  forms  t 
Ye  wild  fontastic  images,  what  are  ye  ? 
Dread  shadows,  qpeak !    Expl^n  your  dark  intent ! 
Ye  will  not  answer  me — Alas !  I  feel 
I  am  a  mortal  now — My  failing  limbs 
Refuse  to  bear  me  up.    I  am  no  god ! 
QoiB  do  not  tremble  thus — Support  me,  hold  me: 
These  loosen'd  joints,  these  knees  which  smite  < 

other, 
Betray  Fm  but  a  man—a  weak  one  too ! 
First  Court.    In  truth  'tis  passing  strange ;  and 

of  horror ! 
Bel.  Send  for  the  leam*d  magicians,  every  sage 
Who  deals  in  wizard  spells  and  magic  charms. 

[Some go  out. 
First  Court.  How  fares  my  l(H*d  the  king? 
Bel.  Am  I  a  king  ? 

What  power  have  I  ?    Ye  lying  slaves,  1  am  not. 

0  soul-distracting  sight  I  but  is  it  real  ? 
Perhaps  'tis  fancy  all,  or  the  wild  dream 
Of  mad  distemperature,  the  fumes  of  wine  l 
rn  look  upon't  no  more  | — So— now  I'm  well ! 

1  am  a  king  again,  and  know  not  fear. 
And  yet  my  eyes  will  seek  that  fatal  spot. 

And  fondly  dwell  upon  the  nght  that  blasts  them ! 
Again,  'tis  there !  it  is  not  fancy's  work. 


BELSHAZZAR.  C7 

I  see  it  still!  'tis  written  on  tbe  waU I 
I  see  the  writing,  bat  the  riewless  writer. 
Who !  what  is  lie  ?  Oh,  horror !  horror !  h<nTor  I 
It  cannot  be  the  God  of  these  poor  Jews ; 
For  what  is  He,  that  He  can  thus  afflict ' 

Second  Court,  Let  not  my  lord  the  king  be  thus  dis* 
majr'd. 

Third  Court.  Let  not  a  phantom,  an  illusire  shade. 
Disturb  the  peace  of  him  who  rules  the  world. 

Bel,  No  more,  ye  wretched  sycophants  I  no  mmre ! 
The  sweetest  note  which  flattery  now  can  strike. 
Harsh  and  discordant  grates  upon  my  souL 
Talk  not  of  power  to  one  so  full  of  fear. 
So  weak,  so  impotent!    Look  on  that  wall ; 
If  thou  would*st  soothe  my  soul,  explain  the  writing. 
And  thoa  shalt  be  my  <Miwle,  my  god  ! 

0  tell  me  whence  it  came,  and  what  it  means, 
And  111  belieTe  I  am  again  a  king  I 

Fciends !  Princes !  ease  my  troubled  breast,  and  say 
"What  do  the  mystic  diaracters  portend  ? 

First  Court.  'Tis  not  in  us,  O  king,  to  ease  thy  spirit ; 
We  are  not  skiU'd  Ui  those  mysterious  arts 
Which  wait  the  midnight  rtudies  of  the  sage ; 
But  of  the  deep  diviners  thou  shalt  learn. 
The  wise  astrolc^ers,  the  sage  magicians, 
Who^  of  events  unb<Nrn,  take  secret  note. 
And  hold  deep  commerce  with  the  unseen  world. 
Enter  At'.rologert,  Magidant^  S[c.  S[C. 

Bel.  AKNToach,  ye  sages,  tis  the  king  commands ! 

[  They  kneel. 

Ait.  Hail,  mighty  king  of  Babylon ! 

Bel.  Nay,  rise : 

1  do  not  need  your  homage,  but  your  help ; 
The  world  may  w<Mr8hip,  you  must  counsel  me. 
He  who  declares  the  secret  of  the  king. 

No  common  honours  shall  await  his  sldll ; 
Our  empire  shall  be  tax'd  for  his  reward, 
And  he  himself  shall  name  the  gift  he  wishes. 
A  splendid  scariet  robe  shall  grace  his  Umbs, 
His  neck  a  princely  chain  of  gold  adorn ; 
Meet  honours  for  such  wisdom  {  he  shall  rule 
The  third  in  rank  throughout  our  Babylon. 
Second  Att.    Such  recompense  becimaes  Beli»hazzar*s 
bounty. 


BELSHAZZAR. 


BfholdNitooriscom 

es.t!iTroTiil 
Enter  QUKB 

molhpr! 

thitm. 

Wf  U  m.ylt  thou  w 

ndertobeh 

d  me  here  I 

eotriot. 

Where  wild  intemp 

honoured  mirth 

lihsiiu! 

And  haye  thee  to  Ui 

e  working. 

fdeipaii': 

For.  aplU  of  bU  the 

loguiihBfm 

AtlhyoffenwM'm 

Ihjr  mother 

Agalmt  ths  loltuia 

paiTXBe  1  ba 

Nevn  lo  mix  In  tUii 

unhaliow'd 

JOWd, 

flBLSHAZZAR.  G9 

My  list^aing*  soul  shall  hang  upon  thy  words, 
And  prompt  obedience  follow  them ! 

Queen,  Then  hear  me. 

Am(Hig  the  captive  tribes  which  hither  came 
To  grace  Nebaasar^s  triumph,  there  was  brought 
A  youth  named  Daniel,  fiftvoar'd  by  high  Hearen 
With  power  to  look  into  the  secret  page 
Of  dim  fhtarity'b  mystwioiis  volume. 
The  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  is  in  him ; 
No  vision  so  obscure,  so  deeply  hid. 
No  sentence  so  perplexed,  but  he  can  solve  it : 
He  can  unfold  the  dark  decrees  of  &te, 
Can  trace  each  crooked  labyrinth  of  thought. 
Each  winding  mace  of  doubt,  and  make  it  clear 
And  palpable  to  sense.    He  twice  explain'd 
The  monarch^  mystic  dreams.    The  holy  seer 
Saw,  with  prophetic  spirit,  what  befell 
The  king  long  after.    For  his  wondrous  skill 
He  was  rewarded,  honour'd,  and  caress'd. 
And  with  the  ruleors  of  Chaidea  rank'd : 
Hiouii^  now,  alas  1  thrown  by,  his  services 
Forgotten  or  neglected. 

Bel,  Send  with  speed 

A  message,  to  command  the  holy  man 
To  meet  us  on  the  instant. 

Nit.  I  already 

Have  sent  to  ask  his  presence  at  the  palace ; 
And  lo !  in  happy  season,  see  he  comes. 

Enter  Daniel. 

Bel.  Welcome,  thrice  venerable  sage  I  approach. 
Art  thou  that  Daniel  whom  my  great  fore&ther 
Brought  hither  with  the  captive  tribes  of  Judah  ? 

D(tn,  I  am,  O  king  I 

BeL  Then  pardon,  holy  prophet ; 

Nor  let  a  just  resentment  of  thy  wrongs. 
And  long  neglected  merit,  shut  thy  heart 
Against  a  Idng^  request,  a  suppliant  king  I 

Dan.  The  Ood  I  worship  teaches  to  foi^ve. 

Bel.  Then  let  thy  words  bring  comfort  to  my  soul. 
Tve  heard  the  spirit  of  the  gods  is  in  thee ; 
That  thou  canst  look  into  the  fieU^es  of  men. 
With  prescience  more  than  human  ! 

Dan,  Hold,  O  king  ! 


mmsm 


70  BELSHAZZAR 

Wisdom  is  firom  aboTe ;  *ti8  God's  own  gift ; 
I  of  myself  am  nothing :  bnt  from  Him 
The  little  knowledge  I  possess,  I  hold ; 
To  Him  be  all  the  glory  1 

Bel.  Then,  O  DaiiieLI 

If  thou  indeed  dost  boast  that  womirmm  gilt. 
That  faculty  divine ;  look  there,  and  tdl  me  I 

0  say,  what  mean  those  mystic  duuraeters  ? 
Remove  this  load  of  terror  from  my  sool. 

And  honours,  such  as  kings  can  give,  await  thee. 
Thou  Shalt  be  great  beyond  tiiy  sonl^  ambttioB, 
And  rich  above  thy  wildest  dream  ot  wealth : 
Clad  in  the  scarlet  robe  oar  noUes  wear. 
And  graced  with  princely  ensigns,  tlMm  shaft  staad 
Near  our  own  throne,  and  third  within  onr  empire. 

Dan.  O  mighty  king,  thy  gifts  with  thee  Noaain, 
And  let  thy  high  rewards  on  others  fall. 
The  princely  enugn,  nor  the  scarlet  robe, 
Nor  yet  to  be  the  third  within  thy  realm. 
Can  touch  the  soul  of  DanieL    Honour,  fisme. 
All  that  the  world  calls  great,  thy  crowa  itself. 
Could  never  satisfy  the  vast  amUtion 
Of  an  immortal  spirit ;  I  aspire 
Beyond  thy  power  of  giving ;  my  high  hopes 
Reach  also  to  a  crown— but  'tis  a  crown 
Unfading  and  etemaL 

First  Court.  Wondrous  man! 

Our  priests  teach  no  such  notions. 

Dan.  Yet,  O  king ! 

Though  all  unmoved  by  grandeur  or  by  gift, 

1  will  unfold  the  high  decrees  of  Heaven, 
And  straight  declare  the  mystery. 

Bel.  Speak,  O  prophet ! 

Dan.  Prepare  to  hear  what  kings  have  sddom  heard ; 
Prepare  to  hear  what  courtiers  seldom  tell ; 
Prepare  to  hear— the  truth.    The  mighty  Ood, 
Who  rules  the  sceptres  and  the  hearts  of  kfaigs, 
Gave  thy  renown'd  forefisther*  here  to  reign. 
With  such  extent  of  empire,  weight  of  power. 
And  greatness  of  dominion,  the  wide  earth 
Trembled  beneath  the  terror  of  his  name, 
And  kingdoms  stood  or  fell  as  he  decreed. 

*  Nebuehadnessar 


BELSHAZZAR.  71 

Oh !  dangerous  iriimaele  of  power  tapreme ; 
Who  can  stand  safe  npon  its  treodiYoos  top. 
Behold  the  gaxing  prostrate  world  below, 
"Whom  depth  and  distance  into  [rigmies  shrink. 
And  not  grow  giddy  ?    Babylon's  great  king 
Forgot  he  was  a  man,  a  hdpless  man, 
Subject  to  pain,  and  sin,  and  death,  like  others  I 
Bat  who  sbafl  fight  against  Omnipotence  ? 
Or  who  hath  harden'd  his  (ri>darate  heart 
Against  the  majesty  of  Heav'n,  and  prospered  ? 
The  Ood  he  had  insvlted  was  aveng'd ; 
IVom  empfare,  from  the  joys  eS  social  life, 
He  drove  him  forth ;  extinguish'd  reason^  lamp  \ 
QnendiM  that  bright  spark  of  Deity  within ; 
Compelled  him  witli  the  forest  brutes  to  roam 
For  scanty  pasture ;  and  the  mountain  dews 
Fell,  cold  and  wet,  on  his  defenceless  head. 
Till  he  confess'd— let  men,  let  raonarehs  hear— 
Till  he  confessed,  **  Pride  was  not  made  for  man !" 

NU.  O,  awful  instance  (rf  divine  displeasure  I 

Bel.  Proceed  I  my  seal  Is  wn^t  in  fix*d  attention ! 

Dan.  O  king  I  thy  grandsire  not  in  vain  hacf  sinn'd, 
If,  from  his  error,  thou  hadst  learnt  the  truth. 
Tlie  story  of  his  Ml  thou  oft  hast  heard, 
But  has  it  taui^t  thee  wisdom  ?    Thou,  Hke  him. 
Hast  been  ^te  with  power,  and  mad  witli  pride. 
Like  him,  thou  hast  defied  the  livfaig  Ctod. 
Nay,  to  bold  theughte  hast  added  deeds  more  bold. 
Thoa  hast  ootwtought  the  pattern  he  bequeathe  thee. 
And  quite  outgcme  ejomple ;  hafll  profim^d 
With  impious  hand,  the  vessele  of  the  temple : 
Those  vessels,  sanetiied  to  bdtesC  use, 
Thoa  hast  pollated  witli  oirfMUlow'd  lip^ 
And  made  the  instruments  ot  feul  debanrh. 
Thoa  hast  adored  the  gods  of  wood  and  stone, 
"^e,  senseless  deities,  tiie  work  of  hands, 
But  Hb,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords, 
In  whom  exists  thy  life,  thy  soul,  thy  breath. 
On  whom  thy  being  hangs,  thou  hast  denied. 

First  Court,  (atide  to  the  otJiers.)  With  what  an  holy 

boldness  he  reproves  him  I 
Second  Court.   Surli  is  the  fearless  confidence  of 
virtue  I 
And  such  the  righteous  courage  those  maintain 


72  BELSHAZZAR. 

Who  plead  the  cause  of  tmtti !    The  smallest  w<nrd 
He  utters  had  been  death  to  half  the  court. 

Bel.  Now  let  the  mystic  writing  be  explain'd. 
Thrice  venerable  sage  I 

Dan.  O,  mighty  king  t 

Hear,  then,  its  awful  import :  Heaven  hot  numbered 
Thy  days  ofroyaUyt  and  soon  will  end  them. 
Our  God  hat  voeigh'd  thee  tn  the  wen  balance 
Of  hit  own  holy  lawy  uodjindt  thee  wantir^  : 
And  last,  thy  kingdom  thall  be  wrettedfrom  thee  : 
And  know,  the  Mede  and  Pertian  thcMpotteu  it. 

BeL  (ttartt  up.)  Prophet,  when  shall  this  be  ? 

Dan.  In  God*s  own  time : 

Here  my  commisdon  ends ;  I  may  not  utter 
More  than  thou'st  heard :  but,  oh  I  remember,  king ! 
Thy  days  are  numbered :  hear,  repent,  and  live ! 

Bel.  Say,  prophet,  what  can  penitence  avail  ? 
If  Heaven's  decrees  immutably  are  fix'd. 
Can  prayers  avert  our  late  ? 

Dan.  They  change  our  hearts. 

And  thus  dispose  Omnipotence  to  mercy. 
*Ti8  man  that  alters ;  God  is  still  the  same. 
Conditional  are  all  Heaven's  covenants ; 
And  when  th'  uplifted  thunder  ia  withheld, 
'Tis  prayer  that  deprecates  th*  impending  bolt. 
Good  Hezekiah^s*  days  were  number'd  too ; 
But  penitence  and  faith  were  mighty  pleas : 
At  mercy's  throne  they  never  plead  in  vain. 

{He  it  going. 

Bel.  Stay,  prophet,  and  receive  thy  promised  gift ; 
The  scarlet  robe  and  princely  chain  are  thine  : 
And  let  my  heralds  publish  through  the  land 
That  Daniel  stands,  La  dignity  and  pow*r. 
The  third  in  Babylon.    These  just  rewards 
Thou  well  may'st  claim,  though  sad  thy  prophecy ! 

Queen.  Be  not  deceived,  my  son  I  nor  let  tiiy  soul 
Snatch  an  uncertain  moment's  treach'rous  rest, 
On  the  dread  brink  of  that  tremendous  gulf 
Which  yawns  beneath  thee. 

Dan.  O  unhappy  king  I 

Know  what  mutt  happen  once,  mmf  happen  soon. 
Uemember  that  'tis  terrible  to  meet 

*  S  Ouron.  nxlll.    IiaUh  jccxtUI. 


BELSHAZZAR.  73 

Qrent  evils  unpreimrM  t  and,  oh,  Belshanar  t 
lu  the  wild  moment  of  dismay  «id  death. 
Remember  thou  wast  warned  1  and,  oh  I  remeaibcr. 
Warnings  despb*d  are  ooademnatioas  then  1 

{Eaeuni  Dakivi.  emd  QniiN. 

Bel,  'lis  wril— my  boo!  shakes  off  its  load  of  earet 
'Tis  only  the  obeeore  is  terrible. 
Imagination  frames  erents  nnknown. 
In  wild  fttntastie  sh^es  of  hideoos  ruin ; 
And  what  it  fears,  creates  1— I  know  the  worst ; 
And  awfol  is  that  worst  as  fear  could  feign ; 
But  distant  are  the  Dls  I  have  to  dread  1 
What  is  remote  may  be  uncertain  too ! 
Ha  I  princes  1  hope  breaks  in  I — ^This  may  not  be. 

First  Court.  Pertunn  this  Daidel  is  in  leagise  with 
Ferria; 
And  Mbed  by  Cyrus  to  report  these  homnrs. 
To  weaken  and  impede  tlie  mighty  {Aans 
Of  thy  imperial  mind ! 

JM.  *Tis  very  like. 

Second  Court.  Return  we  to  the  banquet 

BeL  Dare  we  venture? 

Third  Court.  Let  not  tiiis  dreaming  seer  disturb  the 
kifig. 
Against  the  power  of  Cyrna  and  the  Mede 
Is  Babylon  secure.    Her  tMrazen  gates 
Mock  all  attempts  to  force  them.    Frond  Euphrates^ 
A  watery  bulwark,  guards  our  ample  city 
From  all  assailants.    And  within  the  walls 
Of  this  stupendous  cai^tal  are  lodg'd 
8nch  vast  providons,  such  exhaustless  stores. 
As  a  twice  ten  years*  Aege  could  never  waste ! 

Bel.  (embrcuxi  him.)  My  better  genius !  Safe  fai  such 
resources, 
I  mock  the  prophet.    Turn  we  to  the  banquet ! 

iAi  they  aregmngtoretume  their  ptacee  at  the  banquet, 
a  dreadftd  uproar  is  heard,  tumuUwnu  eriest  mnd  foar" 
like  touinds.  AU  stand  terrified.  Enter  soldiers^  with 
their  swords  drawn,  and  wounded.} 

SoL  Oh,  helpless  Babylon!  Oh,  wretclied  king ! 
Chaldea  is  no  more,  the  Mede  has  conquered ! 
The  victor  Cyrus,  like  a  mighty  torrent, 
Comes  rushing  on,  and  marks  his  way  with  ruin! 

K 


74  BELSHAZZAR. 

Destruction  is  at  hand ;  escape  or  perish. 

Bel,  Impossible  I    Villiun  and  slave,  thou  Ueet ! 
Eaphratas  and  the  braxen  gates  secure  us. 
While  those  remain,  Belshazzar  laughs  at  danger. 

Sol.  Euphrates  is  diyerted  from  its  course ; 
The  toazen  gates  are  burst,  the  city%  talcen. 
Thyself  a  pris'ber,  and  thy  empire  lost. 

Bel,  Oh,  prophet  I    I  remember  thee  indeed ! 
L  He  runt  out.     They  fallow  in  the  utmott  conftmen. 

Enter  severeU  JeteSf  MedeSt  and  BahyUmians. 

Firtt  Jew.  He  comes,  he  comes !  the  long  predicted 
prince, 
Cyrus !  the  destined  instrument  of  Heav*n 
To  free  our  captive  nation,  and  restore 
Jehovah's  temple.    Carnage  marks  his  way. 
And  conquest  sits  upon  his  plume-crown'd  helm ! 

Second  Jew.  What  noise  is  that  ? 

Firrt  Jew.  Hark !  Mis  Belshazzar's  vdee  t 

Bel.  {without. )  O  soldier,  spare  my  life,  and  aid  my 
flight ! 
Such  treasures  shall  reward  the  gentle  deed 
As  Persia  never  saw.    TU  be  thy  slave ; 
ril  yield  my  crown  to  Cyrus ;  I'll  adore 
His  gods  and  thine — 1*11  kneel  and  kiss  thy  feet. 
And  worship  thee.    It  is  not  much  I  ask-~ 
1*11  live  in  bondage,  beggary,  and  pain. 
So  thou  but  let  me  live. 

Sol.  Die,  tyrant,  die  I 

Bel.  O,  Daniel!  Daniel!  Daniel! 

ErUer  Soldier. 

Sol.  Belshazzar's  deadl 

Tlie  wretched  king  breath*d  out  liis  furious  soul 
In  that  tremendous  groan. 

First  Jew.  Belshazzar*s  dead  I 

Then,  Judah,  art  thou  free  I    The  tyrant's  fall'n  I 
Jeruralem,  Jerusalem  is  free  I 


BBLSHAZZAB.  75 

PART  III. 

Enter  Daniel  and  Jxws. 

BsL  bowath  down,*  aad  haughty  Nebo  stoops ! 
The  idols  fall;  the  god  and  worshipper    . 
Together  fidl !  together  they  bow  down  I 
Badi  other,  or  themaelyee  they  cannot  save. 

0  Babylon,  where  is  thy  refuge  now  ? 

Thy  wisdom  and  thy  knowledge,  meant  to  saye, 
Penrertthee;  and  thy  blessing  is  thy  bane  I 
"Where  are  thy  brutish  deities,  Chaldea ; 
"Where  are  ttiy  gods  of  gold  ? — Oh,  Lord  of  life  1 
Thou  very  God !  so  foil  thy  foes  before  thee ! 

FirHJew.  So  fdl  beneath  the  terrors  of  Thy  name 
The  idol  Chemosh,  Moab^  empty  trust ; 
So  Ammonitiah  Moloch  sunk  before  Thee ; 
So  fell  Philistine  Dagon ;  so  shall  fall. 
To  time's  remotest  period,  all  thy  foes, 
Triumphant  Lord  of  hosts  I 

Dan,  How  chang'd  our  fate ! 

Not  for  myself,  O  Judah  1  but  for  thee, 

1  shed  these  tears  of  joy.    For  I  no  more 
Must  Tiew  the  cedars  which  adorn  the  brow 
Of  Syrian  Lebanon ;  no  more  shall  see 

Thy  pleasant  stream,  O  Jordan  I  nor  the  flocks 
Which  whiten  all  the  mountains  of  Judea ; 
No  more  these  eyes  delighted  shall  review 
Or  Carmel*S  heights,  or  Sharon's  flow*ry  Tales. 
I  must  remain  in  Babylon  I    So  Heay*n, 
To  whose  awards  I  bow  me,  has  decreed 
I  ne^er  shall  see  thee,  Salem  I    I  am  old ; 
And  few  and  toilsome  are  my  days  to  come. 
But  we  shall  meet  in  those  celestial  climes, 
Compar*d  with  whidi  created  glories  sink ; 
Where  sinners  shall  have  power  to  harm  no  more, 
And  martyrM  yirtue  rests  her  weary  head. 
Though  ere  my  day  of  promised  grace  shall  come, 
I  shall  be  tried  by  perils  strange  and  new ; 
Nor  shall  I  taste  of  death,  so  have  I  leam'd. 
Till  I  have  seen  the  captive  tribes  restored. 

*lMUhzlTi. 


76  BELSHAZZAR. 

First  Jew,  And  shall  we  view,  once  more,  thy  hallowM 
towen. 
Imperial  Salem? 

Dan,  Yes,  my  youthful  friends  1 

You  shall  behold  the  seccmd  temple  rise,  * 
With  grateful  ecstasy :  but  we,  your  sires. 
Now  bent  with  hoary  age ;  we,  whose  duinn'd  eyes. 
Beheld  the  matchless  glories  of  the  first. 
Should  weep,  remembMng  what  we  once  had  seen. 
That  model  of  perfection  1 

Second  Jew,  Nerer  more 

Shall  such  a  wondrous  structure  grace  the  earth ! 

Dan,  Well  hare  you  borne  affliction,  men  of  J  udahl 
Well  have  su8tain*d  your  portion  of  distress : 
And,  unrepining,  drank  the  bitter  dregs 
Of  adverse  fortune  I    Happier  days  await  you. 
O  guard  against  the  perils  of  success  I 
Prosperity  dissolves  the  yielding  soul. 
And  the  bright  sun  of  shining  fortune  melts 
The  firmest  virtue  down.    Beware,  my  friends. 
Be  greatly  cautious  of  prosperity  I 
Defend  your  sliding  hearts ;  and,  trembling,  think 
How  those,  who  buffeted  affliction's  waves 
With  vigYous  virtue,  sunk  in  pleasure's  calm. 
He,  t  who  of  special  grace  had  been  allowed 
To  roar  the  hallow'd  £uie  to  Israel's  God, 
By  wealth  corrupted,  and  by  ease  debauch'd. 
Forsook  the  God  to  whom  he  rais*d  the  fane ; 
And,  sunk  in  sensual  sloth,  consumed  his  days 
In  vUe  idolatrous  rites  ! — Nor  think,  my  sons. 
That  virtue  in  sequestered  solitude 
Is  always  found.    Within  the  inmost  soul 
The  hidden  tempter  lurks ;  nor  less  betrays 
In  the  still  seeming  safety  of  retreat 
Than  where  the  world  her  snares  entangling  spreads, 
More  visible  to  sense.    Guard  every  thought : 
Who  thinks  himself  secure  is  half  undone ; 
For  sin,  unwatch*d,  may  reach  the  sanctuary : 
*Tis  not  the  place  preserves  us.    Righteous  Lot 
StemM  the  strong  current  of  corruption's  tide, 
E'en  in  polluted  Sodom ;  safe  he  liv'd. 
While  circumspective  virtue's  watchful  eye 

*EsTs.  f  Solomon. 


BELSHAZZAR.  77 

Was  anxionaly  awake  :  bat  in  the  shade. 
Far  from  the  obyioos  perils  which  alarm, 
With  palpable  tempti^on,  secret  sin 
Bnsnar'd  Us  sonl ;  he  trosted  in  himself; 
Secority  betray'd  him,  and  he  fell. 
Second  Jew.    Thy  pradent  counsels  in  oar  heart  shall 

UTe, 
As  if  a  pen  of  adamant  had  gray  *d  them. 
Fit'ft  Jew.   The  dawn  approaches ;  let  as  part»  my 

friend. 
Secure  of  peace,  rince  tyranny  is  fiill*n  ! 

Dan,  So  perish  all  thhie  oiemies,  O  Lord  I 
So,  miffaty  Qod,  riiall  perish  all  who  seek 
Corrnpted  pleasores  in  tiie  torind  wares 
Of  lifers  polluted  stream,  and  madly  quit 
TheHTing  Fountain  of  pwennial  grace  I 


DANIEL: 


91  Sbf^txtti  IBxama, 


Tk«  rlfhMMt  U  dativMtd  Ml  of  uombla,  ud  th*  wickad  commh  In  Ua  ttwJ. 

Prtmrka  tf  atttmm. 

Ob  pnt  dM  plot  gnada  loU  iwpnBdn  U  Jwdca. 

IncapablM  da  uompar, 

Ila  ODt  pMiM  a  a'fchappar 

Daa  pitgea  da  i'artilca. 
Un  c«inr  nobis  na  pent  anapfonnar  an  antral 

La  baaaaaaa  «t  la  malica 

Qn'U  M  aant  point  an  Ini. — E$th*r,  Trmgtdk  dt  Raebm. 


PERSONS  OF  THE  DRAMA. 


Darlut,  kinf  of  Media  and  Ba- 
bylon. 
Pbaniaeet,  >  Coortlen,  enemiet 
Soranus,     5    to  Daniel. 


Araspea,  a  younc  Median  lord. 

friend  and  convert  of  Daniel. 
DanicL 


Scene— The  City  <^  Babylon, 
The  lobject  la  taken  flnom  tlie  Sixth  CItapter  of  the  Prophtt  DanieL 


PART  I. 


Fharnacbs,  Soranus. 

Phar.  Ybs  .—I  have  noted  with  a  jealous  eye, 
The  power  of  this  new  favourite  1    Daniel  reigm, 
And  not  Darius  I    Daniel  guides  the  springs 
Which  move  this  mighty  empire  I    High  he  sits, 
Supreme  in  favour  both  with  prince  and  people  I 
Where  is  the  spirit  of  our  Median  lords. 
Tamely  to  crouch  and  bend  the  supple  knee 
To  this  new  god  ?    By  Mithras,  *tis  too  much  1 
^lall  great  Arbaccs*  race  to  Daniel  bow. 


DANIEL.  79 

A  foreigner,  a  cm»tiye,  and  a  Jew  ? 
Something  mast  be  devised,  and  that  right  soon, 
To  shake  his  credit. 

Sor,  Rather  hope  to  shalce 

The  mountain  pinei  whose  twisting  fibres  clasp 
The  earth,  deep  rooted !    RatUier  hope  to  sliake 
The  SeytUan  Taams  from  his  central  base ! 
No— Danid  aits  too  abeolute  in  power. 
Too  firm  in  fitvonr,  for  tlie  keenest  shaft 
Of  nioely-aiming  jealousy  to  reach  him. 

Phar,  Bather  he  sits  too  high  to  sit  secorely ; 
Tes  1  he  has  reach*d  that  pmnade  of  power 
"Which  closely  tooehes  on  depression^  Terge. 
&B8t  thou  then  lived  in  courts  ?  hast  thou  grown  grey 
Beneatit  the  mask  a  subtle  statesman  wears 
To  hide  his  secret  soul,  and  dost  not  know 
That  of  all  fidde  ftMrtune'k  tran^ent  gifts, 
Favour  is  most  deceitful  ?    *Tis  a  beam, 
Which  darts  uncertain  brightness  for  a  moment  1 
The  fidnt,  precarious,  sickly  shine  of  power ; 
Given  without  merit,  by  caprice  xAathdrawn. 
No  trifle  is  so  small  as  what  obtains, 
Save  that  which  loses  fiivoar ;  *tis  a  breath, 
IVhidi  hangs  upon  a  smile  I    A  look,  a  word, 
A  frown,  the  air-built  tower  of  fortune  shakes. 
And  down  the  unsubstantial  fiEibric  fedls  I 
Darius,  Just  and  clement  as  he  is. 
If  I  mistake  not,  may  be  wrought  upon 
By  inndent  wiles,  by  fiatt*ry*s  pleasant  cup. 
Administered  with  caution. 

Sor.  But  the  means  ? 

For  Daniel's  lifS  (a  foe  must  grant  him  that) 
Is  so  replete  with  goodness,  so  adom*d 
With  every  virtue,  so  exactly  sqnar*d 
By  wisdom^  nicest  rules,  \y9T31  be  most  hard 
To  diarge  him  with  the  shadow  of  offence. 
Pure  is  his  &me  as  Scythia's  mountain  snows. 
When  not  a  breath  pollutes  them  I    O  Phamaees, 
I've  scann*d  the  actions  of  his  daily  life 
M^th  aU  th*  industrious  maUce  of  a  foe ; 
And  nothing  meets  mine  eye  but  deeds  of  honour ! 
In  oflBce  pure ;  for  equitable  acts 
Renown'd:  in  justice  and  impartial  truth, 
The  Grecian  Themis  is  not  more  severe. 


80  DANIEL. 

Phar.  By  yon  bright  son,  tboa  blaton'st  forth  lili 
praise. 

As  if  with  rapture  thou  didst  read  the  pa|^ 

Wliere  these  fair  deeds  are  written ! 
Sor,  Thou  Biiatak*bL 

I  only  meant  to  shew  what  caose  we  have 

To  hate  and  fear  lum.    I  but  meairt  to  paint 

His  poplar  virtoes  and  eoUpsinf  mertt. 

Then  for  devotion,  and  rdigioos  leal. 

Who  so  renown'd  as  Dai^id  ?    Of  Us  law 

Observant  in  th*  extreme.    Thrice  every  day, 

"With  prostrate  reverence,  he  adores  his  God : 

With  superstitious  awe  lis  face  he  tarns 

Towards  his  belovM  Jerusalem,  as  if 

Some  local,  partial  Qod  mig^t  tho'e  be  found 

To  hear  his  supplicatiiMi.    No  affair 

Of  state,  no  business  so  importunate, 

No  pleasure  so  alluring,  no  employ 

Of  such  high  import,  to  seduce  his  zeal 

From  this  observance  due  I 

Phar.  There,  there  he  falls  I 

Enough,  my  friend !    His  piety  destroys  him. 
There,  at  the  very  footstool  of  his  God, 
Where  he  implores  protection,  there  111  crush  him. 
Sot.  What  means  Phamaces  ? 
Phar.  Ask  not  what  I  mean. 

The  new  idea  floating  in  my  brain 
Has  yet  receiv'd  no  form.    'Tis  yet  too  soon 
To  give  it  body,  circumstance,  or  breath. 
The  seeds  of  mighty  deeds  are  laboring  here. 
And  struggling  for  a  birth !    *Tis  near  the  hour 
The  king  is  wont  to  summon  us  to  council : 
Ere  that,  this  big  conception  of  my  mind 
I'll  shape  to  form  and  being.    Thou,  meanwhile, 
Convene  our  chosen  friends ;  for  I  shall  need 
The  aid  of  all  your  counsels,  and  the  weight 
Of  grave  authority. 
Sor.  Who  shall  be  tmsted  ? 

Phar.  With  our  immediate  motive  none,  except 
A  chosen  band  of  friends,  who  most  reftoe 
At  Daniel^s  exaltation.    But  the  scheme 
I  meditate  must  be  disclosed  to  all 
Who  bear  high  offioe ;  all  our  Median  mlers. 
Princes  and  captains,  preudents  and  lords ; 


DANIBL.  81 

All  must  anembl«.    *l%»eoiiuB<m  canae: 

All  but  the  yoong'  Anapes ;  he  indiiiet 

To  Daniel  utd  his  Oo4.    He  sits  atteot, 

With  rayish'd  ears,  to  listen  to  his  lore ; 

Witii  revYenoe  names  Jemsalefli,  and  reads 

Theyolameoftlielaw.    Ko  mere  he  bows 

To  hail  the  golden  mler  ef  the  day, 

But  looks  for  some  great  proi^iet,  greater  Ar, 

So  they  pretend,  than  ICttvaal— From  Um,  thenlorsb 

Conceal  whate'er  of  iiijary  is  derised 

'Gainst  Daniel.    Be  it  too  thy  care  to-day. 

To  keep  him  firom  the  neimnii. 

8or,  *Tis  weH  thoaght. 

'TIs  now  about  the  hour  of  Daniel's  prayer : 
Arables  too  is  with  him  I  and  to-day 
They  will  not  dt  tat  ocmndL    Haste  we  tiwn. 
Dedgns  of  Ugh  inportanee,  once  ooaodT*d, 
Should  be  aocomplish'd.    Genius  which  discerns. 
And  courage  which  adiieTes,  despise  tiie  aid 
Of  lingYing  drcumspection.    The  keen  spirit 
Seizes  the  prompt  occasion,  makes  tiie  thon^ 
Start  into  instant  action,  and  at  once 
Flans  and  performs,  ns^yes  and  executes  I 


PART  II. 

8cBN»— Danftprr  H9uae» 

Daniel,  Araspks. 

Ar.  Proceed,  proceed,  thrice  venerable  sage  1 
Enlighten  my  dnlc  mind  with  fliis  new  imy. 
This  dawning  of  ealvationl  Tdlmemere 
Ofthis  expected  King  f  this  ComfiMter  I 
This  Promise  of  the  nations  1  tins  great  Hope 
Of  anxious  Israd !  ttiis  unborn  Prophet! 
This  Wonderfol,  this  mighty  CouBoriOorl 
This  Everluting  Lord!    This  Prince  of  peace  t 
This  Balm  of  Ollead,  wMdi  shall  heal  the  wounds 
Of  nniyersal  nature  1  this  Mesdaht 
Bedeemer,  Saylour,  Sufferer,  Victim,  God! 

b3 


82  DANIEL. 

Dan,  Enough  to  animate  oar  fUfh  w«  know. 
But  not  enough  to  soothe  the  curions  inride 
Of  rain  philosophy !  enongh  to  cheer 
Our  path  we  see,  the  rest  is  hid  in  clouds ; 
And  heaven's  own  shadows  rest  upon  the  view  I 

^r.  Go  on,  blest  sage  i  I  could  for  ever  hear, 
Untired,  thy  admonition  1    Tell  me  how 
I  shall  obtain  the  fitvonr  of  that  God 
I  but  begin  to  know,  but  fain  would  senre. 

Dan,  By  deq^  hai^lity,  by  faith  unfeigned. 
By  holy  deeds,  best  proof  of  living  faith  I 
O  fidth,*  thoa  wonder-working  principles 
Eternal  substance  of  our  present  hope. 
Thou  evidence  of  things  iavisible  I 
What  cannot  man  sustain,  snstain'd  by  thee ! 
The  time  would  fail,  and  the  bright  star  of  day 
Would  quench  his  beams  in  ocean,  and  resign 
His  empire  to  the  silver  queen  of  night ; 
And  she  again  descend  the  steep  of  heaven. 
If  I  should  tell  what  wonders  foith  achiev'd 
By  Gideon,  Barak,  and  tlie  holy  seer, 
Ellcanah^s  son ;  the  i^ous  Gileadite, 
Ill-fated  Jephthah !    He  of  Zorah  too,t 
In  strength  unequall'd ;  and  the  shepherd-king. 
Who  vanquished  Gath's  fell  giant  I    Need  I  tell 
Of  holy  prophets,  who  by  conqu'ring  faith. 
Wrought  deeds  incredible  to  mortal  sense ; 
VanquishM  contending  kingdoms,  quell*d  the  rage 
Of  furious  pestilence,  extinguish^  fire  I 
Victorious  fiedth  I  others  by  thee  endur'd 
Exile,  disgrace,  captivity,  and  death ! 
Some,  nncomplainhig,  bore  (nor  be  it  deem*d 
The  meanest  exercise  of  weU-tried  fidth) 
The  cruel  mocking,  and  the  bitter  taunt» 
Foul  obloquy,  and  undeserved  reproach ; 
Despising  shame,  that  death  to  human  pride ! 

^r.  How  shall  this  foith  be  sought? 

Dan.  By  earnest  prayer 

Solicit  first  the  wisdom  from  above ; 
Wisdom,  whose  firuits  are  purity  and  peace ! 
Wisdom  1  that  bright  intelligence,  which  sat 
Supreme,  when  with  his  golden  compasses  t 
*  H«brtwsxl.  f  Samion. 

t  Its  Fandiie  Lost,  book  Tli.  lint  SU.    Frovetbi  vUi.  IT. 


DANIEL.  83 

Th*  Eternal  planned  fhe  fiabric  of  the  world. 

Produced  Ids  ftir  idea  into  light, 

And  said,  that  all  was  good  I  Wisdom,  blest  beam  1 

The  brightness  of  the  eveilasting  light ! 

The  spotless  mirror  of  the  power  of  God ! 

The  reflex  image  of  th*  all-perfect  mind ! 

A  stream  translucent,  flowing  firom  the  source 

Of  i^y  infinite  1  a  cloudless  light  1 

Defilement  cannot  touch,  nor  sin  pollute 

Her  unstained  puritf  1    Not  Ophir's  gold 

Nor  Btfaiopia^  gems  can  match  her  inrice 

The  ruby  of  the  mine  is  pale  before  her  I 

And,  like  the  oH  Elisha'fe  bounty  bless'd. 

She  is  a  treasure  which  doth  grow  by  use. 

And  mult^ly  by  spending  I    She  contains 

Within  herself  the  sum  of  excellence. 

If  riches  are  desired,  wisdom  is  wealth ! 

If  prudence,  where  shall  keen  invention  find 

Artificer  more  cunning  ?    If  renown. 

In  her  right  hand  it  comes !    If  piety, 

Are  not  her  labours  virtues  ?    If  the  lore 

Which  sage  experience  teaches,  lo !  she  scans 

Antiquity's  dark  truths ;  the  past  she  knows. 

Anticipates  the  future ;  not  by  arts 

Forbidden,  of  Chaldean  sorcerer, 

But  from  the  piercing  ken  of  deep  forelmowledi^e. 

F^m  her  sure  sdence  of  the  human  heart 

She  weighs  effects  with  causes,  ends  with  means ; 

Besolviug  all  into  the  sovereign  will. 

Tor  earthly  blesdngs,  moderate  be  thy  prayer, 

And  qualified;  for  light,  for  strength,  for  grace. 

Unbounded  thy  petition. 

^r.  Now,  O  prophet! 

Exididn  the  secret  doubts  which  rack  my  mind. 
And  my  weak  sense  confound.    Give  me  some  line 
To  sound  tlie  depths  of  providence  I  Osay, 
Why  the  ungodly  prosper  ?  why  th^  root 
Shoots  deep,  and  their  thick  branches  fiourish  fair 
like  the  green  bay-tree  ?  why  the  righteous  man. 
Like  tender  plants  to  shivMng  winds  exposed. 
Is  stripp*d  and  torn,  in  naked  virtue  bare. 
And  nipp*d  by  cmri  sorrow*s  biting  blast  ? 
Explain,  O  Daniel,  these  mysterious  ways 
To  my  Mot  i^prehension !    For  as  yet 


84  DANIEL. 

IVe  much  to  leam.    Fair  tratti's  immortal  suli 
Is  sometimes  hid  in  doads ;  not  that  her  light 
Is  in  itself  defective  j  but  otecorM 
By  my  weak  pr^adke,  imperfect  feith. 
And  ail  the  thousand  causes  which  obstmct 
The  growth  of  goodness. 

Btm.  Follow  me,  Araapes. 

Within,  thou  ehalt  peruse  the  sacred  page. 
The  book  of  life  etomal !  that  wfll  shew  thee 
The  end  of  the  ungodly ;  tho^  wilt  own 
How  short  th^  longest  period;  wiltpereeiTe 
How  black  a  nighit  succeeds  their  brightest  day  t 
Thy  pulled  eye  wiU  see  Qod  is  not  slack. 
As  men  count  slackness,  to  fulfil  liis  word. 
Weigh  well  this  book ;  and  may  the  Spirit  of  grace. 
Who  stamp'd  the  seal  of  truth  on  tiie  bless'd  page. 
Descend  into  thy  soul,  remove  tiiy  doubts. 
Clear  the  perplex'd,  and  solve  the  intricate. 
Till  faith  be  lost  in  sight,  and  hope  in  joy ! 


PART  III. 


Darius  on  hi$  ^ron^— Phabnacbb,  Soramus,  Pruiob9» 
P&BSIDBNT8,  and  Courtiers. 

Phar.  Hail !  king  Darius,  live  tot  ever  1 
Bar.  Welcome ! 

Welcome,  my  princes,  presidents,  and  Mends ! 

Now,  tell  me,  has  your  wisdom  aught  devis'd 

To  aid  the  commonwealth  ?  In  our  new  empire. 

Subdued  Chaldea,  is  tiiere  aught  remains 

Your  prudence  can  suggest  to  serve  tiie  state. 

To  benefit  the  subject,  to  redress 

And  raise  the  ii^ur'd,  to  assist  th*  ofqjtress'd. 

And  humble  the  oppressor  ?  If  you  Imow, 

Speak  freely,  prUioes  I  Why  am  I  a  king, 

Bxcept  to  poise  tite  awful  scale  of  justice 

VnXh  even  hand ;  to  minister  to  want ; 

To  bless  the  nations  with  a  libVal  rule. 

Vicegerent  of  th*  eternal  Oromasdes  ? 


DANIEL.  8$ 

Fhar.  So  abtc^te  thy  wisdom,  mighty  king. 
All  counsri  wore  soperflaoiw. 

Dar.  Hold,  Fhanuuses ! 

Mo  adulation;  tto  the  death  of  virtue ; 
Who  flatten,  is  ef  all  maakiBd  the  loweat, 
Save  he  who  court*  the  flatfry.    Kings  are  men. 
As  feeble  and  as  frail  as  those  they  role, 
And  hern,  Uce  then,  to  die.    The  Lydian  monarch. 
Unhappy  Ocesas,  latdy  sat  alolt, 
Almost  above  mortality ;  now  see  him ! 
Sunk  to  the  yite  eenfition  of  a  sbive. 
He  swells  the  train  of  Cyras  I    I,  like  him. 
To  mis'ry  am  obnoxioos.    See  this  throne ; 
This  royal  throne  the  great  Nebassar  fill'd ; 
Yet  hence  his  pride  expell'd  him !  Yonder  wall. 
The  dread  terrific  writing  to  the  eyes 
Of  inroad  Behhauar  shewed ;  sad  monuments 
Of  heaven's  tremendous  vengeance  1  and  shall  I, 
Unwam'd  by  such  examj^ies,  cheridi  pride  ? 
Yet  to  their  dire  calamities  I  owe 
The  brightest  gem  that  glistens  in  my  crown. 
Sage  Daniel.    If  my  speech  have  aogbt  of  worth. 
Or  if  my  life  with  aught  of  good  be  graced. 
To  him  alone  I  owe  it, 

Sor,  (aside  to  Phamaoet.)  Mow,  Fhamaee^ 

Will  he  run  o'er,  and  dweU  upon  his  praise. 
As  if  we  ne'er  had  heard  it ;  nay,  will  swell 
The  nauseous  catalogue  with  many  a  virtue 
His  own  fond  fisncy  coins. 

Phar.  O  great  Darius ! 

Let  thine  unworthy  servant's  words  find  grace. 
And  meet  acceptance  in  his  royal  ear 
Who  subjugates  the  East!    Let  not  the  king 
iVith  anger  hear  my  prayer. 

lkar»  Fhamaces,  speak  j 

I  know  thou  lov'st  me ;  I  but  meant  to  ddde 
Thy  flatfry,  not  r^irove  thee  f<H'  thy  seal. 
Speak  boldly,  friends,  as  man  should  speak  to  nam. 
Perish  the  bnrb'rous  maxims  of  the  East, 
Which  basely  would  enslave  the  freebom  mind. 
And  plunder  man  of  the  best  gift  of  heaven, 
His  liberty  of  soul. 

Phar.  Darius  I  hear  me. 

Thy  princes,  and  the  captuns  of  thy  bands, 


86  DANIEL. 

Thy  presidents,  the  nobles  who  bear  role 

0*er  provinces,  and  I,  thine  hiunUe  creature, 

Less  than  the  least  in  merit,  but  in  lore, 

In  seal,  and  duty,  eqoal  with  the  first. 

We  hare  derised  a  measure  to  confirm 

Thy  intent  empire,  to  establish  firmly 

Thy  power  and  new  dominion,  and  secure 

Thy  growing  greatness  past  the  power  of  change. 

Dar,  I  am  prepar'd  to  hear  thee ;  speak,  Fhamaces, 
r  Fhar,  The  wretched  Babylonians  long  hare  groan'd 
Beneath  the  rule  of  princes,  weak  or  rash. 
The  rod  of  power  was  swayed  alike  amiss 
By  feeble  Merodach  and  fierce  Belshacsar. 
One  let  the  slacken'd  reins  too  loosely  fioat 
Upon  the  peoide's  neck,  and  lost  his  power 
By  nerreless  relaxation.    He  who  followed 
Held  with  a  tyrant's  hand  the  cruel  curb,  • 

And  checked  the  groaning  nation  till  it  bled ; 
On  different  rocks  they  met  one  common  ruin. 
Their  edicts  were  irresolute,  their  laws 
Were  feebly  plann'd,  their  councils  ill  advised ; 
Now  so  relaxed,  and  now  so  overstrain'd. 
That  the  tired  people,  wearied  with  the  weight 
They  long  have  borne,  will  soon  disdain  control. 
Tread  on  all  rule,  and  spurn  the  hand  that  guides  thenu 

Dor.  But  say,  what  remedy  ? 

Phar,  That  too,  O  king  I 

Thy  servants  have  provided.    Hitherto 
They  bear  the  yoke  submissive.    But  to  fix  < 

Thy  power  and  their  obedience,  to  reduce 
All  hearts  to  thy  dominion,  yet  avoid 
Those  deeds  of  cruelty  thy  nature  starts  at. 
Thou  shouldst  begin  by  some  imperial  act 
Of  absolute  dominion,  yet  unstainM 
By  aught  of  barbarous.    For  know,  O  king ! 
Wholesome  severity,  if  wisely  fram'd 
With  sober  discipline,  procures  more  reverence 
Than  all  the  lenient  coimsels  and  weak  measures 
Of  frail  irresolution. 

Bar,  Now  proceed 

To  thy  request. 

Phar.  Not  I,  but  all  request  it. 

Be  thy  imperial  edict  issued  straight, 
And  let  a  firm  decree  be  this  day  passed. 


DANIEL.  87 

IrrerocaUe,  as  oar  Median  laws 
Ordaiii,  that  for  the  space  of  thirty  days 
No  sntiJect  in  thj  reahn  shall  aught  request 
Of  god  or  nun,  except  of  thee,  O  king ! 

Dor,  Wherefore  this  strange  decree  ? 

Phar,  'Twill  fix  the  crown 

Vfitik  lasting  safety  on  thy  royal  brow. 
And,  by  a  bloodless  means,  presenre  th*  obedience 
Of  tlds  new  empire.    Think  how  much  *twill  raise 
Thy  high  renown  I  'Twill  make  thy  name  revered 
And  popular  beyond  example.    "What  I 
To  be  as  heaven,  dispensing  good  and  ill 
For  thirty  days  I    "Wittk  thine  own  ears  to  hear 
Thy  people's  wants,  with  thine  own  lib'ral  hands 
To  bless  thy  suppliant  sul^jects  1    O  Darius ! 
Thoult  seem  as  bounteous  as  a  giving  god  I 
And  reign  in  every  heart  in  Babylon 
As  well  as  Media  1    What  a  glorious  state, 
To  be  the  sovereign  arbiter  of  good  I 
The  first  efficient  cause  of  happiness ! 
To  scatter  mercies  with  a  plenteous  hand. 
And  to  be  blest  thyself  in  blessing  others ! 

Dor.  Is  this  the  general  wish  ? 

iPrincet  and  courtiers  kneeL 

Ch^f  Pres.  Of  one,  of  all. 

Behold  thy  princes,  presidents,  and  lords. 
Thy  counsellors,  and  detains  I    See,  O  king 

[presenting  the  edict. 
Behold  the  instrument  our  zeal  has  drawn ; 
The  edict  is  prepared.    We  only  wait 
The  confirmation  oi  thy  gracious  word. 
And  thy  imperial  signet. 

Dor.  Say,  Pharnaces, 

What  penalty  awaits  the  man  who  dares 
Transgress  our  mandate  ? 

Ph€nr.  Instant  death,  O  king ! 

This  statute  says,  "  Should  any  subject  dare 
Petition  for  the  space  of  thirty  days, 
Of  God  or  man,  except  of  thee,  O  king  I 
He  shall  be  thrown  into  yon  dreadful  den 
Of  hungry  lions  V* 

Dar.  Hold !    Methinks  a  deed 

Of  such  importance  should  be  wisely  weigh'd. 

Phar.  We  have  revolv'd  it,  mighty  king !  with  care. 


S6  DANIEL. 

"With  closest  scrutiny.    On  us  devolve 
Whatever  blame  ocean  I 

Dar,  I'm  satisfied. 

Then  to  your  wisdom  I  commit  me,  princes. 
Behold  the  royal  signet :  see,  *tis  draw. 

Phar.  Ccuide.J  There  Daniel  fell  1     That  signet  seal 
hisdoonu 

Dar,  (after  a  pau$e.)  Let  me  reieet— Sore  I  hai 
been  too  rash ! 
Why  such  intefflp*rate  haate  ?    But  yon  are  wise ; 
And  would  not  counsel  this  severe  decree 
But  for  the  wisest  purpose.    Yet,  methinks, 
I  n^ht  have  weigh'd,  and  in  my  mind  revolvVL 
This  statute,  ere,  the  royal  signet  stamp'd. 
It  had  been  past  repeal.    Sage  Daniel.too  I 
My  counsellor,  my  guide,  my  well-tried  Iriend, 
He  should  have  been  consulted ;  he  whose  wisdom 
I  still  have  found  oracular. 

Phar,  Mighty  Ung  I 

*Tis  as  it  should  be.    Th«i  iecree  Is  past 
Irrevocable,  as  the  steadfiut  law 
Of  Mode  and  Persian,  which  can  never  change. 
Those  who  observe  it  live,  as  is  most  meet, 
High  in  thy  grace ;— who  violate  it,  die. 


PART  IV. 

ScBNB— Daniel's  Houte. 

Daniel,  Araspes. 


jir.  Oh,  holy  Daniel !  prophet,  fother,  friend, 
I  come,  the  wretched  messaagar  of  ill  1 
Thy  foes  complot  thy  death.    For  what  can  mean 
This  new-made  law,  extorted  from  the  king 
Almost  by  force  ?    What  can  it  mean,  O  Daniel, 
But  to  involve  thee  in  Hie  t<^  they  spread 
To  snare  thy  {nredous  life  ? 

Dan.  How  I  was  the  king 

Consenting  to  this  edict  ? 

jlr.  They  surpris'd 

His  easy  nature ;  took  him  when  his  heart 
Was  soften'd  by  their  blandishments.    They  wore 


DANIEL.  99 

The  mask  of  public  virtoe.  to  deoeif«  Jbim. 
Beneath  the  speciow  name  of  flpenenl  good. 
They  wrought  him  to  their  i^orpoae* :  no  tiiDe 
Anoiw*d  him  to  delib*rBte.    One  short  hour, 
Another  momeat,  and  Us  sool  had  gained 
Her  nat*^  tone  of  rirtae. 

Dan.  That  great  PowV, 

"Who  suffers  evil,  only  to  produce 
Some  unseen  good,  permits  tlwt  tihto  shoatd  be : 
And,  He  permlttiDg,  I,  wdl  pleas'd,  resign. 
Betire,  my  friend :  tids  is  my  seeond  hour 
Of  daily  pray*r.    Anoo  well  meet  ag^n. 
Here,  in  the  <H>en  Csce  of  that  bright  sun 
Thy  fethers  wor8hipp*d,  will  I  offer  up. 
As  is  my  rule,  petition  to  oar  God, 
For  thee,  for  me,  for  Solyma,  for  aJl  1 

Jr.  Oh,  stay !  wliat  meanest  thou !  sure  thou  hast  not 
heard 
The  edict  of  the  king  ?    I  thought,  but  now. 
Thou  knew*st  its  purport.    It  expresdy  says. 
That  no  petition  kenoeforth  shall  be  made. 
For  thirty  days,  save  only  to  the  king; 
Nor  pray*r  nor  intercesaiQii  shall  be  heard 
Of  any  (Sod  or  man,  but  of  Darius. 

Dan.    And  think'st  thou  H^en.  mj  revYence  for  the 
king. 
Good  as  he  is,  shall  tempt  me  to  renounce 
My  sworn  allegianee  to  the  King  of  kings  ? 
Hast  thou  commanded  legions  ?  strove  in  battle, 
Defied  the  foce  of  danger,  mock*d  at  death 
In  all  its  frightful  forms,  and  tremblest  now  ? 
Come,  learn  of  me ;  ni  teach  thee  to  be  bold. 
Though  sword  I  never  drew  I    Fear  not,  Araspes, 
The  feeble  vengeance  of  a  m<Nrtal  man, 
'Whose  Inreath  is  in  his  nostrils ;  for  wherein 
Is  he  to  be  accounted  of?  but  fear 
Th*  awakened  vengeance  of  the  living  Lord ; 
He  who  can  plunge  the  everlasting  soul 
In  infinite  perdition  I 

Jr.  Then,  O  Danid  I 

If  thou  persist  to  disobey  the  edict. 
Retire,  and  hide  thee  from  the  prying  eyes 
Of  busy  roaUoe ! 

D€tn.  He  who  is  aaham*d 


90  DANIEL. 

To  Tindioate  the  honour  of  his  God, 
Of  him  the  living  Lord  shall  be  asham'd 
When  he  shall  judge  the  tiibesi 

Ar,  Yet,  O  remember. 

Oft  hare  I  heard  thee  say,  the  secret  heart 
Is  fair  devotion's  temple ;  there  the  saint, 
E*en  on  that  living  altar,  lights  the  flame 
Of  purest  sacrifice,  whidi  bums  unseen. 
Not  unaccepted. — I  remember  too, 
When  Syrian  Naaman,*  by  Elisha's  hand. 
Was  cleansed  from  foul  pollution,  and  his  mind. 
Enlightened  by  the  miracle,  confess^ 
The  Almighty  God  of  Jacob ;  that  he  deem'd  it 
No  flagrant  violation  of  his  fidth 
To  bend  at  Rimmon's  shrine ;  nor  did  the  seer 
Forbid  the  rite  extemaL 

Dcm,  Know,  Araspes, 

Heav'n  deigns  to  suit  our  trials  to  our  strength : 
A  recent  convert,  feeble  in  his  faith, 
Naaman,  perhiqM,  had  sunk  beneath  the  weight 
Of  so  severe  a  duty.    Gracious  Heav'n 
Forbears  to  bruise  the  reed,  or  quench  the  flax 
When  feeble  and  expiring.    But  shall  I, 
Shall  Daniel,  shall  the  servant  of  the  Lord, 
A  vet*ran  in  his  cause— long  trained  to  know 
And  do  his  will— long  exercised  in  wo. 
Bred  in  captivity,  and  bom  to  suffer ; 
Shall  I,  from  known,  from  certain  duty  shrink. 
To  shun  a  threaten'd  danger?    O,  Araspes! 
Shall  I,  advanced  in  age,  in  zeal  decline  ? 
Grow  careless  as  I  reach  my  journey's  end  ? 
And  slacken  in  my  pace,  the  goal  in  view  ? 
Perish  discretion,  when  it  interferes 
With  duty  I    Perish  the  false  policy 
Of  human  wit,  which  would  commute  our  safbty 
With  GK>d's  eternal  honour !    Shall  His  law 
Be  set  at  nought,  that  I  may  live  at  ease  ? 
How  would  the  heathen  triumph,  should  I  fall 
Through  coward  fear!    How  would  God's  enemiea 
Insultingly  blaspheme  I 

Ar.  Yet,  think  a  moment. 

Dan.  No  !— 

Where  evil  may  be  done^  'tis  right  to  ponder ; 

•  2  Kings  T. 


DANIEL.  91 

Where  only  n^^^d^  know,  the  shortest  pense 
Is  much  too  long.    Had  great  Darius  paos'd, 
This  ill  bad  been  prevented.    Bat  for  me, 
Ara^es,  to  deliberate  is  to  sin. 

Ar.  Think  of  thy  pow*r,  thy  lisroar  virith  Darius : 
Think  of  thy  life's  importance  to  the  tribes. 
Scarce  yet  retam*d  in  safety.    live  1  oh,  live  I 
To  serve  the  cause  of  God. 

J^n,  God  will  himself 

Bostain  his  righteoos  cause.    He  knows  to  raise 
Fit  instruments  to  serve  him.    Know,  Araspes^ 
He  does  not  need  oor  crimes  to  help  his  cause. 
Nor  does  his  equitable  law  permit 
A  dniul  act,  from  the  prepost^ons  plea 
That  good  may  follow  it.    For  me,  my  friend. 
The  spadons  earth  holds  not  a  bait  to  tempt  me. 
"What  would  it  profit  me,  if  I  should  gain 
Imperial  Bcbatan,  th'  extended  land 
Of  fruitful  Media,  nay,  the  world*s  wide  empire, 
If  miiie  eternal  soul  must  be  the  price  ? 
IPteeweU,  my  friend  1  time  presses.    I  have,  stol'n 
Some  moments  from  my  duty,  to  confirm 
And  strengthen  thy  young  faith.    Let  us  fulfil 
What  Heaven  eqjcdns,— and  leave  to  Heav*n  th'  event. 


PART  V. 

ScBNB —  The  Palace, 
Fharnacbs,  Soranus. 

Phar.  Tis  done— success  has  crowned  our  schciuo, 
Soranus; 
And  Daniel  foils  into  the  deep-laid  toils 
Our  prudence  spread. 

8or.  That  he  should  fall  so  soon, 

Astcmishes  e*en  me.    What!  not  a  day  I 
What!  not  a  single  moment  to  defer 
His  rash  devotions  ?    Madly  thus  to  rush 
On  certain  peril  quite  transcends  belief  I 
When  happened  it,  Fhamaces  ? 

Phar,  On  the  instant : 


02  DANIEL. 

Scarce  is  the  deed  aooompKrii*d.    A>  he  made 

His  ostentatloas  prayer,  e*en  in  the  ftce 

Of  the  bright  god  of  dajr,  all  Babylon 

Beheld  the  insult  offer'd  to  Darius. 

For,  as  in  bold  defiance  of  tbto  law. 

His  windows  were  not  closed.    Our  chosen  bands, 

'Whom  we  had  placed  to  note  him,  straight  rudi*d  ia» 

And  seix'd  him  in  the  warmth  of  his  blind  seal. 

Ere  half  his  prayer  was  finished.    Young  Araspes, 

With  all  the  wild  extravagance  of  grie^ 

Prays,  weeps,  and  threatens.    Daniel  sUent  stands. 

With  patient  re8ignati<m,  and  prepares 

To  follow  them.    But  see,  the  king  approaches. 

Sor,  How*s  this  ?  deep  sorrow  sits  upon  his  brow  I 
And  stem  resentment  fires  his  angry  eye. 

Enter  Darius. 

Dor.  O,  deep-laid  stratagem  1    O,  artful  wile  1 
To  take  me  unprepar'd,  to  wound  my  heart, 
E'en  where  it  feels  most  tenderly,  in  fiieudship  I 
To  stab  my  ^^e  I  to  hold  me  i^  a  mark 
To  future  ages,  for  the  peijurM  prince 
Who  slew  the  friend  he  lov*d  I    O  Daniel,  Daniel, 
Who  now  shall  trust  Darius  ?    Not  a  slave 
In  my  wide  eminre,  from  the  Indian  main 
To  the  cold  Caspian,  but  is  more  at  ease 
Than  I,  his  monarch.    Yes !  Vve  done  a  deed 
Will  blot  my  honour  with  eternal  stain ! 
Phamaces !  O,  thou  hoary  sycophant ! 
Thou  wily  politician  1  thou  hast  snared 
Tliy  unsuspecting  master. 

P?uir.  Great  Darius, 

Let  not  resentment  blind  thy  royal  eyes. 
In  what  am  I  to  blame  ?  who  could  suspect 
This  obstinate  resistance  to  the  law  ? 
Who  could  foresee  that  Daniel  would  perforce 
Oppose  the  king's  decree  ? 

JDar.  ThoB,  thou  forsaw'st  it  I 

Thou  knew'st  his  righteous  soul  would  ne*er  endure 
So  long  an  interval  of  prayor.    But  I, 
Deluded  king  I  'twas  I  should  have  foreseen 
His  steadfast  piety.    I  should  have  thought 
Your  earnest  warmth  had  some  more  secret  source^ 
Something  that  touch'd  you  nearer  than  your  love, 


DANIEL.  d3 

Your  well-feign'd  seal,  for  me— I  ihould  have  known 

When  selfish  politicians,  hackneyM  long 

In  fraad  and  artifice,  affect  a  glow 

Of  patriot  fenronr,  or  fond  loyalty. 

Which  scorns  all  show  of  interest,  that's  the  moment 

To  watch  their  crooked  pngects.    Well  thou  know'st 

How  dear  I  held  him ;  how  I  prised  his  truth  I 

Did  I  not  choose  him  from  a  sutdect  world. 

Unblessed  by  fortune,  and  by  birth  ungraced, 

A  captive  and  a  Jew  ?    Did  I  not  lore  him  ? 

Was  he  not  rich  in  independent  worth  ? 

And  great  in  natire  goodness  ?    That  undid  him  !* 

There,  there  he  fell  I    If  he  had  been  less  great. 

He  had  been  sitfis.  Thou  cooldst  not  bear  his  brightness; 

The  lustre  of  his  rirtues  quite  obscured 

And  dimm'd  thy  fiunter  merit.    Rash  old  man  t 

Go,  and  devise  some  means  to  set  me  free 

From  this  dread  load  of  guilt  I    Go,  set  at  work 

Thy  plotting  genius  to  redeem  the  life 

Of  venerable  Daniel  I 

Phar.  *T!s  too  late. 

He  has  offended  'gainst  the  new  decree ; 
Has  dared  to  make  petition  to  his  God, 
Although  the  dreadful  sentence  of  the  act 
Full  well  he  knew.    And  by  th*  establish'd  law 
Of  Media,  by  fliat  law  irrevocable. 
Which  he  has  dared  to  violate,  he  dies  ! 

Iknr,  Impiety  I  presumption!  monstrous  law ! 
Irrevocable  P    Is  tiiere  aught  on  earth 
Deserves  that  name  P    Th'  eternal  laws  alone 
Of  Oromasdes  are  unchangeable  I 
All  human  projects  are  so  fiiintly  framed. 
So  feebly  plann'd,  so  liable  to  diange. 
So  mix'd  witii  error  in  thdr  vary  form. 
That  mutable  and  mortal  are  the  same. 
But  where  is  Daniel  P    Wherefore  comes  he  not 
To  load  me  with  reproaches  P  to  upbraid  me 
With  all  the  wrongs  my  barb'Tous  haste  has  done  him. 
Where  is  he  P 

Phar,  He  prepares  to  meet  his  fate. 

This  hour  he  dies,  for  so  the  act  decrees. 

Bar,  Suspend  the  bloody  sentence.    Bring  him  hither. 
Or  rather  let  me  seek  him,  and  implore 
His  dying  pardon,  and  his  parting  prayer. 


SdSHi — Daai^t  Sauti- 


No  grief;  no  womm'i  wssknon.  food  Anupea ! 

Thou  thonldil  Tflnict  my  laigrimsge  ii  o'er. 

And  Ois  Mett  hsTen  of  repqw  (n  view. 

^r.  And  mart  1  lose  Uie»,  Denlel  7  muat  Ihm  i 

Don.Andwliatlidei,UiiByfrJeod.thstlihDiiJdtr 

To  die  1  why,  11.  to  trioniph  ;  tlB  lo  join 

Ths  smA  WHrnlily  of  the  good  end  just ; 

ImmorUl  worthlei,  heroeg,  propheti,  uioti ! 

Oh !  Ill  to  Join  Ihe  bsQd  Df  holy  men 

Made  peifecl  liy  their  lufferiagi  !    "Tla  to  meet 

Delgu-dholdfamilierconvereel    'Ti.  lo  ». 

BlMi'd  Noah  imd  hi.  chtldren.  ones  •  world  I 

Tb  to  behold,  oh  i  rapture  to  concelYe  1 

Thoie  we  have  known,  »nd  lov'd,  and  Istt  below  1 

Bold  Aiariah,  end  the  bend  of  hrothen. 

Who  eoDgbt,  in  bloom  of  youth,  the  Kordunt  Saa 

Hot  sheU  we  Me  heroic  men  alone, 

Cbwopiou  who  fong-ht  the  Sght  of  f^th  on  eutta  \ 

Michael  end  hi.  bright  legion^  who  .nbd«d 

The  foea  of  truth  1    To  johi  Iheir  bleat  emphiy 

Of  love  end  pnuae  1  to  the  high  melodUea 

Of  Choi™  calettUd  to  sttune  my  voiee. 

Aecording  to  the  golden  harpa  of  ulot*  1 

To  join  in  biMt  hoaanna.  to  their  King  •■ 

Ahrae  were  hesTen,  though  ..lot  or  eenph  DOoa 

Shoold  meet  oar  el^t.  uid  only  God  were  there  1 

Thtaittodiel    Who  would  not  die  for  thi.  ? 

Who  would  not  die,  UuU  he  piltht  Ure  for  enr  r 

DANIEL.  g5 

Dabids,  Danikl,  Araspbs. 

J)ar.  'Where  is  he!  where  is  Danid?  LetmeseehimI 
Let  me  emlwace  that  venerable  form. 
Which  I  have  doom*d  to  glut  the  greedy  maw 
Of  fioiioas  lions  1 

Dan.  King  Darius,  hail ! 

Dor.  O,  iqjnred  Daniel,  can  I  see  thee  thas ! 
Thus  nncomidaining !  can  I  bear  to  hear 
That  when  the  ruffian  ministers  of  death 
Stopped  thy  unfinish'd  prayer,  thy  pious  lips 
Had  just  invok'd  a  blessing  on  Darius, 
On  him  who  sought  thy  life  ?    Thy  mnrdVers  drop! 
Tears  of  strange  pity.    Look  not  on  me  thus 
With  mild  benignity  I    Ohl  I  could  bear 
The  Toice  of  keen  reproach,  or  the  strong  flash 
Of  fierce  resentment ;  but  I  cannot  stand 
That  touching  silence,  nor  that  patient  eye 
Of  meek  req[>ect. 

Dan.  Thou  art  my  master  still. 

Dor.  I  am  thy  murdVer !  I  have  signed  thy  death  I 

Dan.  I  know  thy  bent  of  soul  is  honourable : 
Thou  hast  been  gracious  still  I    Were  it  not  so, 
I  would  have  met  th*  appointment  of  high  Heaven 
V^th  humble  acquiescence ;  but  to  know 
Thy  will  concurred  not  with  thy  servant's  &te. 
Adds  Joy  to  redgnation. 

Dar.  Here  I  swear  ^ 

By  Him  who  sits  enthron'd  in  yon  bright  sun, 
Thy  blood  shall  be  aton*d  1  On  these  thy  foes 
Thou  shalt  have  ample  vengeance. 

Dtm.  Hold,  O  king ! 

Vengeance  is  mine,  th*  eternal  Lord  has  said ; 
MjTMlf  win  recompense,  with  even  hand. 
The  sinner  for  the  sin.    The  wrath  of  man 
Works  not  the  righteousness  of  God. 

Dar.  I  had  hoped 

We  should  have  trod  this  busy  stage  together 
A  little  longer,  then  have  sunk  to  rest 
In  honourable  age  I    Who  now  shall  guide 
My  shattered  bark  in  safety  ?  who  shall  now 
Direct  me  ?    O,  unhappy  state  of  kings  I 
TIs  weU  the  robe  of  mi^esty  is  gay. 
Or  who  would  put  it  on  P    A  crown  I  what  ia  it  P 
It  is  to  bear  the  miseries  of  a  people  1 


9S  DANIEL. 

To  hear  their  mumiars,  feel  their  discontents. 

And  sink  beneath  a  kiad  of  splendid  care  1 

To  have  your  best  success  ascrflwd  to  fortane> 

And  fortune*s  fiulures  all  ascribed  to  you  1 

It  is  to  sit  upon  a  joyless  height, 

To  every  blast  of  changing-  fate  exposM! 

Too  high  for  hope  I  toe  great  for  happiness  1 

For  friendship  too  much  fear*d.    To  all  the  joys 

Of  social  freedom,  and  th*  endearing  diarm 

Of  liberal  interchange  of  soul,  unknown. 

Fate  meant  me  an  exception  to  the  rest. 

And,  though  a  monarch,  bless'd  me  with  a  friend ; 

And  I^iave  murdered  him ! 

Dan.  My  hour  approadies. 

Hate  not  my  memory,  king :  protect  Araspes : 
Encourage  Cyrus  in  the  holy  work 
Of  building  ruin*d  Solyma.    Farewell. 

Dor,  With  most  rel^ous  strictness  Til  fulfil 
Thy  last  request.    Araspes  shall  be  next 
My  throne  and  heart.    Farewell  t  [  They  embrace. 

Hear,  future  kings ! 
Ye  unborn  rulers  of  tiie  nations,  hear ! 
Learn  from  my  crime,  from  my  misfortunes  learn. 
Never  to  trust  to  weak  or  wicked  hands, 
That  delegated  power  which  Oromasdes 
Invests  in  monarchs  for  the  public  good. 


PART  VII. 

Scene—  The  court  of  the  Palace. —  The  tun  rising. 

Darius,  Araspes. 

Dar.  Oh,  good  Araspes  I  what  a  night  of  horror  I 
To  me  the  da>vning  day  brings  no  return 
Of  cheerfulness  or  peace  I    No  balmy  sleep 
Has  sealed  these  eyes,  no  nourishment  has  pass'd 
These  loathing  lips,  since  Daniel's  fate  was  sign'd. 
Hear  what  my  fruitless  penitence  resolves-^ 
The  thirty  days  my  radmess  had  decreed 
The  edict's  force  should  last,  I  will  devote 
To  mourning  and  repentance,  fasting,  prayer, 


DANIELw  97 

And  all  dae  xltM  oi  grief.    For  thirty  days 
No  pleaiaat  sound  of  dnldmer  or  harp, 
Saekbot,  or  flate,  or  psaltery,  shall  charm 
My  ear,  now  dead  to  ey*ry  note  of  joy  I 

jir.  My  grief  can  know  no  period! 

Dor,  See  that  den  ! 

There  Danid  met  the  forions  lion^  rage  ! 
There  were  the  patient  martyr^s  mangled  limbs 
Tom  inece-meal  I    Never  hide  thy  tears,  Araspes ; 
*Tl8  rirtnons  sorrow,  nnallay'd,  like  mine. 
By  gout  and  fell  remorse  I    Let  us  i^roach : 
"Who  knows  bat  that  dread  Pow'r  to  whom  he  pray'd, 
So  often  and  so  fervently,  has  heard  him  I 

I  He  goes  to  the  mouth  of  the  den, 
O  Daniel,  servant  of  the  living  God, 
Hb  whom  thoa  hast  served  so  long,  and  lov'd  so  well. 
From  the  devouring  Hum's  fiunish'd  jaw 
Can  he  deliver  thee  ? 

Dan,  (from  the  bottom  of  (he  den.)    He  can— he  has  I 

Dor.  Methought  I  heard  him  speak  I 

Ar,  Oh!  wondrous forca 

Of  strong  imagination !  were  thy  voice 
Loud  as  the  trumpet's  blast,  it  could  not  wake  him 
From  that  eternal  sleep  i 

Dan.  {in  the  den,)       Hail !  Idng  Darius  !         -k 
The  Ood  I  serve  has  shut  the  lion*s  mouth. 
To  vindicate  my  innocence. 

Dor.  He  speaks ! 

He  lives  I 

Ar.  *Tis  no  illusion :  *tis  the  sound 

Of  his  known  voice. 

Dar,  Where  are  my  servants  ?    Haste, 

Fly,  swift  as  lightning,  free  him  from  the  den ; 
Release  him,  bring  him  hither  I    Break  the  seal 
Which  keeps  him  from  me !    See,  Araspes !  look ! 
See  the  charm'd  lions ! — Mark  their  mild  demeanour ; 
Araspes,  mark !— they  have  no  power  to  hurt  him ! 
See  how  they  hang  their  heads  and  smooth  their  fiercenes) 
At  his  mild  aspecti 

Ar.  Who  that  see  this  sight, 

Who  that  in  after-times  shall  hear  this  told. 
Can  doubt  if  Daniel's  God  be  God  indeed  ? 

Dar.  None,  none,  Araspes ! 

Ar.  Ah,  he  comes,  he  comes  \ 

p 


OS  DANIEL. 

Enter  Danibl,  fallowed  by  mttUitudcx 

Dan,  Hail,  great  Dariu  I 

Dar,  Dost  thou  Bve  indeed  I 

And  lire  nnhart  ? 

jir.  Oh,  mirade  of  joy  1 

Dar.  I  scarce  can  trust  my  eyes !    How  didst  thoa 
*8cape ; 

Dan.  That  tnright  and  glorious  Bdng,  who  TouchsaTd 
Presence  divine,  when  the  three  martyr'd  brotiiers 
Essay'd  the  caldron*s  flame,  supported  me ! 
E'en  in  the  Airions  lions*  dreadful  den. 
The  prisoner  of  hope,  eren  there  I  tum*d 
To  the  stronghold,  the  bulwark  of  my  strength. 
Ready  to  hear,  and  mighty  to  redeem ! 

Dar.  (to  Ar.)  Where  is  Fhamaoes  ?  Take  tlie  hoery 
traitors 
Take  too  Soranus,  and  the  chief  abettors 
Of  this  dire  edict :  let  not  one  escape. 
The  punishment  their  deep-laid  hate  deris^d 
For  holy  Daniel,  on  their  heads  shall  fiall 
With  tenfold  rengeance.    To  the  lions*  den 
I  doom  his  vile  accusers  I    AH  their  wives. 
Their  children,  too,  shall  share  one  common  fate ! 
Take  care  that  none  escape. — Go,  good  Araspes. 

[  Araspbs  £06»  oni, 

Dan.  Not  so,  Darius ! 

O  spare  the  gmltless,  spare  the  guilty  too  I 
Where  sin  is  not,  to  punish  were  unjust ; 
And  where  sin  is,  O  king,  there  fell  remorse 
Supplies  the  place  of  punbhment  I 

Dar.  No  more ! 

My  word  is  pass'd  I    Not  one  request,  save  this, 
Shalt  thou  e'er  make  in  vain.    Approach,  ray  friends  • 
Araspes  has  already  spread  the  tale, 
And  see  what  crowds  advance. 

People.  Long  live  Darius ! 

Long  live  great  Daniel  too,  the  people's  Ariend  I 

Dar.  Draw  near,  my  subjects.    See  this  holy  roanl 
Death  had  no  power  to  harm  him.    Yon  fell  band 
Of  famish'd  lions,  soften'd  at  his  sight, 
Foi^ot  their  nature,  and  grew  tame  before  him. 
The  n^hty  God  protects  his  servants  thus  I 
The  righteous  thus  he  rescues  from  the  soar*  I 
While  tnxas  artilloer  himMlf  shall  fiiU 


DANIEL.  99 

la  the  dMp  golf  Ms  wUy  arte  devised 
To  mare  the  innoeent  I 

A  Court,  ToiheMuneden 

Aras|»es  bean  Fheniaoea  and  hk  friends ; 
FUl'n  is  their  insolence !    With  fnyefs  and  tears. 
And  all  the  meanness  of  higfa-crested  pride 
When  adverse  fortune  frowns,  they  bef  far  life. 
Araspes  will  not  bear.    **  Yon  heanl  net  me," 
He  cries,  **when  I  for  Daniel's  life  implor'd ; 
**  Hit  God  protected  him  I  see  now  if  jroors 
Will  listen  to  yonr  cries !" 

Dor.  Now  hear. 

People  and  nations,  languages  and  realms, 
0*er  whom  I  rule !    Peace  be  virithin  your  walls  I 
That  I  may  banish  from  the  minds  of  men 
The  rash  decree  gone  out ;  hear  me  resolve 
To  counteract  its  force  by  one  more  just. 
In  evYy  kingdom  of  my  wide-stretch'd  realm, 
Fhnn  feir  Chaldea  to  th*  extremest  bound 
Of  northern  Media,  be  my  edict  sent, 
And  this  my  statute  known.    My  heralds  haste. 
And  spread  my  royal  mandate  through  the*land. 
That  all  my  subjects  bow  the  ready  knee 
To  Daniel*s  God— for  He  alone  is  Lord. 
Let  all  adore,  and  tremble  at  His  name. 
Who  sits  in  glory  uni^roach^le 
Abore  the  heaves— -above  the  heav'n  of  heav*ns ! 
His  pow'r  is  everlasting ;  and  His  throne. 
Founded  in  equity  and  truth,  shall  last 
Beyond  the  bounded  reign  of  time  and  space. 
Through  wide  eternity  I    With  His  right  arm 
He  saves,  and  who  opposes  ?    He  defends. 
And  who  shall  injure  ?    In  the  perilous  den 
He  rescued  Daniel  from  the  lion's  mouth : 
His  common  deeds  are  wonders ;  all  His  works 
One  everduring  chain  of  miracles ! 

Enter  Araspes. 

jir.  An  hail,  O  king !    Darius,  live  for  ever  I 
May  aU  thy  foes  be  as  Fhamaces  is  1 

Dor,  Araspes,  speak ! 

Ar,  Oh,  let  me  spare  the  tale ! 

*Tis  full  of  horror !    Dreadful  was  the  sight ! 
The  hungry  lions,  greedy  for  their  prey. 


100 


DANIEL. 


DeToar*d  the  wretched  {nrinces  ere  they  reach  VI 
The  botUnn  of  the  den. 

Dar,  Now;  now  confess, 

*Twa8  some  saparim*  hand  restrain'd  their  rage 
And  tamed  their  forioos  appetites. 

People.  "Us  true 

The  God  of  Daniel  is  a  mighty  God  I 
He  sares  and  He  destroys. 
,    At.  O friend!    O  Daniel! 

No  waT*ring  doubts  can  ever  more  disturb 
My  setUed  foith. 

Am.  Xo  God  be  all  the  glory  I 


REFLECTIONS 


OP 


KING    HEZEKIAH, 

IN  HIS  SICKNESS. 

*  8«t  tUa«  ko«M  i«  ordir,  for  tkon  thalt  £«."— laaiak  us« 

What,  and  no  more  ?— Is  this,  ray  soul,  said  I, 
My  whole  of  being  (—Mast  I  surely  die  ? 
Be  robb*d  at  once  of  health,  of  strength,  of  time. 
Of  yoath's  feir  promise,  and  of  pleasure's  prime  ? 
i^iall  I  no  more  behold  the  foce  of  mom. 
The  cheerful  daylight,  and  the  spring's  return  ? 
Most  I  the  festive  bower,  the  banquet  leave, 
For  the  dull  chambers  of  the  darksome  grave  ? 

Have  I  conslder'd  what  it  is  to  die  ? 
In  native  dust  with  kindred  worms  to  lie ; 
To  sleep  in  cheerless  cold  n^lect  I  to  rot  I 
My  body  loathM,  my  very  name  foi^otl 
Not  one  of  aQ  those  parasites,  who  bend 
The  supple  knee,  their  mtmarch  to  attend  I 
What,  not  one  friend  I    No,  not  a  hireling  slave 
Shall  hail  great  Hezekiah  in  the  grave. 
Whereas  he,  who  ftdsely  claim*d  the  name  of  Great  f 
Whose  eye  was  temn*,  and  whose  frown  was  fete  ?, 
Who  aw*d  a  hundred  nations  from  the  throne  ? 
See  where  he  lies,  dumb,  friendless,  and  alone  I 
Which  grain  of  dust  proclaims  the  noble  Urth? 
WUeh  is  the  royal  particle  of  earth? 
Where  are  the  marks,  the  princely  oidgns  where? 
WUeh  is  the  slave,  and  which  great  David's  heir  ? 
AkM!  the  beggar's  ashes  are  not  known 
Flroi»  ids  who  lately  sat  <«  Israel's  throne. 
Ift  w  stands  my  great  aceount  ?    My  soul,  survey 
The  debt  Eternal  Juatice  bids  tiiee  pay! 


102  REFLECTIOKS  OF 

Should  I  firail  meinory's  records  striTe  to  blot, 
ynXL  Hesven's  tremendoos  reck'xdng  be  forgot  ? 
Cut  I,  alas !  the  awful  volame  tear, 
Or  rase  one  page  of  the  dread  register? 

**  Prepctre  thy  house,  thy  heart  in  order  set ; 
**  Frepare  the  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth  to  meet.* 
So  spake  the  warning  prophet. — Awful  words  < 
'Which  fearfully  my  troubled  soul  records. 
Am  I  prepared  f  and  can  I  meet  my  doom, 
N<nr  shudder  at  the  dreaded  wrath  to  come  ? 
Xr  all  in  order  set,  my  house,  my  heart? 
Does  not  besetting  sin  stiU  claim  a  part  ? 
No  cherish'd  error,  loath  to  quit  its  place. 
Obstruct  within  my  soul  the  work  of  grace  ? 
Did  I  each  day  for  this  great  day  prepare. 
By  righteous  deeds,  by  sin-subduing  prayer  ? 
Did  I  each  night;  each  day's  offence  repent. 
And  each  unholy  thought  and  word  lunent  ? 
Still  have  these  ready  hands  th*  afBicted  fed, 
And  minister'd  to  want  her  daily  bread  ? 
The  cause  I  knew  not,  did  I  well  explore  ? 
Friend,  advocate,  and  parent  of  the  poor  ? 
Did  I,  to  gratify  some  sudden  gust  ' 

Of  thoughtless  appetite,  some  impious  lust 
Of  pleasure  or  of  power,  such  sums  employ 
As  would  have  fliuhM  pale  penury  with  Joy  ? 
Did  I  in  groves  forbidden  altars  raise. 
Or  molten  gods  adore,  or  idols  fnidse  ? 
Did  my  firm  faith  to  heaven  still  point  the  way  ? 
Did  charity  to  man  my  actions  sway? 
Did  meek-eyed  patience  all  my  steps  attend  ? 
Did  genVous  candour  mark  me  for  her  friend  f 
Did  I  ui^ustly  seek  to  build  my  name 
On  the  pil'd  ruins  of  another*s  fame  ? 
Did  I  abhor,  as  hell,  th*  insidious  lie. 
The  low  deceit,  th*  unmanly  calumny  ? 
Did  my  fix*d  soul  the  imi^ous  wit  detest  ? 
Did  my  firm  virtue  scorn  th'  nnhaUow*d  Jest ; 
The  sneer  profane,  and  the  poor  ridicule 
Of  shallow  infidelity*s  dull  school  ? 
Did  I  still  live  asborp  one  day  to  die. 
And  view  th*  eternal  world  with  constant  eye? 
If  so  I  liv'd,  if  so  I  kept  thy  word, 
Ib  mercy  Tiew,  in  mercy  bear  me.  Lord : 


KING  HBZEKIAII.  103 

For,  oh !  how  rtrict  soever  I  kept  thy  law. 
From  mercy  oidy  all  my  hopes  I  draw ; 
My  hoiieet  deeds  indiilgeDGe  will  require ; 
The  best  bat  to  foiigiveness  will  aspire ; 
If  thoa  my  purest  senrfees  regard, 
'Twill  be  yiritii  pardon  only,  not  reward. 

How  imperfectlon^s  stamp'd  on  all  below ! 
How  sin  intmdes  in  all  we  say  or  do! 
How  late  in  all  the  insolence  of  health, 
I  charm*d  th'  Assyrian*  by  my  boast  of  wraith. 
How  fondly,  with  elab*rate  pomp  displayM 
My  glittVing  treasures !  with  what  triumph  laid 
My  gold  and  gems  before  his  daisied  eyes, 
And  found  a  ridi  reward  in  his  surprise  ? 
Oh,  mean  of  soul  I  can  wealth  elate  Ihe  heart. 
Which  of  the  man  himself  is  not  a  part? 
O,  poverty  of  pride  I    O,  foul  disgrace  I 
Disgusted  Reason,  Uushing  hides  her  face. 
Mortal,  and  proud !  strange  contradicting  terms : 
Pride  for  death^s  victim,  for  the  prey  of  worms ! 
Of  all  the  wonders  which  th*  eventful  life 
Of  man  presents;  of  all  the  mental  strife  • 

Of  warring  passions ;  all  the  raging  fires 
Of  furious  appetites  and  mad  desires. 
Not  one  so  strange  appears  as  this  alone. 
That  man  is  proud  of  what  is  not  his  own! 

How  short  is  human  life !  the  very  breath, 
Which  frames  my  words,  accelerates  my  death. 
Of  this  short  life  how  large  a  portion*s  fled— 
To  what  is  gone  I  am  already  dead ; 
As  dead  to  all  my  years  and  minutes  past. 
As  I,  to  what  remains,  shall  be  at  last. 
Can  I  past  miseries  so  far  forget. 
To  view  my  vanish'd  years  with  fond  regret  f 
Can  I  again  my  worn-out  fluicy  cheat  ? 
Indulge  fresh  hope  t  solicit  new  deceit  t 
Of  all  the  vanities  wealc  roan  admires. 
Which  greatness  gives,  youth  hopes,  or  pride  desires. 
Of  these,  my  soul,  which  hast  thou  not  enJoy*d  ? 
With  each,  with  all,  thy  sated  pow'rs  are  cloy'd. 
What  can  I  then  expect  firom  length  of  days  P 
More  wealth,  more  wisdom,  pleasure,  health,  or  praise  f 

*  TbA»  is  SB  anaelinmlfin.    Hezekiah  did  not  ihew  hla  treasurat 
to  the  AMjrrUn  tiU  slier  hU  reeorery  from  Ms  sidines^^ 


104  REFLECTIONS  OF 

More  pleasure !  hope  not  tfaat,  deluded  king  I 
For  when  did  age  increase  of  pleasure  bring  ? 
Is  health,  of  years  prolong'd  the  common  boast  ** 
And  dear-eam*d  iieune,  is  it  not  cheaply  lost  ? 
More  wisdom  1  that  indeed  were  hi^iness ; 
That  were  a  wish  a  king  might  well  confess : 
But  when  did  wisdom  covet  length  of  days  ? 
Or  seek  its  Miss  in  pleasure,  wealth,  m  praise  ? 
No : — Wisdom  yiews  with  an  indi£ferent  eye 
All  finite  Joys,  all  blessings  bom  to  die. 
The  soul  on  earth  is  an  immortal  guest. 
Compelled  to  starve  at  an  unreal  feast : 
A  spark,  which  upward  tends  by  nature's  force ; 
A  stream  diverted  from  its  parent  source ; 
A  drop,  disseverM  fit>m  the  boundless  sea ; 
A  moment,  parted  from  eternity ; 
A  frilgrim,  panting  for  the  rest  to  come ; 
An  exile,  anxious  for  his  native  home. 

Why  should  I  ask  my  forfeit  life- to  save  ? 
Is  Heav'n  ui^ust,  which  dooms  me  to  the  grave  ? 
Was  I  with  hope  of  endless  days  deceiv'd  ? 
Or  of  lov'd  life  am  I  alone  bereavM  ? 
Let  all  the  great,  the  rich,  the  learned,  the  wise. 
Let  all  the  shades  of  Judah's  monarchs  rise. 
And  say,  if  genius,  learning,  empire,  wealth, 
Youth,  beauty,  virtue,  strength,  renown,  or  health. 
Has  once  revers'd  th*  immutable  decree 
On  Adam  pass'd,  of  man's  mortality  ? 
What — ^have  these  eyes  ne'er  seen  the  felon  worm 
The  damask  cheek  devour,  the  finish'd  form  ? 
On  the  pale  rose  of  blasted  beauty  feed. 
And  riot  on  the  lip  so  lately  red  ? 
Where  are  our  fathers  ?    Where  th'  illustrious  line 
Of  holy  prophets,  and  of  seers  divine  ? 
Live  they  for  ever  ?    Do  they  shun  the  grave  ? 
Or  when  did  wisdom  its  professor  save  ? 
When  did  the  brave  escape  ?    When  did  the  breath 
Of  eloquence  charm  the  dull  cold  ear  of  death  ^ 
When  did  the  cunning  ai^ument  avail, 
The  polish'd  period,  or  the  vamish'd  tale ; 
The  eye  of  lightning,  or  the  soul  of  fire. 
Which  tiironging  thousands  crowded  to  admire  ? 
E*en  whUe  we  praise  the  verse,  the  poet  dies  \ 
And  dlfl&t  aa  his  lyre  great  David  lies. 


KINO  HEZBKIAH.  105 

Thou,  blest  la^ah  I  who  at  Ood*a  command. 
Now  speakVt  repentance  to  a  guUty  land. 
Most  die!  as  wise  and  good  thoa  hadst  not  been, 
As  Nebat'a  son,  who  taught  the  land  to  sin ! 

And  shall  I  then  be  spared  ?    O  monstroos  pride ! 
Shall  I  escape,  when  Solomon  has  died  ? 
If  an  the  wortii  oi  all  the  saints  were  Tain — 
Peace,  peace,  my  troubled  soul,  nor  dare  complain  I 
LOTd,  I  submit    C<miplete  thy  gracious  will ! 
F<Mr  If  thou  slay  me,  I  will  trust  thee  still. 
O  be  my  wQl  so  swallow'd  up  in  thine. 
That  I  may  do  thy  will  in  doing  mine. 


p2 


THK 

SEARCH  AFTER  HAPPINESS  i 

A  PASTORAL  DRAMA  FOR  YOUNG  LADIES. 


1V»  iMur  dM  Jflnder  tfunitbt, 
To  tetdi  Um  young  idea  how  to  ihoot, 
To  poor  the  ftwh  Instnwtioa  o'er  the  mind* 
To  breathe  th'  enllTeiUiiK  iplrit,  and  to  fix 
The  gen*roas  porpoie  in  the  female  breast. 

TBOMaOM. 


TO  MRS.  OWATKIN. 

Dear  Madam, 

Am  the  fblUnring  poemtonii  dileflj  on  the  danger  of  delay  or  error 
in  the  important  article  of  Education,  I  Itnow  not  to  whom  E  can, 
with  mote  proprietj,  dedicate  it  tlian  to  70U,  as  the  subject  it  Ineul- 
otas  has  been  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  your  attention  in  your 
owBlhmily. 

Let  not  the  name  of  Dedication  alarm  you  ;  I  am  not  foinff  to 
eOlmdyou  by  making  your  eulogium.  Panegyric  Is  only  neces- 
sary to  suspicious  characters.  Virtue  will  not  accept  it  i  Delicacy 
wiU  wt  oOiBr  it 

Hie  Mendship  with  which  yon  liave  hcmoured  me  from  my 
childhood,  will.  I  flatter  myself,  induce  you  to  pardon  me  for  ventur- 
ing to  lay  before  you  this  public  testimony  of  my  esteem,  and  to 
assure  you  how  much  I  am. 

Dear  Madam, 

Tour  obedient  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thb  Authob. 


PREFACE. 

Thb  ol\)ect  of  the  following  poem,  which  was  written  in  very  early 
youtli,  was  an  earnest  wish  to  Aimish  a  substitute  for  tlie  very  im- 
proper custom,  wlUch  then  prevailed,  of  allowing  plays,  and  those 
not  always  of  the  purest  Idnd,  to  be  acted  by  young  ladies  in  board- 
ing schools.  And  it  has  aflforded  a  serious  satisfaction  to  the  author 
to  learn  that  this  little  poem,  and  the  preeedhig  Sacred  Dramas, 
have  very  frequently  been  adopted,  to  supply  the  place  of  those 
more  dangerous  amusements.  If  it  may  be  still  happily  instru- 
mental in  promoting  a  regard  to  religion  and  virtue  in  tlie  mindsof 
young  persons,  and  afford  them  an  innocent  and  pnliaps  not  elto- 
gether  unnsef^  amusement  in  tlie  exercise  of  redtation,  the  end 
for  whidi  it  was  originally  composed,  and  the  author's  utmost  wlsk 
in  its  republication,  will  be  flilly  answered. 


PROLOGUE. 

SPOKEN  BY  A  YOUNG  LADY. 


1h  tiMM  gruve  somes,  and  unembeUishM  stndns, 

'Where  ndfher  sly  intrigue  nor  pasaion  rdgns ; 

How  dare  we  hope  an  aadience  will  approve 

A  drama  Toid  of  wit»  and  free  from  love  ? 

"Where  no  soft  Juliet  sighs,  and  weeps,  and  starts. 

No  fierce  Roxana  takes  by  storm  yoor  hearts ; 

No  comic  ridicule,  no  tra^  swagger, 

Not  one  elopement^  not  one  howl  or  dagger  I 

Ko  husband  wrongM,  who  trusted  and  believ*d. 

No  ikther  cheated,  and  no  friend  deceived ; 

No  Hbertine  in  glowing  strains  described. 

No  lying  chambermaid  that  rake  had  bribed ; 

Nor  ^ve  we,  to  reward  the  rover's  life, 

The  ample  portion  and  the  beauteous  wife^ 

Behold,  to  raise  the  manners  of  the  age^ 

The  frequent  moral  of  the  scenic  page ! 

And  shall  we  then  transplant  these  noxious  scenes 

To  private  life  ?  to  misses  in  thdr  teens  ? 

The  pompons  tones,  the  masculine  attire. 

The  stUts,  the  busldn,  the  dramatic  fire, 

Cornet  ttie  softness  of  the  gentler  kind. 

And  taint  the  sweetness  of  the  youthful  mind. 

Ungovem'd  passions,  jealousy  and  rage. 

But  ill  become  our  sex,  still  less  our  age ; 

Whether  we  learn  too  well  what  we  describe. 

Or  foul  the  poet's  meaning  to  imbibe ; 

In  either  case,  your  blame  we  justiy  raise. 

In  either  lose,  or  ought  to  lose,  your  praise 

How  dull,  if  tamely  flows  th*  impasdon'd  strain  I 

If  well— how  bad  to  be  the  thing  we  feign  I 

To  fix  the  mimic  scene  upon  the  heart. 

And  keep  the  passion  when  we  quit  the  part ! 


110 


PROLOGUE. 


Such  are  the  perib  the  dramatic  muse. 
In  youthful  bosoms,  threatens  to  infuse  1 
Our  timid  author  labours  to  impart 
A  less  pemidous  lesson  to  the  heart ; 
'What,  thou£^  no  charm  ol  melody  divine 
SmooUi  her  round  period,  or  adorn  her  line ; 
Thouj^  her  nnpolish'd  page  in  rain  aspires 
To  emulate  the  graces  she  admires ; 
Though  destitute  of  skill,  her  sole  fnretence 
But  aims  at  dmple  truth  and  common  sense ; 
Yet  shall  her  honest  nnawimming  page 
Tell  that  its  author,  in  a  modish  age, 
PrefiBrr*d  plain  virtue  to  the  boast  of  art. 
Nor  fix*d  one  dangVons  maxim  on  the  heart. 
Oh  I  i(  to  crown  her  efforts,  she  could  find. 
They  rooted  but  one  error  from  one  mind ; 
If  in  the  bosom  of  ingenuous  youth 
They  stampM  one  useful  thou^^t,  one  lasting  trutl^ 
*Twould  be  a  fisirer  tribute  to  her  name, 
Tlian  loud  i^tplauMs,  or  an  empty  fiune. 


THE 

SEARCH  AFTER  HAPPINESS. 

PBBSONS  OF  THE  DRAMA. 


Foot  touw  ladic* 


Ottant  t  of  diirtiieitai,  ia 
FMtorelU  C  tearefa  Jbr  taappi* 
Laiiiinda,3    imh. 


dania,aB  aadcnt  ahephtiden. 
millMHerd«ilhUw. 
flordla,  a  yoong  iheplierdMi, 


ScBNB — Jt  Grove, 
BuFBBUA,  Clbora,  Pastobblla,  Ladsinda. 

Oe.  Welcoinfl^  ya  hamble  vales,  ye  flowVy  shades, 
Ye  erystal  foontains,  and  ye  sileiit  glades ! 
From  the  gay  misery  of  the  thonghtiess  great, 
The  walks  of  folly,  the  disease  of  state ; 
F^rom  scenes  where  daring  guilt  triumphant  reigns. 
Its  dark  soqiicions  and  its  hoard  of  pains ; 
Where  pleasure  neyer  comes  without  alloy. 
And  art  but  thinly  pidnts  fslladous  joy ; 
IVhere  languor  loads  the  day,  excess  the  night. 
And  doll  satiety  succeeds  delight ; 
'Where  mJdidgfat  vices  their  fell  oi^es  keep. 
And  guilty  rerela  scare  the  phantom  sleep  j 
WhM^  dissipation  wears  the  name  of  bliss : 
From  tiiese  we  fly  in  search  of  happiness. 

Eu.  Not  the  tir*d  pilgrim,  all  his  dangers  past. 
When  he  descries  the  long-sought  shrine  at  last. 
E'er  felt  a  Joy  so  pure  as  this  fidr  field. 
These  peaceful  shades,  and  smiling  valleys  yield ; 
For,  sure,  these  oaks,  which  ^d  as  Time  appear, 
Prodatm  Urania*s  lonely  dwelling  near. 

Ptu,  How  the  descr^^ion  with  the  sGOie  agrees  I 
Here  lowly  thickets,  there  aspiring  trees  s 
The  hasel  copse  excluding  nocmday's  beftm, 
The  tufted  arbor,  the  pellucid  stream ; 
The  blooming  sweetbriar,  and  the  hawthorn  shade 
The  springing  cowslips  and  the  daisied  mead. 


112  THE  SEARCH. 

The  wild  luxuriance  of  the  fall-blown  fields. 
Which  spring  prepares,  and  laughing  summer  yields ! 

Eu,  Here  simple  nature  strikes  th*  enraptured  eye 
With  charms  which  wealth  and  art  but  ill  supply ; 
The  genuine  graces,  which  unthout  we  find, 
Diq»lay  the  beauty  of  the  owner's  mind. 

Lau.  These  deep  embow'ring  shades  conceal  the  cell 
Where  sage  Urania  and  her  daughters  dwell : 
Florella,  too,  if  right  weVe  heard  the  tale, 
ynth  them  resides— the  lily  of  the  vale. 

Cfo.  But  soft!  what  gentle  female  form  appears, 
Whidi  smiles  of  more  than  mortal  beauty  wears  ? 
Is  it  the  guardian  genius  of  the  grove. 
Or  some  fair  angel  from  the  choirs  above  ? 

Enter  Florblla,  who  speaks. 

Whom  do  I  see  ?  ye  beauteous  viigins,  say. 
What  chance  conducts  your  steps  this  lonely  way  ? 
Do  you  pursue  some  favorite  lambkin  stray'd  ? 
Or  do  yon  alders  court  you  to  their  shade  ? 
Declare,  Hair  strangers !  if  aright  I  deem. 
No  rustic  nymphs  of  vulgar  rank  you  seem. 

CZe.  No  cooling  shades  allure  our  eager  sight, 
Nor  lambkins  lost  our  searching  steps  invite. 

Fh,  Or  is  it,  haply,  yonder  branching  vine. 
Whose  tendrils  round  our  low-roof  d  cottage  twine ; 
Whose  spreading  height,  with  purple  clusters  crown*d. 
Attracts  the  gaze  of  ev^y  nymph  around  ? 
Have  these  lone  regions  aught  that  charms  beside  ? 
Yours  are  my  shades,  my  flow'rs,  my  fleecy  pride. 

Eu.  Florella!  our  united  thanks  receive ; 
Sole  proof  of  gratitude  we  have  to  give : 
And  since  you  deign  to  ask,  O  courteous  feir ! 
The  motive  of  our  unremitting  care : 
Know  then,  kind  maid,  our  joint  researches  tend 
To  find  that  sovereign  good  of  life— a  friend ; 
From  whom  the  wholesome  counsel  we  may  giUn, 
How  our  young  hearts  may  happiness  obtain. 
By  fancy's  mimic  pencil  oft  portrayed. 
Still  have  we  wooM  the  visionary  maid : 
The  lovely  phantom  mocks  our  eager  eyes ; 
And  still  we  chase,  and  still  we  miss  the  prise ! 

Cie.  Long  have  we  search'd  throughout  this  bounteous 
isle. 


AFTBB  HAPPINESS.  113 

'With  eonstant  ardoor  and  with  oeaaelMs  toil ; 

The  Tarioas  ways  of  Tarioas  life  we're  tried^ 

But  itill  the  bUas  we  seek  has  bem  denied. 

WeVe  sought  in  rain  throogh  every  different  state ; 

The  mnrmYing  poor,  the  discontented  great ; 

If  peace  and  joy  in  palaces  reside, 

Or  in  obecnrer  haunts  delight  to  hide ; 

If  happiness  with  worldly  pleasures  dweD, 

Or  sfaroads  her  graces  in  the  hermit's  cell : 

If  wit,  if  science,  teach  the  road  to  bliss, 

Or  torpid  dolness  find  the  Joys  they  miss ; 

To  learn  this  trath,  we*Te  bid  a  l<N>g  adiea 

To  all  the  shadows  blinded  taai  pnrsne. 

—We  seek  Urania ;  whose  sagadons  mind 

Vaj  lead  our  steps  this  latent  good  to  find : 

Her  w<nth  we  emulate  ;  her  virtues  fire 

Our  ardent  hearts  to  be  what  we  admire : 

F<nr  thoofl^  with  care  she  shuns  the  pnUic  eye^ 

Tet  worth  like  hers,  unknown  can  never  lie. 

Lou,  On  such  a  feir  and  fiftoltless  model  form'd. 
By  prudence  guided  and  by  virtue  warm'd, 
Perliaps  Florella  can  direct  our  youth, 
And  point  our  footsteps  to  the  paths  of  truth. 

Flo.  ni  would  it  suit  my  unexperienced  age 
In  sudi  important  questions  to'  engage. 
Young  as  I  am,  unskilful  to  discern. 
Nor  fit  to  teach,  who  yet  have  much  to  learn. 
But  would  yon  with  maturer  years  advise^ 
And  rei4»  the  counsel  of  the  truly  wise, 
The  dame,  in  whom  such  worth  and  wisdom  meet, 
Dwells  in  the  covert  of  yon  green  retreat : 
AU  that  the  w<nid  calls  great  she  once  possess'd. 
With  wealth,  with   rank,  her  prosp'rous   youth  was 

bless'd. 
In  adverse  fortune,  now,  serene  and  gay, 
**  Who  gave,"  she  said,  **had  right  to  take  away,* 
Two  lovely  daughters  bless  her  growing  years. 
And,  by  their  virtues,  well  repay  her  cares. 
With  them,  beneath  her  sheltering  wing  I  livfl^ 
And  share  the  bounties  she  has  still  to  give ; 
For  heav'n,  who  in  its  dispensations  joined 
A  narrow  fortune  to  a  noble  mind. 
Has  bless'd  the  sage  Urania  with  a  heart 
Which  wisdom's  noblest  treasures  can  impiut ; 


THE   SEARCH 

.u:tirfl  round.  .«j>d>yl< 

iput 

.t)>«i«hl«d.d*,ml^, 

WDT*  her  lut : 

■re, 

rhen  Ind.  FlonUi,  to  thM 

■ndciUnacd' 

II. 

Amldit  tha  tnlki  of  pobUe  UTe, 
Tlis  bdb  of  wnlth,  uibmoD't  itiilr, 

W«  Ion;  hire  mof ht  in  Tala  j 
Tlie  amtiad  <itft  mali]r  din. 
And  111  tlis  buy  kumM  of  mEn, 

Alfnd  but  are  ud  pain. 
111. 
PleaaVI  witli  tlw  hI^  tlw  HMtldno  po»a 


Come,  ttkfl  pa6Hail4i 
Andtlun/uav 


AFTEB  UAPPINBSS.  115 

ScKMB — The  Grove. 

Ubania,  Stlyia,  Bliza. 

Stlyu,  isinging.) 

I. 
Sweet  SoUtade,  fhoa  pladd  queen. 
Of  modest  air,  and  brow  serene  I 
'Tis  thou  inspir'st  the  aage^s  themes. 
The  poet's  i^slonary  dreams. 

II. 

Parent  of  yirtoe,  norse  of  thought ! 
By  thee  were  saints  and  patriarchs  taught } 
Wisdom  from  thee  her  treasures  drew. 
And  in  thy  lap  fitir  science  grew. 

III. 

VHiate'er  exalts,  refines,  and  charms, 
Inrites  to  thought;  to  virtue  warms ; 
Vrhate*er  is  perfect,  fair,  and  good, 
Vfe  owe  to  thee,  sweet  Solitude  I 

IV. 

In  these  blest  shades,  O  still  maintain 
Thy  peaceful,  unmolested  reign ! 
Let  no  disordered  thoughts  intrude 
On  thy  repose,  sweet  Si^tude ! 

V. 

With  thee  the  charm  of  life  shall  last. 
Although  its  rosy  Uoom  be  past ; 
Shall  still  endure  when  time  shall  spread 
His  silver  Uoesoms  o'er  my  head. 

VL 

No  more  with  this  vain  worid  perpiex'd. 
Thou  shalt  prepare  me  for  the  next ; 
The  springs  of  life  shall  gently  cease. 
And  angels  point  the  way  to  peace. 

Ur.  Ye  tender  objects  of  maternal  love. 
Ye  dearest  Joys  my  widow'd  heart  can  prove^ 
Come,  taste  the  glories  of  the  new-bom  day 
And  grateful  homage  to  its  autiior  pav  I 


Jar'iglxlHnc 


THE  SEABCH 

tidt  udmkting  il^t 
earn  wUlB  Ititatdi  delight  I 
BOD.  irhoH  chbOrlDf  beami  impArt 


inrolu  thy  D»rcl«»  imd  prudidiii  tbf  powtr. 

Khilt  than  Ihae  iKDeau  In  TBiD  bem«v  t 
Shall  we  forgat  the  FWiBtidn  wbenn  Ohit  flow ! 
Tssch  in  tbroDgh  tii«e  to  UK  our  heHta  to  Tlie 
And  tn  tha  gtft  the  boonteoiu  (^var  eae^ 
To  Tlenr  thee  u  Uun  ut,  iiU  good  and  wIk, 
Hot  let  th;  bltnaiiigi  hide  Thee  ftom  our  eyet. 
fViHO  kU  obitniotioiui  clou  oar  menUl  right  { 
FoDi  on  our  ualt  thr  bHUflii  light  I 
Taadi  oi  thy  wozidrous  goodnou  to  raTera* 
With  loie  to  wonhip,  and  with  reT'ienoe  fear ! 
la  Che  Diild  worki  oT  thy  benignaot  huid» 

Id  cornmoa  objectt  ire  oeglect  thy  power, 
VpliUe  wooden  ehlne  Id  every  plant  and  flower. 
Tell  me,  my  flnt,  my  Int.  my  duling  cub. 


Jpfo.  fatide  telhtta 


Ur.  Sat  irtwr*^  Floralla  1 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  117 

Flo,  Here's  the  happy  thOi 

Whom  Hearen  most  foroiir'd  when  H  gsre  her  thee. 

Ur,  But  who  are  these,  in  whose  attraetlye  mien. 
So  sweetly  Uended,  every  grace  is  seen  ? 
Speak,  my  FloireUa  1  say  the  canae  why  here 
These  beauteooa  damsels  on  onr  fdains  appear  ? 

Fh,  Invited  hither  by  Urania's  fiune. 
To  seek  her  friendship^  to  these  shades  they  came 
Straying  alcme  at  morning's  eaxiiest  dawn, 
I  met  them  wand*ring  on  the  distant  lawn. 
Their  courteoos  manners  soon  engaged  my  lore : 
Pye  brought  them  here  yonr  sage  advice  to  prove. 

Ur.  Tell  me,  ye  gentle  nymphs,  the  reason  tell, 
"Which  brings  snch  gnests  to  grace  my  lowly  cell  ? 
My  power  of  serving,  though  indeed  bat  snudl, 
Sndi  as  it  is,  yoo  may  command  it  all. 

Cte.  Toor  counsel,  your  advice,  is  all  we  ask ; 
And  for  Urania  that's  no  irksome  task. 
*Ti8  happiness  we  seek :  O  deign  to  tell 
Where  the  coy  fugitive  delights  to  dwell ! 

Ur,  Ah,  rather  say  where  you  have  sought  this  guests 
This  lovely  inmate  of  the  virtuous  breast  ? 
Declare  the  various  methods  you've  essay'd 
To  court  and  win  the  bright  celestial  maid. 
But  first,  though  harsh  the  task,  each  beauteous  fair 
Her  ruling  pasnon  must  with  truth  declare. 
Trom  evil  habits  own'd,  from  foults  confess'd. 
Alone  we  trace  the  secrets  of  the  breast. 

Eu,  Bred  in  the  regal  splendours  of  a  court, 
"Where  {deasures,  dress'd  in  every  shape,  resort, 
I  tried  the  power  of  pomp  and  costly  ^are. 
Nor  e'er  found  room  for  thought,  or  time  for  prayer : 
In  difPrent  follies  every  hour  I  spent ; 
I  shunn'd  reflection,  yet  I  sought  content. 
My  hours  were  shared  betwixt  the  park  and  play, 
And  music  serv'd  to  waste  the  tedious  day ; 
Yet  softest  airs  no  more  with  joy  I  heard. 
If  any  sweeter  warbler  was  preferr'd ; 
The  dance  succeeded,  and,  succeeding,  tired. 
If  some  more  graceful  dancer  were  admired. 
No  sounds  but  flatfry  ever  sooth'd  my  ear : 
Ungentle  truths  I  knew  not  how  to  bear. 
The  anxious  day  induced  the  sleepless  nigh^ 
And  my  vex'd  s^t  never  knew  delight. 


118  TH£  SEARCH 

Coy  pleasure  mock'd  me  with  delusive  diarms ; 
Still  the  thin  shadow  fled  my  elasping  arms : 
Or  if  some  actual  joy  I  seem*d  to  taste, 
Another^s  Measures  laid  my  Uesaiiigs  waste : 
One  truth  I  inrored,  that  lurking  envy  hides 
In  every  heart  where  vanity  fO'esides. 
A  fiurer  face  would  rob  my  soul  of  rest. 
And  fix  a  scorpion  in  my  wounded  hreast. 
Or,  if  my  elegance  of  form  prevailM, 
And  haply  her  inferior  graces  feil'd ; 
Yet  stUl  some  cause  of  wretchedness  I  found. 
Some  barbed  shaft  my  shatter'd  peace  to  wound. 
Peihaps  her  gay  attire  exceeded  mine- 
When  she  was  finer,  how  could  I  be  fine  ? 

SyL  Pardon  my  inteiruption,  beauteous  maid ! 
Can  truth  have  prompted  what  you  just  have  said  ? 
What !  can  the  poor  pre-emin«iee  of  dress 
Ease  the  pain'd  heart,  or  give  it  happiness  ? 
Or  can  you  think  your  robes,  though  rich  and  fin^ 
Possess  intrinsie  value  more  than  mine  ? 

Ur.  So  dose  our  nature  is  to  vice  allied. 
Our  very  comforts  are  the  source  of  pride ; 
And  dress,  so  much  oorrui^on  reigns  within, 
U  both  the  consequence  and  cause  of  sin. 

de.  Of  happiness  unfound  I  too  complain. 
Sought  in  a  diff  Yent  patli,  but  sought  in  vain ! 
I  sigh'd  for  fiune,  I  languish'd  for  renown, 
I  would  be  flattered,  praised,  admir*d,  and  kno^vn. 
On  daring  wing  my  mounting  q>irit  soar'd. 
And  science  through  her  boundless  fields  explored  * 
I  scom'd  the  Salique  laws  of  pedant  schools. 
Which  chain  our  genius  down  by  tasteless  rules : 
I  long*d  to  burst  these  female  bonds,  which  held 
My  sex  in  awe,  by  vanity  impell*d : 
To  boast  each  various  faculty  of  mind. 
Thy  graces,  Pope  I  with  Johnson's  learning  join*d : 
Like  Swift,  with  stron^y  pointed  ridicule. 
To  brand  the  villain,  and  abash  the  fool : 
To  judge  with  taste,  with  spirit  to  compose. 
Now  mount  in  epic,  now  descend  to  prose ; 
To  join,  like  Burke,  the  beauteous  and  sublime. 
Or  build,  with  Milton's  art,  "  the  lofty  rhyme ;" 
Through  &ncy's  fields  I  ranged ;  I  strove  to  hit 
Melmoth*s  chaste  style,  and  Priori  easy  wit : 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  119 

Thy  daado  graoM,  Masom  to  dtaplay. 

And  ooart  the  mnae  of  degy  with  Gray : 

I  raved  of  Shakipearo's  flame  and  Dryden's  rage. 

And  oTery  etarm  of  Otway'b  ineltiiig  page. 

I  talkM  by  rote  the  jargon  of  the  achoois, 

Of  critie  taiw«>  and  Aristotle's  roles ; 

Of  passion,  sentiment,  and  style,  and  grace. 

And  unities  of  action,  time,  and  place. 

The  daily  duties  of  my  Uie  fotgot. 

To  study  fietion,  incident,  and  fdot : 

Howe'er  the  oonduGt  of  my  Hfe  might  err. 

Still  my  dramatie  frians  were  reguhur. 

Ur.  Who  aims  at  every  sdenee  soon  will  find 
The  field  how  vast,  how  limited  the  mind  I 

Cle,  Abstroser  studies  soon  my  feney  caught. 
The  poet  in  th'  astronomer  forgot : 
The  schoolmen's  systems  now  my  mind  emi^oy'd; 
Their  crystal  spheres,  their  atoms  and  their  void  \ 
Newton  and  Halley  aU  my  soul  inspir'd. 
And  numbers  less  than  calculations  fired ; 
Descartes  and  EueUd  shar*d  my  varying  breast^ 
And  plans  and  problems  aU  my  soul  possess'd. 
Less  pleased  to  shig  inspiring  Phflsbus*  ray. 
Than  mark  the  fiaming  comets  deviiius  way. 
The  pale  moon  dancing  on  the  silver  stream. 
And  the  mild  lustre  of  her  trembling  beam. 
No  mcnre  could  charm  my  {diilosophic  pride^ 
Which  sought  her  influence  on  the  flowing  tide. 
No  more  ideal  beauties  fired  my  thoujj^ 
Which  only  facts  and  demcmstratkms  sought : 
Let  common  eyes,  I  said,  with  transport  view 
The  earth's  bright  verdure,  or  the  heaven's  soft  blue, 
Ealse  is  the  pleasure,  the  delight  is  vain. 
Colours  exist  but  in  the  vulgar  brain. 
I  now  with  Locke  trode  metiq[diysic  soil. 
Now  diased  coy  nature  tiurongh  the  tracts  of  Boyle : 
To  win  the  vnreath  of  fame,  by  science  twin'd. 
More  than  the  love  of  science  fir*d  my  mind. 
I  seiz'd  on  learning's  superfidal  part. 
And  title-page  and  index  got  by  heart ; 
Some  leam'd  authority  I  still  would  bring 
To  grace  my  talk,  and  prove— the  plainest  thing : 
This  the  chief  transpart  I  from  science  drew. 
That  aU  might  know  how  much  Qeora  knew. 


120  THE  SEARCH. 

Not  loye,  but  wonder,  I  aspir'd  to  raise, 
And  miss'd  affection,  while  I  grasp*d  at  praise. 

Pcu.  To  me,  no  joys  could  pomp  or  fome  impart  ( 
Far  softer  thoughts  possess'd  my  virgin  heart. 
No  prudent  parent  form'd  my  ductile  youth. 
Nor  led  my  footsteps  in  the  paths  of  truth. 
Left  to  myself  to  cultivate  my  mind. 
Pernicious  novels  their  soft  entrance  find : 
Their  pois*nous  influence  led  my  mind  astray : 
I  sighM  for  something,  what,  I  could  not  say. 
I  fiwcied  virtues  which  were  never  seen. 
And  died  for  heroes  who  have  never  been ; 
I  sickened  with  disgust  at  sober  sense, 
And  loath'd  the  pleasures  worth  and  truth  dispense; 
I  scomM  the  manners  of  the  world  I  saw ; 
My  guide  was  fiction,  and  romance  my  law. 
Distemper^  thoughts  my  wandVing  fiemcy  fill. 
Each  wind  a  zephyr,  and  each  brook  a  rill ; 
I  found  adventures  hi  each  common  tale. 
And  talked  and  sigh'd  to  evVy  pasdng  gale ;  . 
Conversed  with  echoes,  woods,  and  shades,  and  bow'rs. 
Cascades,  and  grottos,  fields,  and  streams,  and  tow"^. 
Retirement,  more  than  crowds,  had  leani*d  to  please ; 
For  treachVous  leisure  feeds  the  soft  disease. 
There,  plastic  fancy  ever  moulds  at  will 
Th*  obedient  image  with  a  dangerous  skill ; 
The  charming  fiction,  with  alluring  art, 
Awakes  the  passions,  and  infects  the  heart. 
A  fancied  heroine,  an  ideal  wife ; 
I  loath'd  the  offices  of  real  life. 
These  all  were  dull  and  tame,  I  long'd  to  prore 
The  gen'rous  ardours  of  unequal  love , 
Some  marvel  still  my  wayward  heart  must  strike^ 
Or  prince,  or  peasant,  each  had  charms  alike : 
Whatever  inverted  nature,  custom,  law 
With  joy  I  courted,  and  with  transport  saw : 
In  the  dull  walk  of  virtue's  quiet  round. 
No  aliment  my  fever'd  fcuicy  found. 
Each  duty  to  perform  observant  still. 
But  those  which  God  and  nature  bade  me  fiU. 

El.  (to  Urania. J  O  save  me  from  the  errors  oidectik^ 
And  ail  the  dangers  wealth  and  beauty  meet. 

Pas.  Reason  perverted,  fancy  on  her  throne^ 
My  soul  to  all  my  sex's  softness  prone ; 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  121 

I  neither  ipoke  nor  looV'd  as  mortal  ought ; 

To  sense  abandoned,  and  by  folly  taught : 

A  vicOm  to  imagination's  sway, 

Which  tUAe  my  health,  and  rest,  and  peace  away : 

Profesdom,  roid  of  meaning,  I  receiv'd. 

And  still  I  found  them  false— and  still  believ'd : 

Imagin*d  all  who  courted  me,  approved ; 

"Who  prats'd,  esteem*d  me ;  and  who  flattered,  lov'd. 

Fondly  I  hop^d,  (now  vain  those  hopes  appear,) 

Each  man  was  faithful,  and  each  maid  sincere. 

Still  disappointment  mock'd  the  lingering  day ; 

Still  new-bom  wishes  led  my  soul  astray. 

When  in  the  rolling  year  no  joy  I  find, 
I  trust  the  next,  the  next  will  sure  be  kind. 
The  next  fiillacious  as  the  last  appears. 
And  sends  me  on  to  still  remoter  years. 
They  come,  they  promise— but  forget  to  give : 
I  lire  not,  but  I  still  intend  to  liye. 

At  length,  deceiv'd  in  all  my  schemes  of  bliss, 
I  Joined  these  three  in  search  of  happiness. 

Ei.  Is  this  the  world  of  which  we  want  a  sight  ? 
Are  these  the  beings  who  are  call'd  polite  ? 

SyL  If  so,  oh  gracious  Heaven!  hear  Sylvia's  prayer: 
Preserve  me  still  in  humble  virtue  here  I 
Far  from  such  baneful  pleasures  may  I  live. 
And  keep,  O  keep  me,  from  the  taint  they  give ! 

JLou.  No  love  of  fame  my  torpid  bosom  warms, 
No  fimcy  soothes  me,  and  no  pleasure  charms  I 
Yet  still  remote  from  happiness  I  stray. 
No  guiding  star  illumes  my  trackless  way. 
My  mind,  nor  wit  misleads,  nor  passion  goads. 
But  the  dire  rust  of  indolence  corrodes ; 
This  eating  canker,  with  malignant  stealth. 
Destroys  the  vital  powers  of  moral  health. 

Till  now,  Fve  slept  on  life's  tumultuous  tide. 
No  principle  of  action  for  my  guide. 
From  ignorance  my  diief  misfortunes  flow ; 
I  never  wish'd  to  learn,  or  car'd  to  know. 
With  ev*ry  folly  slow-paced  time  beguil'd ; 
In  sice  a  woman,  but  in  soul  a  child. 
In  slothful  ease  my  moments  crept  away. 
And  busy  trifles  filPd  the  tedious  day ; 
I  liv'd  extempore,  as  fancy  fir^d. 
As  diance  directed,  or  caprice  inspired  t 

a 


122  THE  SEARCH 

Too  indolent  to  think,  too  weak  to  choose. 

Too  soft  to  blame,  too  gentle  to  refuse ; 

My  character  was  stamped  from  those  around  : 

The  figures  they,  my  mind  the  simple  ground. 

Fashion,  with  monstrous  forms,  the  canrass  stained. 

Till  nothing  of  my  genuine  self  remain'd ; 

My  pliant  soul  from  chance  receir'd  its  bent. 

And  neither  good  performed,  or  evil  meant. 

From  right  to  wrong,  from  vice  to  virtue  thrown. 

No  character  possessing  of  its  own. 

To  shun  fatigue  I  made  my  only  law  ; 

Yet  ev'ry  night  my  wasted  spirits  saw. 

Ko  plan  e'er  mark'd  the  duties  of  the  day. 

Which  stole  in  tasteless  apathy  away : 

No  energy  inform'd  my  languid  mind  I 

No  joy  the  idle  e'er  must  hope  to  find. 

Weak  indecision  all  my  actions  sway'd ; 

The  day  was  lost  before  the  choice  was  mado. 

Though  more  to  folly  than  to  guilt  inclined, 
A  drear  vacuity  possess'd  my  mind. 
Too  old  with  infant  sports  to  be  amus'd. 
Unfit  for  converse,  and  to  books  unus'd, 
The  wise  avoided  me,  they  could  not  hear 
My  senseless  prattle  with  a  patient  ear. 
I  sought  retreat,  but  found,  with  strange  surprise. 
Retreat  is  pleasant  only  to  the  wise ; 
The  crowded  world  by  vacant  minds  is  sought. 
Because  it  saves  th*  expense  and  pain  of  thought. 

Disgusted,  restless,  evVy  plan  amiss, 
1  come  with  these  in  search  of  happiness. 

Ur.  O  happy  they  for  whom,  in  early  age. 
Enlightening  knowledge  spreads  her  lettered  page ! 
Teaches  each  headstrong  passion  to  control. 
And  pours  her  lib'ral  lesson  on  the  soul  I 
Ideas  grow  from  books,  their  natural  food. 
As  aliment  is  chang'd  to  vital  blood. 
Though  feuthless  fortune  strip  her  vot*ry  bare. 
Though  malice  haunt  him,  and  though  envy  tear. 
Nor  time,  nor  chance,  nor  want,  can  e'er  destroy 
This  soul-felt  solace,  and  this  bosom  joy  ! 

Cle.  We,  thus  united  by  one  common  fate. 
Each  discontented  with  her  present  state. 
One  common  scheme  pursue :  resolv'd  to  know 
If  happiness  can  ne'er  be  found  below. 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  123 

Ur,  Tour  caadoar.  beauteous  damseb,  I  approve. 
Vour  foibles  pity,  and  your  merits  love. 
Bat  ere  I  say  the  methods  you  must  try 
To  gain  the  glorious  price  for  which  you  sigh, 
Your  fainting  strengUi  and  spirits  must  be  cheer'd 
With  a  plain  meal,  by  temperance  prepar'd. 

Flo.  No  loxory  our  humble  board  attends ; 
Bat  lore  and  concoird  are  its  smiling  friends. 


SONG. 
I. 
Hail,  artless  Simplidty,  beautiful  maid. 
In  the  genuine  attractions  of  nature  arrayed ; 
Let  the  rich  and  the  proud,  and  the  gay  and  the  vain, 
Still  laugh  at  the  graces  that  move  in  thy  train. 

II. 

No  charm  in  thy  modest  allurements  they  find ; 
The  pleasures  they  follow  a  sting  leave  behind. 
Can  criminal  passion  enrapture  the  breast 
Like  virtue,  with  peace  and  serenity  blest  ? 

III. 

O  would  you  Simplicity's  precepts  attend. 

Like  us,  with  delight  at  her  altar  youM  bend. 

The  pleasures  she  yields  would  with  joy  be  embraced ; 

Yoa*d  practise  from  virtue,  and  love  them  from  taste. 

IV. 

The  linnet  enchants  us  the  bushes  among : 
Though  dieap  the  musidan,  yet  sweet  is  the  song ; 
We  catch  the  soft  warbling  in  air  as  it  fioats. 
And  with  ecstasy  hang  on  the  ravishing  notes. 

V. 

Our  water  is  drawn  from  the  clearest  of  springs, 
And  our  food,  nor  disease  nor  satiety  brings ; 
Our  mornings  are  cheerful,  our  labours  are  blest, 
Ourev'ningsare  pleasant,  our  nights  crown'd  with  rest 

VI. 

From  our  culture  yon  garden  its  ornament  finds. 
And  we  catch  at  the  hint  for  improving  our  minds  | 


124  THE  SEARCH 

To  lire  to  some  purpose  we  constantly  try, 
And  we  mark  by  our  actions  the  days  as  they  fly. 

VII. 

Since  such  are  the  joys  that  Simplidty  yields. 
We  may  well  be  content  with  our  woods  and  our  fields : 
How  useless  to  us  then,  ye  great,  were  your  health. 
When  without  it  we  purchase  both  pleasure  and  health ! 

[  They  retire  into  the  cottage. 

Scene — A  rural  Entertainment. 

Florblla,  Euphelia,  Cleora,  Laurinda,  Pastorella* 

Florblla  {sings.) 

I. 

Wliile  beauty  and  pleasure  are  now  in  their  prime, 
And  folly  and  fashion  expect  our  whole  time. 
Ah  !  let  not  those  phantoms  our  wishes  engage ; 
Let  us  live  so  in  youth,  that  we  blush  not  in  age. 

II. 

Though  the  vain  and  the  gay  may  allure  us  a  while, 
Yet  let  not  their  flatt'ry  our  prudence  beguile ; 
Let  us  covet  those  charms  that  will  never  decay. 
Nor  listen  to  all  that  deceivers  can  say. 

III. 

"  How  the  tints  of  the  rose  and  the  jasmine's  perfume  ! 
**  The  eglantine's  fragrance,  the  lilac's  gay  bloom, 
*'  Though  fair  and  though  fragrant  unheeded  may  lie, 
*'  For  that  neither  is  sweet  when  FloreUa  is  by.*' 

IV. 

I  sigh  not  for  beauty,  nor  languish  for  wealth, 
But  grant  me,  kind  Providence,  virtue  and  health ; 
Then,  richer  than  kings,  and  as  happy  as  they. 
My  days  shall  pass  sweetly  and  swiftly  away. 

V. 

When  age  shall  steal  on  me,  and  youth  is  no  more. 
And  the  moralist  Time  shakes  his  glass  at  my  door. 
What  charm  in  lost  beauty  or  wealth  should  I  find  ? 
My  treasure,  my  wealth,  is  a  sweet  peace  of  mind. 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  125 

VI. 

That  p«ace  111  preserve  then,  as  pure  as  was  giyen. 
And  taste  in  my  bosom  an  earnest  of  heaven ; 
Thus  virtue  and  wisdom  can  warm  the  cold  scene, 
And  dxty  may.  flourish  as  gay  as  sixteen. 

VII. 
And  when  long  I  the  burden  of  life  shall  have  borne. 
And  death  with  his  siclde  shall  cut  the  ripe  com. 
Resigned  to  my  iate,  without  murmur  or  sigh, 
111  bless  the  kind  summons,  and  lie  down  and  die. 

Eu.  Thus  sweetly  pass  the  hours  of  rural  ease  ! 
Here  life  is  bliss,  and  pleasures  truly  please ! 

Pat.  With  joy  we  view  the  dangers  we  have  post, 
Assur'd  we've  found  felicity  at  last. 

Flo.  Esteem  none  happy  by  their  outward  air ; 
All  have  their  portion  of  allotted  care. 
Though  wisdom  wears  the  semblance  of  content. 
When  the  full  heart  with  agony  is  rent. 
Secludes  its  anguish  from  the  public  view. 
And  by  secluding  learns  to  conquer  too  : 
Denied  the  fond  indulgence  to  complain. 
The  aching  heart  its  peace  may  best  regain. 
By  love  directed,  and  in  mercy  meant. 
Are  trials  suffer'd  and  afflictions  sent ; 
To  stem  impetuous  passion's  furious  tide. 
To  curb  the  insolence  of  prosp'rous  pride. 
To  wean  from  earth,  and  bid  our  wishes  soar 
To  that  blest  clime  where  pain  shall  be  no  more  ; 
Where  wearied  virtue  shall  for  refuge  fly. 
And  ev'ry  tear  be  wip'd  from  ev'ry  eye. 

CZe.  List'ning  to  you,  my  heart  can  never  cease 
To  rev'rence  virtue,  and  to  sigh  for  peace. 

Flo.  Know,  e'en  Urania,  that  accomplish'd  fair, 
Whose  goodness  makes  her  HeavVs  peculiar  care. 
Though  bom  to  all  that  affluence  can  bestow, 
Has  felt  the  deep  reverse  of  human  wo ; 
Yet  meek  in  grief,  and  patient  in  distress,  ^ 
She  knew  the  hand  that  wounds  has  powY  to  blesa 
Grateful  she  bows,  for  what  is  left  her  still. 
To  Him  whose  love  dispenses  good  and  ill ; 
To  Him  who,  while  his  bounty  thousands  fed. 
Had  not  himself  a  plac^  to  lay  his  head ; 


126  THE  SEARCH 

To  Him  who,  that  he  might  our  wealth  insure, 
Thoogh  rich  liimself,  consented  to  be  poor. 
Taught  by  his  precepts,  by  his  practice  taught. 
Her  will  submitted,  and  resigned  her  thought, 
Through  faith,  she  looks  beyond  this  dark  abode 
To  scenes  of  glory  near  the  throne  of  God. 

Enter  Urania,  Sylvia,  Eliza. 

Ur.  Since,  gentle  nymphs,  my  friendship  to  obtain, 
YouVe  sought  with  eager  step  this  peaceful  plain. 
My  honest  counsel  with  attention  hear, 
Though  pkun,  well  meant,  imperfect,  yet  sincere ; 
What  from  maturer  years  alone  Tve  known. 
What  time  has  taught  me,  and  experience  shewn ; 
No  polished  phrase  my  artless  speech  will  grace. 
But  unaffected  candour  fill  its  place : 
My  lips  shall  flatt*ry*s  smooth  deceit  refuse ; 
And  truth  be  all  the  eloquence  I'll  use. 
Know  then,  that  lifers  chief  happiness  and  wo. 
From  good  or  evil  education  flow ; 
And  hence  our  future  dispositions  rise ; 
The  vice  we  practise,  or  the  good  we  prize. 
When  pliant  nature  any  form  receires. 
That  precept  teaches,  or  example  gives, 
JThe  yielding  mind  with  virtue  should  be  graced. 
For  first  impressions  seldom  are  effaced. 
Then  holy  habits,  then  chastis'd  desires. 
Should  regulate  disordered  nature's  fires. 
If  ignorance  then  her  iron  sway  maintain. 
If  prejudice  preside,  or  passion  reign. 
If  vanity  preserve  her  native  sway. 
If  selfish  tempers  cloud  the  op'ning  day. 
If  no  kind  hand  impetuous  pride  restrain. 
But  for  the  wholesome  curb  we  give  the  rein ; 
The  erring  principle  is  rooted  fast 
And  fix'd  the  habit  that  tiiroogh  life  may  last. 

Pas.  With  heartfelt  penitence  we  now  deiriore 
Those  squander'd  hours,  that  time  can  ne'er  restore. 

Ur.  Euphelia  sighs  for  flattery,  dress,  and  show : 
Too  common  sources  these  of  female  wo  I 
In  beauty's  sphere  pre-eminence  to  find. 
She  slights  the  culture  of  th*  immortal  mind : 
I  would  not  rail  at  beauty's  charming  powV, 
I  would  but  have  her  aim  at  sometiiing  more ; 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  127 

The  fiiirert  tymmetry  of  form  or  fiuse, 
FWun  intelleet  raceiyM  its  highett  grace : 
The  brightest  eyes  ne*er  dart  such  piercing  fires 
As  when  a  soul  irradiates  and  inspires. 
Beauty  with  reason  needs  not  quite  dispense. 
And  coral  lips  may  sore  speak  common  sense ; 
Beauty  makes  virtue  lovelier  still  appear ; 
A^rtne  makes  beauty  more  divinely  flair  1 
Confirms  its  conquest  o*er  the  willing  mind. 
And  those  your  beauties  gain,  your  virtues  bind. 
Yet  would  ambition's  fire  your  bosom  fill. 
Its  fiame  rejnrese  not— be  ambitious  still ; 
Let  nobler  views  your  best  attention  claim. 
The  object  changed,  the  energy  the  same : 
Those  very  pas8i<ms  wliich  our  hearts  invade. 
If  rightly  pointed,  blessings  may  be  made. 
Indulge  the  true  ambition  to  excel 
In  that  best  art— the  art  of  living  well. 
But  first  extirpate  from  your  youthful  breast 
That  rankling  torment  which  destroys  your  rest : 
All  other  faults  may  take  a  higher  aim, 
But  hopeless  envy  must  be  still  the  same. 
Some  other  passions  may  be  tum'd  to  good. 
But  envy  must  subdue,  or  be  subdued. 
This  fstal  gangrene  to  our  m<H^  life, 
R^ects  all  palliatives,  and  asks  the  laiife ; 
Excisi<m  spared,  it  taints  the  vital  part. 
And  spreads  its  deadly  venom  to  the  heart. 

Eu,  Unhiq>py  those  to  bliss  who  seek  the  way 
In  powV  superior,  or  in  splendour  gay ! 
Inform'd  by  thee,  no  more  vain  man  shall  find 
The  charm  of  flattery  taint  Euphelia*s  mind : 
By  thee  instructed,  still  my  views  shall  rise, 
Nor  stop  at  any  mark  beneath  the  skies. 

Ur,  In  fair  Laurinda's  uninstructed  mind. 
The  want  of  culture,  not  of  sense,  we  find. 
Whene'er  you  sought  the  good,  or  shunn'd  the  ill, 
*Twas  more  from  temper  than  from  principle : 
Your  random  life  to  no  just  rules  reduced, 
*Twas  chance  the  virtue  or  the  vice  produced. 
The  casual  goodness  ImptUte  has  to  boast, 
like  morning  dews,  or  transient  showers,  is  lost ; 
While  heav'n-taught  virtue  pours  her  constant  tide. 
Like  steams  by  Uving  fountains  still  supplied. 


128  THE  SEARCH 

Be  wisdom  still,  though  late,  your  earnest  care. 
Nor  waste  the  preaous  hours  in  vain  despair : 
Associate  with  the  good,  attend  the  sage. 
And  meekly  listen  to  experienced  age, 
"What,  if  acquirements  you  have  fail*d  to  gain, 
Such  as  the  wise  may  want,  the  bad  attun ; 
Yet  still  Religion's  sacred  treasures  lie 
Inviting,  open,  plain  to  ev'ry  eye ; 
For  ev'ry  age,  for  ev'ry  genius  fit. 
Nor  limited  to  science  nor  to  wit ; 
Not  bound  by  taste,  to  genius  not  confin'd, 
But  all  may  learn  tiie  truths  for  all  designM. 
Though  low  the  talents,  and  th^  acquirements  small, 
The  gift  of  grace  divine  is  free  to  all ; 
She  calls,  solidts,  courts  you  to  be  blest. 
And  points  to  mansions  of  eternal  rest. 

And  when,  advanced  in  years,  matured  in  sense. 
Think  not  with  farther  care  you  may  dispense ; 
'Tis  fatal  to  the  interests  of  the  soul 
To  stop  the  race  before  we've  reach'd  the  goal ; 
For  nought  our  higher  progress  can  preclude 
So  much  as  thinking  we're  already  good. 
The  human  heart  ne'er  knows  a  state  of  rest ; 
Bad  leads  to  worse,  and  better  tends  to  best. 
We  either  gain  or  lose,  we  sink  or  rise. 
Nor  rests  our  struggling  nature  till  she  dies ; 
Then  place  the  standard  of  perfection  high ; 
Pursue  and  grasp  it,  e'en  beyond  the  sky. 

Lou,  Oh,  that  important  Time  could  back  return 
Those  mis-spent  hours  whose  loss  I  deeply  mourn ! 
Accept,  just  Heav'n,  my  penitence  sincere. 
My  heartfelt  anguish,  and  my  fervent  prayY. 

Ura.  I  pity  Fastorella's  hapless  fate. 
By  nature  gentle,  generous,  mild,  and  great : 
One  false  propension  all  her  powers  confin'd. 
And  chain'd  her  finer  faculties  of  mind ; 
Yet  ev'ry  virtue  might  have  flourished  there 
With  early  culture  and  maternal  care. 
If  good  we  plant  not,  vice  will  fill  the  place, 
And  rankest  weeds  the  richest  soils  deface. 
Leam  how  ungovem'd  thoughts  the  mind  pervert. 
And  to  disease  all  nourishment  convert. 
Ah !  happy  she,  whose  wisdom  learns  to  find 
A  healthful  fancy,  and  a  well-train'd  mind  1 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  120 

A  dek  inMi*8  wildest  dreams  less  wild  are  found 
Than  the  day-Tlsions  of  a  miiid  unsound. 
Disorder'd  phantasies  indulged  too  much. 
Like  harpies,  alvrays  taint  whate'er  they  touch. 
Fly  soothing  solitude  I  fly  vain  desire  I 
Fly  such  soft  verse  as  fans  the  dangerous  fire ! 
Seek  action ;  *tis  the  scene  which  virtue  loves : 
The  vigYous  sun  not  only  shines,  but  moves. 
From  sickly  thoughts  with  quick  abhorrence  start* 
And  rule  the  ftncy  if  you'd  rule  the  heart : 
By  active  goodness,  by  laborious  schemes. 
Subdue  wild  visions  and  delusive  dreams, 
No  earthly  good  a  Christian's  views  should  bound. 
For  ever  rising  should  his  aims  be  found. 
Leave  that  fictitious  good  your  fancy  feigns 
For  scenes  where  real  bliss  eternal  reigns : 
Look  to  that  region  of  immortal  joys. 
Where  feat  disturbs  not,  nor  possession  cloys : 
Beyond  what  fency  forms  of  rosy  bow'rs. 
Or  blooming  chaplets  of  nn£Euling  flowers ; 
Fairer  than  e'er  imagination  drew. 
Or  poet's  warmest  visions  ever  knew. 
Press  eager  onward  to  those  blissful  plains 
Where  life  eternal,  joy  perpetual  reigns. 

Peu.  I  mourn  the  errors  of  my  thoughtless  youth 
And  kmg,  with  thee,  to  tread  the  paths  of  truth. 

Ura,  Learning  is  all  the  bright  Oeora^  aim ; 
She  seeks  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of  fame ; 
On  interdicted  ground  presumes  to  stand. 
And  grasps  at  sdence  with  a  ventVous  hand : 
The  privilege  of  man  she  dares  invade, 
And  tears  the  chaplet  from  his  laurel'd  head. 
Why  found  her  merit  on  a  foreign  daim  ? 
Why  lose  a  substance,  to  acquire  a  name  ? 
Let  the  proud  sex  possess  their  vaunted  powVs ; 
Be  other  triumphs,  other  glories,  ours  I 
The  gentler  charms  which  wait  on  female  life. 
Which  grace  the  daughter  and  adorn  the  wife. 
Be  these  our  boast ;  yet  these  may  well  admit 
Of  various  knowledge,  and  of  blameless  wit : 
Of  sense,  resulting  from  a  nurtur'd  mind. 
Of  polish'd  converse,  and  of  taste  refin'd : 
Of  that  quick  intuition  of  the  best, 
WUch  feels  the  graceful,  and  rct}ects  the  rest  i 

02 


130  THE  SEARCH 

Which  finds  tbe  right  by  shOTter  ways  than  rales : 
An  art  which  nator*  teaches— not  the  schools, 
Thus  conq'ring  S^vign6  the  heart  obtains. 
While  Dader  only  admiration  gains. 

Know,  fear  aspirer,  could  yon  evra  hope 
To  speak  like  Stonhoose,  or  to  write  like  Pope, 
To  all  the  wcmders  of  the  poet's  lyre. 
Join  all  that  taste  can  add,  or  wit  inspire. 
With  evVy  Tarioos  pow'r  of  learning  fraught. 
The  flow  of  style,  and  the  sublime  of  thought ; 
Yet,  if  the  milder  graces  of  the  mind, 
Graces  peculiar  to  the  sex  design'd. 
Good-nature,  patioice,  sweetness  void  of  art ; 
If  these  embellit>h*d  not  your  virgin  heart. 
You  might  be  dazzling,  but  not  truly  bright ; 
Might  glare,  but  not  emit  a  useful  light ; 
A  meteor,  not  a  star,  you  would  appear ; 
For  woman  shines  but  in  her  proper  sj^ere. 
Accomplishments  by  hea7*n  were  sure  designM 
Less  to  adorn  than  to  amend  the  mind ; 
Each  should  epntribute  to  this  gen*ral  end. 
And  all  to  virtue,  as  their  centre,  tend. 
Th*  acquirements  which  our  best  esteem  invite. 
Should  not  project,  but  soften,  mix,  unite : 
In  glaring  light  not  strongly  be  display'd. 
But  sweetly  lost,  and  melted  into  shade. 

Cleo.  Confus'd  with  shame,  to  thy  reproofe  I  bend. 
Thou  best  adviser,  and  thou  truest  friend  ! 
From  thee  HI  learn  to  judge  and  act  aright. 
Humility  with  knowledge  to  unite : 
The  finished  character  must  both  combine. 
The  perfect  woman  must  in  either  shine. 

Ur.  Florella  shines  adom*d  with  every  grace. 
Her  heart  all  virtue,  as  all  charms  her  foce : 
Above  the  wretched,  and  below  the  great. 
Kind  heav'n  has  fix*d  her  in  a  middle  state ; 
The  demon  fashion  never  warp*d  her  soul. 
Her  passions  move  at  piety^s  control : 
Her  eyes  the  movements  of  her  heart  declare. 
For  what  she  dares  to  be,  she  dares  appear ; 
Unlector'd  in  dissimulation's  school. 
To  smile  by  precept,  and  to  blush  by  rule : 
Her  thoughts  ingenuous,  ever  open  lie. 
Not  shrink  from  close  inspection's  keenest  eye ; 


AFTER  HAPPINESS.  131 

No  dark  diBgulae  about  her  heart  is  throtm ; 
*Tis  Tfatae^  interest  folly  to  be  known ; 
Her  natVal  sweetness  erVy  heart  obtains ; 
What  art  and  affectation  miss,  she  gains. 
She  smooths  the  path  of  my  declining  years. 
Augments  my  comforts,  and  divides  my  cares. 

Ptu,  O  sacred  friendship  I  O  exalted  state ! 
The  choicest  bounty  of  indulgent  fate ! 

Ur»  Let  woman  then  her  real  good  discern, 
And  her  true  interests  of  Urania  learn : 
As  some  foir  violet,  loveliest  of  the  glade, 
Sieds  its  mild  fragrance  on  the  lonely  shade. 
Withdraws  its  modest  head  from  public  sight, 
Nor  courts  the  sun,  nor  seeks  the  glare  of  light ; 
Should  some  rude  hand  profanely  dare  intrude. 
And  bear  its  beauties  from  its  native  wood. 
Exposed  abroad  its  languid  colours  fly. 
Its  form  decays,  and  all  its  odours  die ; 
So  woman,  bom  to  dignify  retreat. 
Unknown  to  flouridi,  and  unseen  be  great, 
To  give  domestic  life  its  sweetest  charm. 
With  softness  polish,  and  virith  virtue  warm. 
Fearful  of  fome,  unwilling  to  be  known, 
Should  seek.but  Heaven's  applauses,  and  her  own ; 
Hers  be  the  task  to  seek^e  lonely  cell 
Where  modest  want  and  silent  anguish  dwell ; 
Raise  the  weak  head,  sustain  the  feeble  knees. 
Cheer  the  cold  heart,  and  chase  the  dire  disease. 
The  splendid  deeds,  which  only  seek  a  name, 
Are  paid  their  just  reward  in  present  fame ; 
But  know,  the  aw/ul,  all-disclosing  day. 
The  long  arrear  of  secret  worth  shall  pay ; 
Applauding  saints  shall  hear  with  fond  regard. 
And  He,  who  witness'd  here,  shall  there  reward. 

Eu.  With  added  grace  she  pleads  religion's  cause, 
Who  from  her  life  her  virtuous  lesson  draws. 

Ur,  In  vain,  ye  fair,  from  place  to  place  you  roam. 
For  that  true  peace  which  must  be  found  at  home : 
Nor  change  of  fortune,  nor  of  scene  can  give 
The  bliss  you  seek,  which  in  the  soul  must  live. 
Then  look  no  more  abroad,  in  your  own  breast 
Seek  the  true  seat  of  happiness  and  rest. 
Nor  small,  my  friends !  the  vigilance  I  ask ; ' 
Watch  well  yourselves,  this  is  the  Christian^  task. 


132     THE  SEARCH  AFTER  HAPPINESa 

The  cherlsh'd  sin  by  each  most  be  assail'd. 
New  efforts  added,  where  the  past  have  faSTd : 
The  darUog  error  check'd,  tiie  will  subdued. 
The  heart  by  penitence  and  prayer  renew'd. 
Nor  hope  for  perfect  happiness  below ; 
Celestial  plants  on  earth  reluctant  grow : 
He  who  our  frail  mortality  did  bear, 
Though  free  from  sin,  was  not  exempt  from  care. 

Ge.  Let*8  join  to  bless  that  Power  who  brought  us 
here. 
Adore  his  goodness,  and  his  will  revere ; 
Assured,  that  peace  exists  but  in  the  mind. 
And  piety  alone  that  peace  can  find. 

Ur.  In  its  true  light  this  transient  life  regard : 
This  is  a  state  of  trial,  not  reward. 
Though  rough  the  passage,  peaceful  is  the  port, 
The  bliss  is  perfect,  the  probation  short. 
Of  human  wit  beware  the  fatal  pride ; 
A  useful  follower,  but  a  dang'rous  guide : 
On  holy  faith*s  aspiring  pinions  rise ; 
Assert  your  birthright,  and  assume  the  skies. 

Fountain  of  Being !  teach  us  to  devote 
To  Thee  each  purpose,  action,  word,  and  thought ! 
Thy  grace  our  hope,  thy  love  our  only  boast. 
Be  all  distinctions  in  the  Christian  lost ! 
Be  this  in  ev'ry  state  our  wish  alone, 
Almighty,  Wise,  and  Good,  Thy  will  be  done ! 


ODE  TO  CHARITY. 

TO  BE  PERFORMED  BY  THE  CHARACTERS 
OF  THE  PIECE. 


I. 

O  Charitt,  divinely  wise, 
Thou  meek-ey'd  daughter  of  the  skies  I 
From  the  pore  fountain  of  eternal  light. 
Where,  fair,  immutable,  and  ever  bright^ 
The  beatific  vision  shines. 
Where  angel  with  archangel  joins 
In  choral  songs  to  sing  His  praise. 
Parent  of  life.  Ancient  of  days. 
Who  was  ere  time  existed,  and  shall  be 
Through  the  wide  round  of  vast  eternity ; 
Oh  come,  thy  warm  celestial  beams  impart. 
Enlarge  my  feelings,  and  expand  my  heart  I 

II. 

Descend  from  radiant  realms  above. 
Thou  eflSuence  of  that  boundless  love 
Whence  joy  and  peace  in  streams  unsullied  flow. 
Oh  deign  to  make  thy  lov*d  abode  below  I 

Though  sweeter  strains  adorned  my  tongue 
Than  s^nt  conceiv'd  or  seraph  sung. 
And  though  my  glowing  fancy  caught 
Whatever  art  or  nature  taught. 
Yet  if  this  hard  unfeeling  heart  of  mine 
Ne'er  felt  thy  force,  O  charity  divine ! 
An  empty  shadow  science  would  be  found  : 
My  knowledge  ignorance,  my  wit  a  sound  I 

III. 

Though  my  prophetic  spirit  knew 

To  bring  futurity  to  view. 
Without  thy  aid  e*en  this  would  nought  avail. 
Fur  tongues  shall  cease,  and  prophecies  shall  fail. 


134  ODE  TO  CHARITY. 

Come  then,  thoa  sweet  immortal  guest. 
Shed  thy  soft  influence  o*er  my  breast, 
Bring  with  thee  f^^  divinely  bright. 
And  hope,  fahr  harb^er  of  light. 
To  clear  each  mist  with  their  pervading  ray 
To  fit  my  soul  for  heaven,  and  point  the  way ; 
There  perfect  happiness  her  sway  maintains  j 
For  there  the  Qod  of  peace  for  ever  reigns. 


PREFACE 

TO 

THE  TRAOEDIES. 


I  AM  derirooa  to  antidpate  a  censure  which  the  critical 
reader  will  be  ready  to  bring  forward  on  the  apparent 
inconristency  between  the  contents  of  this  volume,  com- 
posed of  dramatic  pieces,  and  several  sentiments  not  un- 
firequently  introduced  in  some  of  the  other  volumes, 
respecting  the  dangerous  tendency  of  certain  public 
amusements,  in  which  dramatic  entertainments  will  be 
naturally  included.  The  candid  reader  will  be  able  to 
•dre  the  paradox,  when  it  is  intimated  at  what  different 
periods  of  life  these  different  pieces  were  written.  The 
dates,  if  they  were  regularly  preserved,  would  explain 
tiiatthe  seeming  disagreement  does  not  involve  a  contra- 
diction, as  it  proceeds  not  from  an  inconsistency,  but 
from  a  revolution  in  the  sentiments  of  the  author. 

FVom  my  youthful  course  of  reading,  and  early  habits 
of  society  and  conversation,  aided,  perhaps,  by  that  na- 
tural but  secret  bias  which  the  incUnation  gives  to  the 
judgment,  I  had  been  led  to  entertain  that  common,  but, 
as  I  must  now  think,  delusive  and  groundless  hope,  that 
the  stage,  under  certain  r^ulations,  might  be  converted 
into  a  school  of  virtue ;  and  thus,  like  many  others,  in- 
ferred, by  a  seemingly  reasonable  conclusion,  that  though 
a  bad  play  would  always  be  a  bad  thing,  yet  the  repre- 
sentation of  a  good  one  might  become  not  only  harmless, 
but  useful ;  and  that  it  required  nothing  more  than  a 
correct  Judgment  and  a  critical  selection,  to  transform  a 
pemidous  pleasure  into  a  profitable  entertainment. 

On  these  grounds,  (while,  perhaps,  as  was  intimated 
above,  it  vms  nothing  more  than  the  indulgence  of  a 
propensity,)  I  was  led  to  flatter  myself  it  might  be  ren- 
dering that  inferior  service  to  sodety  which  the  fabri- 
cator of  safe  and  innocent  amusements  may  reasonably 


136  PREFACE. 

be  supposed  to  confer,  to  attempt  some  theatrical  com- 
positions, which,  whatever  other  defects  might  be  justly 
imputable  to  them,  should  at  least  be  found  to  have  been 
written  on  the  side  of  virtue  and  modesty ;  and  which 
should  neither  hold  out  any  corrupt  image  to  the  mind, 
nor  any  impure  description  to  the  fancy. 

As  the  following  pieces  were  written  and  performed 
at  an  early  period  of  my  life,  under  the  above  impres- 
sions, I  feel  it  a  kind  of  duty  (imploring  pardon  for  the 
unavoidable  egotism  to  which  it  leads,)  not  to  send  them 
afresh  into  the  world  in  this  collection,  without  prefixing 
to  them  a  candid  declaration  of  my  altered  view.  In  so 
doing,  I  am  fully  aware  that  I  equally  subject  myself  to 
the  opposite  censures  of  two  different  classes  of  readers, 
one  of  which  will  think  that  the  best  evidence  of  my  sin- 
cerity would  have  been  the  suppression  of  the  tragedies 
themselves,  while  the  other  will  reprobate  the  change  of 
sentiment  which  gives  birth  to  the  qualifying  prefoce. 

I  should,  perhaps,  have  been  inclined  to  adopt  the  first 
of  these  two  opinions,  had  it  not  occurred  to  me  that  the 
suppression  would  be  thought  disingenuous ;  and  had  I 
not  been  also  desirous  of  grounding  on  the  publication, 
though  in  a  very  cursory  manner,  my  sentiments  on  the 
general  tendency  of  the  drama ;  for  it  appeared  but  fair 
and  candid  to  include  in  this  view  my  own  compositions ; 
and  thus,  in  some  measure,  though  without  adverting  to 
them,  to  involve  myself  in  the  general  object  of  my  own 
animadversions. 

I  am  not  even  now  about  to  controvert  the  assertion 
of  some  of  the  ablest  critics,  that  a  well- written  tragedy 
is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  noblest  efforts  of  the  human  mind 
— I  am  not  even  now  about  to  deny,  that  of  all  public 
amusements,  it  is  the  most  interesthig,  the  most  intel- 
lectual, and  the  most  accommodated  to  the  tastes  and 
capacities  of  a  rational  being ;  nay,  that  it  is  almost  the 
only  one  which  has  mind  for  its  object :  which  has  the 
combined  advantage  of  addressing  itself  to  the  imagina- 
tion, the  judgment,  and  the  heart ;  that  it  is  the  only 
public  diversion  which  calls  out  the  higher  energies  of 
the  understanding  in  the  composition,  and  awakens  the 
most  lively  and  natural  feeUngs  of  the  heart  in  the  re- 
presentation.   • 

With  all  this  decided  superiority  in  point  of  mental  plea- 
sure which  the  stage  possesses  over  every  other  species 


PREFACE.  137 

of  pubtte  enfeertainment,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
its  admiren  and  adrocates,  even  the  most  respectable, 
■hoald  dierish  a  hope,  that,  under  certain  restrictions, 
and  under  an  improved  form,  it  might  be  made  to  contri- 
bote  to  instroction  as  well  as  to  pleasure ;  and  it  is  on 
this  plausible  ground  that  we  have  heard  so  many  ingen- 
ious defences  of  this  species  of  amusement. 

What  the  stage  might  be  under  another  and  an  imag- 
inary state  of  tilings,  it  is  not  very  easy  for  us  to  know, 
and  therefore  not  very  important  to  inquire.  Nor  is  it, 
faidaed,  the  soundest  logic  to  ai^^e  on  the  possible  good- 
ness of  a  thing,  which,  in  the  present  circumstances  of 
sodety,  is  doing  positive  evil,  from  the  imagined  good 
tiiat  thing  might  be  conjectured  to  produce  in  a  supposed 
state  of  unattainable  improvement  Would  it  not  be 
more  safe  and  simple  to  determine  our  judgment  as  to 
the  character  of  the  thing  in  question,  on  the  more  visi- 
ble, and  therefore  more  rational  grounds  of  its  actual 
sti^  and  from  the  effects  which  it  is  known  to  produce 
in  that  state? 

For,  unfortunately,  this  Utopian  good  cannot  be  pro- 
doced,  until  not  only  the  stage  itself  has  undergone  a 
complete  purification,  but  until  the  audience  shall  be 
purified  also.  For  we  must  first  suppose  a  state  of  so- 
dety in  which  the  spectators  will  be  disposed  to  relish 
all  that  is  pure,  and  to  reprobate  all  that  is  corrupt,  be- 
fore the  system  of  a  pure  and  uncorrupt  theatre  can  be 
adopted  with  any  reasonable  hope  of  success.  There 
must  always  be  a  congruity  between  the  taste  of  the 
spectator  and  the  nature  of  the  qpectade,  in  order  to  effect 
that  p<^t  of  union  which  can  produce  pleasure :  for  it 
must  be  remembered  that  people  go  to  a  play,  not  to  be 
hutntctedf  but  to  be  plecued.  As  we  do  not  send  the 
blind  to  an  exhibition  of  pictures,  nor  the  deaf  to  a  ccm- 
oert,  so  it  would  be  leaving  the  projected  plan  of  a  pure 
stage  in  a  state  of  imperfection,  unless  the  general  cor- 
ruption of  human  nature  itself  were  so  reformed,  as  to 
render  the  amusements  of  a  perfectly  purified  stage  pa- 
latable. If  the  sentiments  and  passions  exhibited  were  no 
longer  accommodated  to  the  sentiments  and  passions  of 
the  audience,  corrupt  nature  would  soon  withdraw  itself 
from  the  v^id  and  inappropriate  amusement ;  and  thin, 
I  will  not  say  empty,  benches  would  too  probably  be  the 
reward  of  the  consdentious  reformer. 


138  PREFACE. 

Far  be  it  from  me  to  wish  to  restore  that  obsolete  mb. 
Msh  of  ignorance  and  folly  with  which  the  monkish  leg- 
ends furnish  oat  the  rude  materials  of  oar  early  drama  t 
I  mean  those  uncouth  pieces,  in  whidi,  under  the  titles 
of  mysteries  and  moralities^  the  most  sacred  persons  were 
introduced  as  interlocutors ;  in  which,  events  too  solemn 
for  exhibition,  and  sufaijects  too  awful  for  detail,  were 
brought  before  the  audience  with  a  formal  gravity  more 
offennve  than  levity  itself.  The  superstitions  of  the 
doister  were  considered  as  suitable  topics  for  the  diver- 
sions of  the  stage ;  and  celestial  intelligences,  uttering 
the  sentiments  and  language,  and  blended  with  the  buf- 
fooneries, of  Bartholomew  fair,  were  regarded  as 
appropriate  subjects  of  merry-making  for  a  holiday  au- 
dience. But  from  this  holy  mummery,  at  which  piety, 
taste,  and  common  sense  would  be  equally  revolted,  I 
return  to  the  existing  state  of  things.* 

I  have  never  perused  any  of  those  treatises,  excellent 
as  some  of  them  are  said  to  be,  which  pious  divines  have 
written  agidnst  the  pemidous  tendency  of  theatrical  en- 
tertainments. The  convictions  of  my  mind  have  arisen 
solely  from  experience  and  observation.  I  shall  not, 
therefore,  go  over  the  well-trodden  ground  of  those  who 
have  inveighed,  with  too  much  justice,  against  the  im- 
moral lives  of  too  many  stage  professors,  allowing  always 
for  some  very  honourable  exceptions.  I  shall  not  remark 
on  the  gross  and  palpable  corruptions  of  those  plajrs 
which  are  obviously  written  with  an  open  disregard  to 
all  purity  and  virtue:  nor  shall  I  attempt  to  shew 
whether  any  very  material  advantage  would  arise  to  the 
vain  and  the  dissipated,  were  they  to  exclude  the  theatre 
from  its  turn  in  their  undiscriminated  round  of  promis- 
cuous pleasure.  But  I  would  coolly  and  respectfully 
address  a  few  words  to  those  many  worthy  and  consd- 

*  An  enthuiiast  to  the  literature  of  my  own  oountry,  and  so  Jcal- 
oua  of  its  fiune  as  grudgingly  to  allow  its  eompaimtive  ioferioiit)' 
in  any  one  instance,  I  am  yet  compelled  to  acknowledge,  that,  as 
fer  as  my  slender  reading  enables  me  to  form  a  judgment,  the  Bngw 
lish  dramatic  poets  are  in  general  more  licentious  than  those  of 
most  otlier  countries.     In  that  profligate  reign, 

When  all  the  Muses  were  debauched  at  court, 
the  stage  attained  its  highest  degree  of  dissoluteness.    Mr  Oarriek 
did  a  great  deal  towards  its  purification.    It  is  said  not  to  have 
since  kept  the  ground  it  then  gained. 


PRBFACB.  139 

tntloos  persons,  who  would  not,  perhaps,  so  early  and 
Incautloaaly  expose  their  youthful  offsprhig  to  the  temp- 
tatioiis  of  an  amosement,  <^  which  they  themselves  could 
be  brought  to  see  and  to  feel  the  existence. 

The  question,  then,  which  with  gnreat  deference  I 
would  propose,  is  not  whether  those  who  risk  every 
thing  may  not  risk  this  also ;  but  whether  the  more  cor- 
rect and  eondderate  Christian  might  not  find  it  worth 
while  to  conmder  if  the  amusement  in  question  be  en- 
tirely  eonHWtible  with  his  avowed  character  ?  whether 
it  be  entirely  eondstent  with  the  clearer  views  of  one 
who  professes  to  live  in  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of  that 
fanmcnrtality  which  is  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel  ? 

FoTt  however  weighty  the  ailments  in  fovour  of  the 
superior  ratumaiity  of  plays  may  be  found  in  the  scale, 
when  a  rational  being  puts  one  amusement  in  the  balance 
against  another ;  however  fairly  he  may  exalt  the  stage 
against  other  diversions,  as  being  more  adapted  to  a  man 
of  sense ;  yet  this,  perhaps,  will  not  quite  vindicate  it  in 
Uie  opinioo  of  the  more  scrupulous  Christian,  who  will 
not  allow  himself  to  think  that  of  two  evils  either  may  be 
chosen.  Hii  amusements  must  be  blameless,  as  weU  as 
ingenious ;  safe,  as  well  as  rational ;  moral,  as  well  as 
intellectual.  They  must  have  nothing  in  them  which 
may  be  likely  to  excite  any  of  the  tempers  which  it  is 
his  daily  task  to  subdue ;  any  of  the  passions  which  it  is 
his  constant  business  to  keep  in  order.  Hit  chosen 
amusements  must  not  deliberately  add  to  the  **  weight  '* 
whidi  he  is  commanded  **to  lay  aside ;"  they  should  not 
irritate  the  *'  besetting  sin  "  against  which  he  is  strug- 
gttng ;  fhey  diould  not  obstruct  that  **  spiritual  minded- 
nesB  **  which  he  is  told  "  is  life  and  peace ;"  they  should 
not  inflame  that  **  lust  of  the  flesh,  that  lust  of  the  eye, 
and  that  pride  of  life,"  which  he  is  forbidden  to  gratify. 
A  religious  person,  who  occasionally  indulges  in  an 
amusement  not  consonant  to  his  general  views  and  pur- 
suits, inconceivably  increases  his  own  difiiculties,  by 
whetting  tastes,  and  exciting  appetites,  which  it  will  cut 
him  out  so  much  work  to  counteract,  as  will  gnreatly 
overbalance,  in  a  conscientious  mind,  the  short  and  tri- 
vial ei^joyment.  I  speak  now  on  the  mere  question  of 
pleasure.  Nay,  the  more  keen  his  relish  for  the  amuse- 
neot,  the  more  exquisite  his  discernment  of  the  beauties 
of  composition  or  the  graces  of  action  may  be,  the  more 


140  PREFACE. 

prudent  he  inay  perhaps  find  it  to  deny  himself  the  g^- 
tification  which  is  ei^oyed  at  the  slightest  hazard  of  his 
higher  interests ;  a  gratification  which  to  him  will  be  the 
more  dangerous,  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  poignantly 
felt. 

A  Christian,  in  our  days,  is  seldom  called  in  his  oi'di- 
nary  course  to  great  and  signal  sacrifices,  to  very  strik- 
ing  and  very  ostensible  renunciations ;  but  he  is  daily 
called  to  a  quiet,  uniform,  constant  series  of  self-denial 
in  small  things.  A  dangerous  and  bewitching,  especially 
if  it  be  not  a  disreputable  pleasure,  may  perhaps  have  a 
just  place  among  those  sacrifices :  and,  if  he  be  really  in 
earnest,  he  will  not  think  it  too  much  to  renounce  such 
petty  ei^joyments,  were  it  only  from  the  single  considera- 
tion that  it  is  well  to  seize  every  little  occasion  which 
occurs  of  evidencing  to  himself  that  he  is  constantly  on 
the  watdi ;  and  of  proving  to  the  world,  that  in  small 
things,  as  well  as  in  great,  he  ia  a  follower  of  Him  who 
**  pleased  not  himself." 

Little,  unobserved,  and  unostentatious  abstinencies, 
are  among  the  silent  deeds  of  his  daily  warfare.  And 
whoever  brings  himself  to  exercise  this  habitual  self- 
denial,  even  in  doubtful  cases,  will  soon  learn  from  happy 
experience,  that  in  many  instances  abstinence  is  much 
more  easily  practised  than  temperance.  There  is  in  this 
case  no  excited  sensibility  to  allay ;  there  is  no  occasional 
remorse  to  be  quieted ;  Uiere  is  no  lost  ground  to  be  re- 
covered, no  difiicult  backing  out,  only  to  get  again  to  the 
same  place  where  we  were  before.  This  observation 
adopted  into  practice  might,  it  is  presumed,  effectually 
abolish  the  qualifying  language  of  many  of  the  more  tober 
frequenters  of  the  theatre,  "that  they  go  but  seldom,  and 
never  but  to  a  good  play.**  We  give  these  moderate  and 
discreet  persons  all  due  praise  for  comparative  sobriety. 
But  while  they  go  cU  ally  the  principle  is  the  same ;  for 
they  sanction,  by  going  sometimes,  a  diversion  which  is 
not  to  be  defended  on  strict  Christian  principles.  Indeed, 
their  acknowledging,  that  it  should  be  but  sparingly  fire- 
quented,  probably  arises  from  a  conviction  that  it  ia  not 
quite  right. 

I  have  already  remarked,  that  it  is  not  the  object  of  this 
address  to  pursue  the  usual  track  of  attacking  bad  plays, 
of  which  the  more  prudent  and  virtuous  seldom  vindicate 
the  principle,  though  they  do  not  always  scrupulously 


preface:  141 

aroid  attoDdiny  tha  exhibition.  I  impose  ratner  on  roy- 
•elf  the  unpopular  task  of  animadverting  on  the  dange- 
rous effects  of  those  which  come  under  the  description 
of  good  plays ;  for  from  those  chiefly  arises  the  danger 
Of  danger  there  be)  to  good  people. 

Novr,  with  all  the  allowed  superiority  justly  ascribed 
to  pieces  of  a  better  cast,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  a  com- 
plete justification  of  the  amusement,  that  the  play  in 
fnestioa  is  more  chaste  in  the  sentiment,  more  pure  in 
the  expression,  and  more  moral  in  the  tendency,  than 
those  which  are   avowedly   objectionable;   though    I 
readily  concede  all  the  degrees  of  distinction,  and  very 
Important  they  are,  between  such  compositions  and  those 
of  the  oppoAte  character.    But  the  point  for  which  I  am 
contending  is  of  another  and  of  a  distinct  nature ;  namely, 
that  there  will,  generally  spealdng,  still  remain,  even  in 
tragedies,  otherwise  the  most  unexceptionable,  provided 
they  are  sufBdentiy  impassioned  to  produce  a  powerful 
effect  on  the  feelings,  and  have  spirit  enough  to  deserve 
to  become  popular ;  there  will  still  remain  an  essential 
radical  defect.    What  I  insist  on  is,  that  there,  almost 
inevitably,  runs  through  the  whole  web  of  the  tragic 
drama,  (for  to  this  least  blameable  half  of  stage  com- 
position I  confine  my  remarks,  as  against  comedy  still 
stronger  objections  ttiay  be  urged,)  a  prominent  Uuread 
of  false  principle.    It  is  generally  the  leading  object  of 
the  poet  to  erect  a  standard  of  honour  in  direct  opposi- 
tion to  the  standard  of  Christianity ;  and  this  is  not  done 
subordinately,  incidentally,  occasionally;   but  worldly 
honour  is  the  very  soul,  and  spirit,  and  life-giving  prin- 
eipie  of  the  drama.    Honour  is  the  religion  of  tragedy. 
It  is  her  moral  and  political  law.    Her  dictates  form  its 
institutes.    Fear  and  shame  are  the  capital  crimes  in  her 
code.     Against  these,  all  the  eloquence  of  her  most 
powerful  pleaders,  against  these  her  penal  statutes,  pis- 
tol, sword,  and  poison,  are  in  full  force.    Injured  honour 
can  only  be  vindicated  at  the  point  of  the  sword ;  the 
stains  of  ii\)ured  reputation  can  only  be  washed  out  in 
blood.    Love,  jealousy,  hatred,  ambition,  pride,  revenge, 
are  too  often  elevated  into  the  rank  of  splendid  virtues, 
and  form  a  dazzling  system  of  worldly  morality,  in  direct 
contradiction  to  the  sinrit  of  that  religion  whose  charac- 
teristics are  "charity,  meekness,  peaceableness,  long- 
suffering,  gentleness,  forgiveness."    **  The  fruits  of  the 


142  PREFACE. 

S[nrit,"  and  the  fruits  of  the  stage,  if  the  parallel  were 
followed  up,  as  it  might  easily  be,  would  perhaps  exhibit 
as  pointed  a  contrast  as  human  imagination  could  con- 
ceive. 

I  by  no  means  pretend  to  assert  that  religion  is  ex- 
cluded from  tragedies ;  it  is  often  incidentally  iotroduc- 
ed  i  and  many  a  period  is  beautifully  turned,  and  many 
a  moral  is  exquisitely  pointed,  with  the  finest  sentiments 
of  piety.  But  the  single  grains  of  this  counteracting 
principle,  scattered  up  and  down  the  piece,  do  not  ex- 
tend their  antiseptic  property  in  a  sufficient  degree  to 
preserve  from  corruption  the  body  of  a  work,  the  gene- 
ral spirit  and  leading  tempers  of  which,  as  was  said 
above,  are  evidently  not  drawn  from  that  meek  religion, 
the  very  essence  of  which  consists  in  "casting  down 
high  imaginations  :*'  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  lea- 
ven of  the  predominating  evil  secretly  works  and  in- 
sinuates itseU^  till  the  whole  mass  becomes  impregnated 
by  the  pervading  principle.  Now,  if  the  directing  prin- 
ciple be  unsound,  the  virtues  groviring  out  of  it  will  be 
unsound  also ;  and  no  subordinate  merit,  no  collateral 
excellendes,  can  operate  witli  effectual  potency  against 
an  evil  which  is  of  prime  and  fundamental  force  and 
eaergy,  and  which  forms  the  very  essence  of  the  work. 

A  learned  and  witty  friend,  who  thought  differently 
on  this  subject,  once  asked  me  if  I  went  so  for  as  to 
think  it  necessary  to  try  the  merit  of  a  song  or  a  play  by 
the  ten  commandments.  To  this  may  we  not. venture 
to  answer,  that  neither  a  song  nor  a  play  should  at  least 
contain  any  thing  hostile  to  the  ten  commandments. 
That,  if  harmless  merriment  be  not  expected  to  advance 
religion,  we  must  take  care  that  it  do  not  oppose  it ; 
that  if  we  concede,  that  our  amusements  are  not  ex- 
pected to  make  us  better  than  we  are,  ought  we  not  to 
condition  that  they  do  not  make  us  worse  than  they 
find  us  ?  If  so,  then,  whatever  pleasantry  of  idea,  what- 
ever gaiety  of  sentiment,  whatever  airiness  of  expres- 
sion we  innocently  admit,  should  we  not  jealously  watch 
against  any  unsoundness  in  the  general  principle,  any 
mischief  in  the  prevailing  tendency  ? 

We  cannot  be  too  often  reminded,  that  we  are  to  an 
inconceivable  degree  the  creatures  of  habit.  Our  tem- 
pers are  not  prindpally  governed,  nor  our  characters 
formed,  by  single  marked  actions ;  nor  is  the  colour  of 


PREFACE.  143 

our  HnH  often  determined  by  prominent  detaclied  rir- 
euBrtaaees ;  bot  tlie  duurSfCter  is  gradoaily  moulded 
by  »  Miiai  of  teemingly  iodgnillcant  but  constantly  re- 
eurfiag  pnetiees,  whidi,  incorporated  into  our  habits, 
became  part  of  omrsdres. 

Now,  as  tliese  lesser  habits,  if  they  take  a  wrong  di- 
reetloD,  silently  and  imperceptibly  eat  out  the  rery  heart 
mmI  life  of  Tigoroos  rirtue,  they  will  be  almost  more 
sedaloosly  watched  by  those  who  are  careful  to  keep 
tteir  eooadences  tenderly  aUye  to  the  perception  of  sin, 
(howarer  tiiey  may  elude  the  attention  of  ordinary 
CkristiaBB,)  Uma  actions  which  deter  by  bold  and  decided 
•fO. 

When  it  ie  recollected  how  many  young  men  pick  up 
tteir  habits  of  thinking  and  their  notions  of  morality 
from  tiie  playhouse,  it  is  not  periiaps  going  too  far  to 
Bospeet,  timt  the  principles  and  examples  exhibited  on  the 
stage  may  contribute  in  their  full  measure  and  proptir- 
tion  towards  supplying  a  sort  of  regular  aliment  to  the 
i^ipetito  (how  dreadfully  increased!)  for  duelling,  and 
eren  suicide.  For,  if  religion  teaches,  and  experience 
prater,  the  immense  importance  to  our  tempers  and 
morals  of  a  regular  attendance  on  public  worship,  which 
attendance  is  only  required  of  us  one  day  in  a  week ; 
and  if  it  be  considered  how  much  the  heart  and  mind  of 
the  attenttre  hearer  beccnne  gradually  imbued  with  the 
prindplee  infused  by  this  stated,  though  unfrequent  at- 
tradance ;  who,  that  knows  any  thing  of  the  nature  of 
the  human  heart,  will  deny  how  much  more  deep  and 
lasting  will  be  the  impressicm  likely  to  be  made  by  a  far 
more  frequent  attendance  at  those  places,  where  senti- 
ments of  s  direct  contrary  tendency  are  exhibited ;  ex- 
hibited, too,  with  every  addition  whidi  can  charm  the 
imagination  and  captivate  the  senses.  Once  in  a  week, 
it  may  be,  the  young  minds  are  braced  by  the  invigorat- 
in  g  inlnciples  of  a  strict  and  self-denying  religion :  on 
h  e  intermediate  nights,  their  good  resolutions  (if  such 
'  h  ey  have  made)  are  melted  down  with  all  that  can  re- 
lax the  soul,  and  dispose  it  to  yield  to  the  temptations 
against  whidi  it  was  the  object  of  the  Sunday^s  lecture 
to  guard  and  fortify  it.  In  the  one  case,  there  is  every 
thing  held  out  which  can  inflame  or  soothe  corrupt  na- 
ture, in  opposition  to  those  precepts  which,  in  the  other 
case,  were  directed  to  subdue  it.    And  this  one  grand 


144  PREFACE. 

and  important  difference  between  the  two  cases  should 
never  be  overlooked,  that  religious  instruction,  applied 
to  the  human  heart,  is  seed  sown  in  an  uncultivated 
soil,  where  much  is  to  be  cleared,  to  be  broken  up,  and 
to  be  rooted  out,  before  good  fruit  will  be  produced ; 
whereas  the  theatrical  seed,  by  lighting  on  the  fertile 
soil  prepared  by  nature  for  the  congenial  implantation, 
is  likely  to  shoot  deep,  spread  wide,  and  bring  forth  fruit 
in  abundance. 

But  to  drop  all  metaphor. They  are  told— and  from 

whose  mouth  do  they  hear  it?— that  ** blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,  the  meek,  and  the  peace-makers."  Will 
not  these,  and  such  like  humbling  propositions,  delivered 
one  day  in  seven  only,  in  all  the  sober  and  beautiful  sim- 
plicity of  our  church,  with  all  the  force  of  truth  indeed, 
but  with  all  its  plainness  also,  be  more  than  counter- 
balanced by  the  speedy  and  much  more  frequent  recur- 
rence of  the  nightly  exhibition,  whose  precise  object  it 
too  often  is,  not  only  to  preach,  but  to  personify  doc- 
trines in  diametrical  and  studied  opposition  to  poverty 
of  spirit,  to  purity,  to  meekness,  forbearance,  and  for- 
giveness. Doctrines,  not  simply  expressed,  as  those  of 
the  Sunday  are,  in  the  naked  form  of  axioms,  principles, 
and  precepts,  but  realized,  embodied,  made  alive,  fur- 
nished with  organs,  dothed,  decorated,  brought  into 
lively  discourse,  into  interesting  action ;  enforced  with 
all  the  energy  of  passion,  adorned  with  all  the  graces  of 
language,  and  exhibited  with  every  aid  of  emphatical 
delivery,  every  attraction  of  appropriate  gesture.  To 
such  a  complicated  temptation  is  it  wise,  voluntarily, 
studiously,  unnecessarily  to  expose  fr^and  erring  crea- 
tures ?  Is  not  the  conflict  too  severe  ?  Is  not  the  com- 
petition too  unequal  ? 

It  is  pleaded  by  the  advocates  for  church  music,  that 
the  organ  and  its  vocal  accompaniments  assist  devotion, 
by  enlisting  the  senses  on  the  side  of  religion ;  and  it  is 
justly  pleaded  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  both,  because 
the  affections  may  fairly  and  properly  derive  every  hon 
est  aid  from  any  thing  which  helps  to  draw  them  off 
from  the  world  to  Qod.  But  is  it  not  equally  true,  that 
the  same  species  of  assistance,  in  a  wrong  direction,  will 
produce  an  equally  forcible  effect  in  its  way,  and  at 
least  equally  contribute  in  drawing  off  the  soul  from 
Ood  to  the  world  ?    I  do  not  presume  to  say  that  the 


PREFACE.  145 

floury  win  be  iiMTitable,  much  less  that  it  will  be  irre- 
trierabla  ;  bat  I  dare  repeat,  that  it  is  exposing  feeble 
Tkkoe  to  a  powerful  temptation ;  and  to  a  hazard  so 
great,  that  were  the  same  reason  iH>plied  to  any  worldly 
ul^eefey  it  wonld  be  thonght  a  folly  to  renture  on  any 
undertaking  where  the  chances  against  our  coming  off 
nihart  were  so  obvioosly  against  us.  Besides,  if  we 
amy  portiie  the  doctrine  of  chances  a  little  farther,  that 
is  at  best  playing  a  most  unprofitable  game,  where,  if 
we  eren  ooold  be  sure  that  nothing  would  be  lost,  it  is 
dear  to  demonstration  that  nothing  can  be  giUned ;  so 
that  ttie  certain  risk  is  not  even  counterbalanced  by  tlio 
poeriUe  success. 

It  k  not  in  point  to  the  present  design  to  allude  to 
tt«  nniltitade  of  theatrical  sentiments  which  seem  to  bo 
written  as  if  in  arowed  opposition  to  such  precepts  as 
*  Swear  not  at  all :"  **  He  that  looketh  on  a  woman  to 
lost  after  her,  hath  already  committed  adultery  in  his 
heart,*'  &c  &c.  We  are  willing  to  allow  that  this  last 
offMMse,  at  least,  is  generally,  I  would  it  were  invariably, 
eooflned  to  those  more  incorrect  dramas  which  we  do 
not  now  profess  to  consider.  Yet  it  is  to  be  feared  we 
■honld  not  find  many  pieces  (are. we  sure  we  can  find 
one  ?)  entirely  exempt  from  the  first  heavy  charge.  And 
it  it  perhaps  one  of  the  most  invindble  olyections  to 
many  tragedies,  otherwise  not  very  exceptionable,  that 
the  awlkil  and  tremendous  name  of  the  infinitely  glori- 
OQi  God  it  shamefully,  and  almost  incessantly,  introduc- 
ed in  various  scenes,  both  in  the  way  of  asseveration  and 
of  invocation. 

Besides,  the  term  good  and  bad  play  are  relative  ;  for 
we  are  so  litUe  exact  in  our  general  definitions,  that  the 
character  given  to  tiie  piece  often  takes  its  colour  from 
the  character  of  him  who  gives  it.  Passages  which  to 
the  decent  moral  man,  (him  I  mean  who  is  decent  and 
moral  on  mere  worldly  principles,)  are  to  the  "  purged 
I  eye**  of  a  Christian  disgusting  by  tibeir  vanity,  and  offen- 
sive by  their  levity,  to  speak  in  the  gentiest  terms. 

But  more  especially  the  prime  animating  spirit  of  many 
of  our  more  decorous  dramas  seems  to  furnish  a  strong 
contrast  to  the  improved  and  enlarged  comment  of  our 
Saviour  in  the  New  Testament,  on  the  Divine  prohibi- 
tion against  murder  in  the  Old,  in  the  woe  denounced 
agaiiiat  anger,  as  containing  in  itself  the  seed  and  prin- 

u 


146  PREFACE. 

dple  of  murder ;  anger,  and  its  too  asoal  concomitant, 
revenge,  being  the  main  spring  on  which  some  of  our 
best  tragedies  turns. 

The  eloquent  i^logies,  and  the  elaborate  vindication 
of  the  crimes  resulting  from  the  point  of  honour  and  the 
dread  of  shame,  and  with  such  apologies  and  vindications 
some  of  our  most  approved  pieces  abound,  too  temptingly 
invite  the  high  unbroken  spirit  of  a  warm  youth,  from 
admiring  such  sentiments  to  adopt  them ;  and  he  is  liable 
to  be  stimulated  first  to  the  commission  of  the  crime,  and, 
after  he  has  committed  it,  to  the  hope  of  having  his  re- 
putation cleared,  by  the  perpetual  eulogies  these  flatter, 
big  scenes  bestow  on  rash  and  intemperate  bravery ;  on 
the  dignity  of  that  spirit  which  cannot  brook  an  insult ; 
and  on  that  generout  sense  of  wounded  honour  which 
is  ever  on  the  watch  to  revenge  itself.  And  when  he 
hears  the  bursts  of  applause  with  which  these  sallies  of 
resentment,  these  vows  of  revenge,  these  determinations 
to  destroy  or  be  destroyed,  this  solemn  obtesting  the 
great  Jut^e  of  hearts  to  witness  the  innocence  of— per- 
haps a  very  crimhial  action  or  intention  ; — ^when,  I  say, 
a  hot-headed  young  man  witnesses  the  enthusiasm  of 
admiration  which  such  expressions  excite  in  a  transport- 
ed audience,  will  it  not  operate  as  a  kind  of  stimulus  to 
him  to  adopt  a  similar  conduct,  should  he  ever  be  placed 
in  similar  circumstances  ?  and  will  it  not  furnish  him 
with  a  sort  of  criterion  how  such  maxims  would  be  re- 
ceived, and  such  conduct  approved,  in  real  life  P  For  the 
danger  does  not  lie  merely  in  his  hearing  such  sentiments 
delivered  from  the  stage,  but  also  in  seeing  how  fovour- 
ably  they  are  received  by  the  audience ;  received,  too^ 
by  those  persons  who,  should  he  realize  these  sentiments, 
would  probably  be  the  arbiters  of  his  conduct.  These 
are  to  him  a  kind  of  antidpated  jury.  The  scene  is  as  it 
were  the  rehearsal  of  an  acquittal  at  the  bar  of  that 
world  whose  tribunal  is  perhaps,  unhappily  for  him,  con- 
sidered as  his  last  appeal ;  for  it  is  not  probably  hazard- 
ing too  much  to  condude,  that  by  the  sort  of  character 
we  are  considering,  human  opinion  will  be  looked  upon 
as  the  highest  motive  of  action,  human  praise  as  the 

;  highest  reward,  and  human  censure  as  an  evil  to  be  de- 

/  precated,  even  by  the  loss  of  his  soul. 

If  one  of  the  mo^t  virtuous  of  poets  and  of  men,  by  the 
cool,  deliberate,  argumentative  manner  in  which  he 


phefacb.  147 

imkeB  Ui  Eomaa  hero  destroy  himself ;  tliis  hero  too  a 
fMfui,  cofMiateiitly  illustratiiig'  by  this  actiou  an  histori- 
eai  ftrt,  and  aeting  in  a  natural  conformity  to  his  own 
stoieal  principles ;— if,  I  say,  under  all  these  palliating  dr- 
comttanees,  the  ingenious  sophistry  by  which  the  poet 
was  drhren  to  mitigate  the  crime  of  suicide,  in  order  to 
aeecmimodate  the  sentiment  to  the  real  character  of  his 
hero ;— if  this  Qiristian  poet,  even  to  his  own  private 
friend  and  literary  associate,  could  appear,  by  the  speci- 
ous reas<ming  of  his  fomons  soliloquy,  to  vindicate  self- 
morder,  so  that  the  unhappy  BudgeU  exclaimed,  when 
fUUiiy  by  his  own  hand. 

What  Cato  did,  and  Addison  approv'd, 
Mtut  rare  be  right  :— 

I^  I  say,  under  all  the  extenuating  circumstances  here 
detidled,  such  a  dreadful  effect  could  be  produced  from  a 
eanse  so  little  expected  or  intended  by  its  author  to  pro- 
duce it}  how  much  more  probably  are  similar  ill  conse- 
quences likely  to  arise  from  similar  causes  in  the  hands 
of  a  poet  less  guarded  and  worse  principled ;  and  whose 
heroes  have  perhaps  neither  the  apology  of  acknow- 
ledged paganism,  nor  the  sanction  of  historic  truth  ?  For 
Addisoa,  who  in  general  has  made  his  piece  a  vehicle  of 
tlie  noblest  and  most  patriotic  sentiments,  could  not 
arold  making  Ids  catastrophe  just  what  he  has  made  it, 
wiUiOQt  Tii^ting  a  notorious  fact,  and  falsifying  tho 
diaracter  he  exhibits. 

Even  in  tiiose  plays  in  which  the  principles  which  false 
honour  teaches  aro  neither  professedly  inculcated  nor 
vindicated ;  nay,  where  moreover  the  practices  above 
alluded  to,  and  especially  the  practice  of  duelling,  are 
even  reprobated  in  the  progress  of  the  piece  ;  yet  the 
hero  trho  has  been  reprieved  from  sin  during  four  acts 
by  the  sage  remonstrance  of  some  interfering  friend,  or 
the  imperious  power  of  beauty ;  beauty,  which  is  to  a 
stage  hero  that  restraining  or  impelling  power  which 
law,  or  conscience,  or  scripture,  are  to  other  men ;  still, 
in  the  conclusion,  when  the  intrigue  is  dexterously  com- 
pleted, when  the  passion  is  worked  up  to  its  acme,  and 
the  valedictory  scene  Is  so  near  at  hand  that  it  becomes 
inconvenient  to  the  poet  that  the  impetuosity  of  his  hero 
should  be  any  longer  restrained ;  when  his  own  patience 
and  tho  expostulating  powers  of  his  friend  aro  both  ex- 


148  PREFACE. 

hausted  together,  and  he  seasonably  wuida  up  the  drama 
by  stabbing  either  his  worst  enemy  or  his  best  benefactor, 
or,  as  it  still  more  frequently  happens,  himself ;  still,  not- 
withstuiding  his  criminal  catastrophe,  the  hero  has  been 
exhibited  through  all  the  preceding  scenes  as  such  a  com- 
bination of  perfections ;  his  behaviour  has  been  so  brave 
and  so  generous,  (and  bravery  and  generosity  are  two 
qualities  which  the  world  boldly  stakes  against  both 
tables  of  the  decalogue,)  that  the  youthful  spectator, 
especially  if  he  have  that  amiable  warmth  and  sensibility 
of  soul  which  lay  him  so  peculiarly  open  to  seduction,  is 
too  much  tempted  to  consider  as  venial  the  sudden  and 
unpremeditated  crime  to  which  the  unresisted  impulse 
of  the  moment  may  have  driven  so  accomplished  a 
character.  And  a  little  tame  tag  of  morality,  set  to 
a  few  musical  periods  by  the  unimpassioned  friend,  is 
borne  down,  absorbed,  lost,  in  the  impetuous  but  too  en- 
gaging character  of  the  feeling,  fiery  hero ;  a  character, 
the  errors  of  which  are  now  consummated  by  an  act  of 
murder,  so  affectingly  managed,  that  censure  is  swal- 
lowed up  in  pity :  the  murderer  is  absolved  by  the  weep- 
ing auditory,  who  are  ready,  if  not  to  justify  the  crime, 
yet  to  vindicate  the  criminaL  The  drowsy  moral  at  the 
(dose,  slowly  attempts  to  creep  after  the  poison  of  the 
piece :  but  it  creeps  in  vidn ;  it  can  never  expel  that 
which  it  can  never  reach ;  for  one  stroke  of  feeling, 
one  natural  expression  of  the  passions,  be  the  principle 
right  or  wrong,  carries  away  the  affections  of  the  audi- 
tor beyond  any  of  the  poet's  force  of  reasoning  to  con- 
trol. And  tiiey  know  little  of  the  power  of  the  drama- 
tic art,  or  of  the  conformation  of  the  human  mind,  who 
do  not  know  that  the  heart  of  the  feeling  spectator  is 
always  at  the  command  of  the  passions  in  the  hand  of 
a  true  poet ;  who  snatches  him  with  uncontrolled  do- 
minion 

To  Thebes  and  Athens  when  he  will,  and  where*  - 

Now  to  counteract  the  bias  given  by  the  passions,  all 
the  flowers  of  rhetoric,  all  the  flights  of  mere  poetry, 
and  all  the  blunted  weapons  of  logic  united,  are  ineffec- 
tual. Of  course,  the  concluding  antidote  never  defeats 
the  mischief  of  the  piece  ;  the  effect  of  the  smooth  mo- 
ral is  instantly  obliterated,  while  that  of  the  indented 
passion  is  perhaps  indelible. 


PRBBACE.  149 

Let  me  now  for  a  moment  turn  to  the  younger  part 
of  that  sex,  to  whose  service  I  have  generally  devoted 
my  princ^Md  attention.  A  virtuous  young  woman,  it 
will  be  said,  who  has  been  correctly  educated,  will  turn 
with  aUiorrence  from  the  unchaste  scenes  of  a  loose 
play.  It  is  indeed  so  to  be  hoped ;  and  yet  many  plays 
whidi  really  deserve  that  character,  e8ci^;>e  that  deno- 
minatioa.  But  I  concede  this  point,  and  proceed  to  the 
more  immediate  object  of  my  animadversions.  The  re- 
mark may  be  thought  preposterous,  should  I  observe, 
that  to  a  diaste  and  ddicate  young  mind,  there  is  in 
good  plays  one  danger  which,  I  will  venture  to  assert,  is 
almost  more  formidable  than  that  which  is  often  attach- 
ed to  pieces  more  obviously  censurable.  The  more  re- 
fined and  delicate  the  passion  of  love  is  made  to  appear, 
the  more  insinuating,  and,  of  course,  the  more  danger- 
ous, will  the  exquisite  and  reiterated  representation  of 
that  passion  be  found.  Now,  love  being  the  grand  busi- 
ness <rf  plays,  those  young  ladies  who  are  frequently  at- 
tending them,  will  be  liable  to  nourish  a  feeling  which  is 
<rften  strong  enough  of  itself,  without  this  constant  sup- 
ply of  foreign  fuel,  namely,  that  love  is  the  grand  busi- 
ness of  life  also.  If  the  passion  be  avowedly  illicit,  her 
well-instructed  consdence  will  arm  her  with  scruples, 
and  her  sense  of  d§corum  will  set  her  on  her  guard. 
lYhile,  on  the  other  hand,  the  greater  the  purity  with 
which  the  passion  is  exhibited,  provided  the  exhibition 
be  very  touching  and  warm,  the  more  deep  and  irresisti- 
ble will  be  its  effect  on  a  tender  .and  inexperienced 
heart;  nay,  the  more  likely  will  the  passion  acted  on 
the  stage  be  to  excite  a  corresponding  passion  in  the 
heart  of  the  young  spectatress.  If  she  have  not  yet  felt 
the  passion  she  sees  so  finely  portrayed,  she  will  witih  to 
feel  it ;  and,  the  not  having  felt  it,  she  will  consider  as 
something  wanting  to  the  perfection  of  her  nature.  She 
will  ascribe  the  absence  of  it  to  a  defect  in  her  own  heart 
which  must  be  supplied,  or  to  some  untowardness  in  her 
own  dreumstances  which  must  be  removed.  Thus  her 
imagination  will  do  the  work  of  the  passions,  and  the  fancy 
will  anticipate  the  feelings  of  the  heart :  the  source  this,  of 
some  of  the  most  fotal  disorders  in  the  female  character ! 

Now,  to  captivate  such  a  tender  and  affectionate  heart 
as  that  we  are  considering,  the  semblance  of  virtue  is 
necessary ;  for,  while  she  will  conceive  of  criminal  pas- 


150  PREFACE. 

sion  as  censurable,  she  will  be  equally  apt  to  consider 
even  the  most  imprudent  passion  as  justifiable,  so  long 
as  the  idea  of  absolute  crime  is  kept  at  a  distance.  11 
the  love  be  represented  as  avowedly  vicious,  instead  of 
lending  herself  to  the  illusion,  she  will  allow  it  ought  to 
be  sacrificed  to  duty ;  but  if  she  thinks  it  innocent,  she 
persuades  herself  that  every  duty  should  be  sacrificed  to 
St.  Nay,  she  will  value  herself  in  proportion  as  she 
thinks  die  could  imitate  the  heroine  who  is  able  to  love 
with  so  much  violence  and  so  much  purity  at  the  same 
lime.  By  firequent  repetition,  especially  if  Uiere  be  a  taste 
for  romance  and  poetry  in  the  innocent  young  mind,  the 
feelings  are  easily  transplanted  from  the  theatre  to  the 
closet ;  they  are  made  to  become  a  standard  of  action, 
and  are  brought  home  as  the  regulators  of  life  and  man- 
ners. The  heart  being  thus  filled  with  the  pleasures  of 
love,  a  new  era  takes  place  in  her  mind,  and  she  carries 
about  with  her  an  aptitude  to  receive  any  impression 
herself,  and  a  constantly  waking  and  active  desire  to 
make  this  impression  in  return.  The  plain  and  sober 
duties  of  life  begin  to  be  uninteresting;  she  wislies 
them  to  be  diversified  with  events,  and  enlivened  by 
heroes.  Though  she  retains  her  virtue,  her  sober- 
mindedness  is  impaired ;  fur  she  longs  to  be  realizing 
those  pains  and  pleasures,  and  to  be  acting  over  tliose 
scenes  and  sacrifices,  which  she  often  sees  represented. 
If  the  evils  arising  from  frequent  scenic  representations 
to  a  young  woman  were  limited  to  this  single  incon- 
venience, that  it  makes  her  sigh  to  be  a  heroine,  it  would 
be  a  strong  reason  why  a  discreet  and  pious  mother 
should  be  slow  in  introducing  her  to  them. 

I  purposely  forbear,  in  this  place,  repeating  any  of 
those  higher  arguments  drawn  from  the  utter  irrecon- 
cilableness  of  this  indulgence  of  the  fancy,  of  this  gra- 
tification of  the  senses,  this  unbounded  roving  of  the 
thoughts,  with  the  Divine  injunction  of  bringing 
"  every  thought  into  the  obedience  of  Christ." 

But  it  will  be  said,  perhaps,  all  this  rigour  may  be  very 
suitable  to  enthusiasts  and  fanatics,  to  the  vulgar,  the 
retired,  and  the  obscure :  but  would  you  exclude  the 
more  liberal  and  polished  part  of  society  from  the  de- 
light and  instruction  which  may  be  derived  from  the 
great  masters  of  tlic  human  heart,  from  Shakspeare  par- 
ticuhu-ly  ? 


PREFACE.  151 

Ob  tliis  saljeet  I  think  myself  called  upon  to  offer  my 
•pinkm  (siidi  as  it  is)  as  amresenredly  as  I  have  taken 
tbe  Uborty  ci  doing  on  the  points  considered  in  the  for- 
mer part  <rf  this  preftuse.  I  think,  then,  that  there  is  a 
•ohatential  diffierence  between  seeing  and  reading  a 
draaatie  eompodtion ;  and  that  the  otj^ctiims  which  lie 
■o  atrongly  against  the  ime,  are  not,  at  least  in  the  same 
degree^  ^i^icable  to  the  other.  Or,  rather,  while  there 
is  an  esaontial  and  inseparable  danger  attendant  on 
dramatie  e^diibitionB,  let  the  matter  of  the  drama  be  evef 
■o  Imiooent,  the  danger  in  readir^  a  {toy  arises  solely 
from  the  teniimefUt  contained  in  it. 

To  read  a  moral  play  is  little  different  from  reading 
any  other  innocent  poem ;  the  dialogue  form  being  a 
mere  aeddent,  and  no  way  affecting  the  moral  tendency 
of  the  piece.  Nay,  some  excellent  poets  have  chosen 
that  fotm  on  account  of  its  peculiar  advantages,  even 
when  tiie  nature  of  their  subjects  precluded  the  idea  of 
theatrical  exhibition.  Thus  Buchanan  wrote  his  line 
tragedies  of  "The  Baptist"  and  "Jephthah,"  Grotins 
that  of  <*  Christ  Suffering,"  and  Milton  that  of  *'  Samson 
Agottistes  ;*'  not  to  name  the  "  Joseph,  *"  the  **  Bethulia 
I>elivered,*'  and  some  other  pieces  of  tiie  amiable  Met- 
astasio.  Nothing,  therefore,  could  be  more  unreasona- 
ble than  to  proscribe  from  the  study  or  the  closet  well 
selected  dramatic  poetry.  It  may  be  read  with  safety, 
because  it  can  there  be  read  with  soberness.  The  most 
animated  speeches  subside  into  comparative  tamenese, 
and  provided  they  are  perfectly  pure,  iHroduce  no  ruffle 
of  the  passions,  no  agitation  of  the  senses,  but  merely 
afford  a  pleasant,  and,  it  may  be,  a  not  nnsalutary  exer- 
cise to  the  imagination. 

•  In  all  the  different  kinds  of  poetry,  there  will  be  a  ne- 
cesdty  for  selection;  and  where  could  safer  poetical 
amusement  be  found  than  in  the  works  of  Badne,  whose 
Athalia,  in  particular,  (as  we  have  had  occadon  else- 
where to  observe,)  most  happily  illustrates  an  interest- 
ing piece  of  scripture  history,  at  the  tame  time  that, 
c<mddered  as  a  composition,  it  is  itself  a  model  of  poeti- 
cal perfection.  I  may  mention,  as  an  exquisite  piece,  the 
Sfasqne  of  Comus,  and,  as  interesting  poems  in  the  dra- 
matie form  also,  the  Caractacus  and  Elfrida  of  Mason ; 
the  pasdng  over  which  pieces  in  the  volumes  of  that  vir  • 
teOQS  poet,  merely  because  they  are  in  a  dramatic  form, 


162  PREFACE. 

would  be  an  instance  of  8ca*upulo«ty  which  one  mi^j^ht 
venture  to  say  no  well-informed  conscience  could  sug- 
gest. 

Let  ndther,  then,  the  devout  and  scrupulous,  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  the  ci^>tiou8  caviller,  on  the  other,  object 
to  this  distinction ;  I  mean  between  recuUng  a  dramatio 
composition,  and  seeing  a  theatrical  exhibition,  as  if  it 
were  fencifid  or  arbitrary.  In  the  latter,  is  it  the  mere  re- 
petition  of  the  speeches  which  implies  danger  ?  is  it  this 
which  attracts  the  audience  ?  No :  were  even  the  best 
reader,  if  he  did  not  bring  in  aid  the  novelty  of  a  foreign 
language,  to  read  the  whole  play  himself,  wdtbout  scenic 
decorations,  without  dress,  without  gesticulation,  would 
such  an  exhibition  be  numerously,  or  for  any  length  of 
time,  attended?  What  then  chiefly  draws  the  multi- 
tude ?  It  is  the  semblance  of  real  action  which  is  g^ven 
to  the  piece,  by  different  pers(ms  supporting  the  different 
parts,  and  by  their  dress,  their  tones,  their  gestures, 
heightoiing  tiie  representation  into  a  kind  of  enchant^ 
ment.  It  is  the  concomitant  pageantry,  it  is  the  splen- 
dour of  the  spectacle,  and  even  the  show  of  the  specta- 
tors : — these  are  the  circumstances  which  altogether  fill 
the  theatre— whidi  altogether  produce  the  effect — ^which 
altogether  create  the  danger.  These  give  a  pernicious 
force  to  sentiments  which,  when  read,  merely  explain 
the  mysterious  action  of  the  human  heart,  but  which, 
when  thus  uttered,  thus  accompanied,  become  contagi- 
ous and  destructive.  These,  in  short,  make  up  a  scene 
of  temptation  and  seduction,  of  over- wrought  voluptu- 
ousness, and  unnerving  pleasure,  which  surely  ill  accords 
with  **  working  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trem- 
bling,** or  with  that  frame  of  mind  which  implies  that 
"  the  world  is  crucified  to  us,  and  we  to  the  world.** 

I  trust  I  have  sufficiently  guarded  against  the  charge  of  ^ 
inconsistency,  even  though  I  venture  to  hazard  an  opin- 
ion that,  in  company  with  a  judicious  friend  or  parent, 
many  scenes  of  Shakspeare  may  be  read  not  only  with- 
out danger,  but  with  improvement.  Far  be  it  from  me 
to  wish  to  abridge  the  innocent  delights  of  life,  where  they 
may  be  enjoyed  with  benefit  to  the  understanding,  and 
witiiout  injury  to  the  principles.  Women,  especially, 
whose  walk  in  life  is  so  circumscribed,  and  whose  avenues 
of  information  are  so  few,  may,  I  conceive,  learn  to  know* 
the  world  with  less  danger,  and  to  study  human  nature 


PREFACE.  163 

wiOk  mora  adnmtage,  from  the  penual  of  selected  purts 
of  ttdi  incompanible  g^oniiis,  than  from  most  other  attain- 
aUe  aooreea.  I  would  in  tliis  view  consider  Shakspeare 
M  ft  phikMoplier  as  wdl  as  poet,  and  I  have  been  snr- 
ptiaed  to  hear  many  irions  people  universally  confoond 
and  rqnrobate  tbis  iwet  with  the  common  herd  of  dra- 
matists and  novelists.  To  his  aeote  and  sagadoos  mind 
every  varied  porition  of  the  human  heart,  every  shade 
of  discrimination  in  the  human  character,  all  the  minn- 
ter  delieades,  all  the  exquisite  touches,  all  the  distinct 
alfeettons,  all  the  contending  interests,  all  the  complicated 
panions  oi  the  heart  of  roan,  seem,  as  for  as  is  allowed 
to  homan  inspection  to  discern  them,  to  be  laid  open. 
Thongb  destitute  himself  of  the  aids  of  literature,  and  of 
the  polish  of  society,  he  seems  to  have  possessed  by  in- 
tuition all  the  advantages  that  various  learning  and 
elegant  society  can  bestow ;  and  to  have  combined  the 
wannest  energies  of  passion,  and  the  boldest  strokes 
of  imagination,  with  the  justest  proprieties  of  reason- 
ing, and  the  ezactest  niceties  of  conduct.  He  makes 
every  description  a  picture,  and  every  sentiment  an 
axiom.  He  seems  to  have  known  how  every  being 
which  did  exist  would  speak  and  act  under  every  sup- 
posed circumstance  and  every  possible  situation;  and 
how  every  being  which  did  not  exist  must  speak  and  act, 
if  ever  he  were  to  be  called  into  actual  existence. 

F^m  the  discriminated,  the  guarded,  the  qualified 
perusal  of  such  an  author,  it  would  be  impossible,  nor 
does  it  ^pear  to  be  necessary,  to  debar  accomplished 
and  elegantiy  educated  young  persons.  Let  not  the 
above  eulogium  be  censured  as  too  strong  or  too  bold. 
In  almost  every  library  they  will  find  his  writings ;  in 
almost  every  work  of  taste  and  criticism,  the  young 
reader  will  not  fail  to  meet  the  panegyric  of  Shakspeare. 
The  frequent  allusions  to  him,  and  the  beautiful  quota- 
tions from  him,  will,  if  they  light  upon  a  corresponding 
taste,  inflame  it  with  a  curiosity  to  peruse  all  his  works. 
Now,  would  it  not  be  safer  to  anticipate  the  danger 
which  might  result  from  a  private  and  unqualified  per- 
usal, for  the  parent  to  select  such  pieces  as  have  in  them 
the  fewest  of  those  corruptions,  which  truth  must  allow 
that  Shakspeare  possesses  in  common  with  other  dra- 
matic poets  ?  For  who  will  deny  that  all  the  excel- 
lences we  have  ascribed  to  him  are  debased  by  passages 


154  TREFACE. 

of  (rffemive  grossneas  ?  are  tarnished  with  indelicacy, 
false  ta8te»  and  vulgarity  ?  This  ia  not  the  place  for  a 
discussion  of  those  fonlts,  too  obyioos  to  be  overlooked, 
too  numerous  to  be  detailed,  too  strong  to  be  palliated. 
IfOt  me,  however,  be  permitted  to  observe,  that  though 
Shakspeare  often  disgusts  by  single  passages  and  expres- 
slona,  (which  I  will  not  vindicate  by  ascribing  them  to  the 
false  taste  of  the  age  in  which  he  wrote ;  for  though  that 
may  extenuate  the  fault  of  the  poet,  it  does  not  diminish 
the  danger  of  the  reader,)  yet  perhaps  the  general  ten- 
dency of  his  iMeces  is  less  corrupt  than  that  of  the  pieces 
of  almost  any  dramatist ;  and  the  reader  rises  from  the 
perusal  of  Shakspeare  \«ithout  those  distinct  images  of 
evil  on  his  mind,  without  having  his  heart  so  dissolved 
by  unatory  scenes,  or  his  mind  so  warped  by  corrupt 
reasoning,  or  his  heart  so  inflamed  with  seducing  prin- 
ciples, as  he  wiU  have  experienced  from  other  Writers 
of  the  same  description,  however  exempt  their  works 
may  be  from  the  more  broad  and  censurable  vices  of 
oomposition  which  disfigure  many  parts  of  Shakspeare. 
Lest  I  be  misrepresented,  let  it  be  observed,  that  I  am 
now  distinguishing  the  general  residt  arising  from  the 
tendency  of  his  pieces,  from  the  effect  of  particular  pas- 
sages ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  a  discriminated  perusal 
is  so  important.  For,  after  all,  ttie  general  disposition  of 
mind  with  which  we  rise  from  the  reading  of  a  work,  is 
the  best  criteriim  of  its  utility  or  mischief.  To  the  tra-j 
gedies  of  Shakspeare,  too,  belongs  this  superiority,  that 
his  pieces  being  faithful  histories  of  the  human  heut,  and 
portraits  of  the  human  character,  love  is  only  introduced 
as  one  passion  among  many  which  enslave  mankind ; 
whereas  by  most  other  play  writers,  it  is  treated  as  the 
mimopolizhig  tyrant  of  the  heart. 

It  is  not  because  I  consider  Shakspeare  as  a  correct 
moralist  and  an  unerring  guide,  that  I  suggest  the  ad- 
vantage of  having  the  youthful  curio^ty  allayed  by  a 
partial  perusal,  and  under  prudent  inspection :  but  it  is 
for  this  very  different  reason,  lest,  by  having  that  curi- 
osity stimulated  by  the  incessant  commendatkm  of  this 
author,  with  which  both  books  and  conversation  abound, 
young  persons  should  be  excited  to  devour  in  secret  an 
author  who,  if  devoured  in  the  gross,  will  not.  fail,  by 
many  detached  passages,  to  put  a  delicate  reader  in  tho 


PREFACE.  165 

rihitlfln  of  Ui  own  andent  FisUd  when  eating  the  leek ; 
titet  ie,  to  iwaUow  and  execrate  at  the  same  time. 

But  to  conclade,— which  I  will  do  with  a  recapitola- 
tfon  of  the  principal  objects  already  touched  upon.  That 
I  may  not  be  misunderstood,  let  me  repeat  that  this 
preliEice  is  not  addressed  to  the  gay  and  dissolute ;  to  sucli 
M  praCon  themselves  to  be  "lovers  of  pleasure  more 
than  loren  of  God ;"— but  it  is  addressed  to  the  more 
fober-minded ;  to  those  who  believe  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ;  who  wish  to  be  enlightened  by  its  doctrines*  to 
be  governed  by  its  precepts,  and  who  prcrfiess  to  be 
-  seeking  a  better  country,  even  an  heavenly  one.**  The 
question  th«i  which  we  have  been  asking  is,  whether 
tiie  stage,  in  its  present  state,  be  a  proper  amusement 
for  such  a  character  f  What  it  would  be,  if  perfectly 
reformed,  and  cast  into  the  Christian  mould,  we  have 
considered  as  another  question,  which  it  will  be  time 
ODoagh  to  answer  when  the  reformation  itself  takes 
place. 

Neither  (as  has  been  observed)  is  it  to  the  iHresent  pur- 
pose to  insist  that  theatrical  amusements  are  the  most 
rational  f  for  the  question  we  have  undertaken  to  agitate 
is,  whether  they  are  blameless  f  In  this  view,  the  cir- 
ounetance  of  going  but  «&&Iom  cannot  satisfy  a  consden- 
tioas  mind :  for  if  the  amusement  be  rightt  wc  may  par- 
take of  it  with  moderation,  as  of  other  lawful  pleasures ; 
if  wrong,  we  should  never  partake  of  it. 

Some  individuals  may  urge  that  the  amusements  of  the 
theatre  never  had  the  bad  effects  on  their  minds  which 
they  are  said  to  have  on  the  minds  of  others ;  but  sup- 
posing this  to  be  really  the  cas^  (which  however  may 
admit  of  doubt,)  ought  not  such  persons  to  reflect,  that 
by  their  presence  they  sanction  that  which  is  obviously 
hurtful  to  others,  and  which  must,  if  so,  be  dis^easing 
to  God? 

Tlie  stage  is  by  universal  concurrence  allowed  to  be 
no  indifferent  thing.  The  impressions  it  makes  on  the 
mind  are  deep  and  strong ;  deeper  and  stronger  perhaps 
than  are  made  by  any  other  amusement.  If  then  such 
impressions  be  in  the  general  hostile  to  Oiristianity,  the 
whole  resolves  itself  into  this  short  questiour— Should  a 
Christian  frequent  it  ? 


156  PREFACE. 

[In  addition  to  what  has  here  been  advanced  on  thff 
subject  of  theatrical  amusements,  the  editor  hopes  to  be 
excused  for  inserting  the  conclusion  of  Jeremy  Collier's 
"  Short  "View  of  the  Immorality  and  Profaneness  of  the 
English  stage :"  printed  in  1699. 

**  These  entertainments  are,  as  it  were  literally  re- 
nounced in  baptism.  They  are  the  vanities  of  the  wicked 
worldt  and  the  works  of  the  devil,  in  the  most  open,  and 
emphatical  signification.  What  communion  has  light 
with  darkness,  and  what  concord  hm  Christ  with  Belial  f 
Call  you  this  diversion  ?  can  profaneness  be  such  an  ir- 
resistible delight  ?  Does  the  crime  of  the  performance 
make  the  spirit  of  the  satisfaction,  and  is  the  seom  of 
Christianity  the  entertainment  of  Christians  ?  Is  it  such 
a  pleasure  to  hear  the  scriptures  burlesqued  ?  Is  ribal- 
dry so  very  obliging,  and  atheism  so  charming  a  quality  7 
Are  we  indeed  willing  to  quit  the  privilege  of  our  na- 
ture, to  surrender  our  charter  of  inunortality,  and  throw 
up  the  pretences  to  another  life  ?  It  may  be  so ;  but 
then  we  should  do  well  to  remember  that  nothin o  is  not 
in  our  power.  Our  desires  did  not  make  us,  neither  can 
they  unmake  us.  But  I  hope  our  wishes  are  not  so 
mean,  and  that  wo  have  a  better  sense  of  the  dignity  of 
our  being.  And  if  so,  how  can  we  be  pleased  with  those 
things  wliich  would  degrade  us  into  brutes,  which  ridi- 
cule our  creed,  and  turn  all  our  expectations  into  ro- 
mance. 

*'  And  after  all,  the  jest  on*t  is,  these  men  would  make 
us  believe  their  design  is  virtue  and  reformation.  In 
good  time !  they  are  likely  to  combat  vice  with  success, 
who  destroy  the  prindples  of  good  and  evil  I  T^ke  tiiem 
at  the  best,  and  they  do  no  more  than  expose  a  little 
humour  and  formality.  But  then  as  the  matter  is  man- 
aged, the  correction  is  much  worse  than  the  fault. 
They  laugh  at  pedantry,  and  teach  atheism  ;  cure  a 
pimple,  and  give  the  plague.  I  heartily  wish  they  would 
have  let  us  aloae.  To  excliange  virtue  for  behaviour  is 
a  hard  bargsiai  Is  not  plain  honesty  much  better  than 
hypocrisy  well  dressed  ?  what's  sight  good  for,  without 
substance  ?  what  is  a  well-bred  libertine,  but  a  well-bred 
knave  ?  One  that  can^  prefer  conscience  to  pleasure 
without  calling  himself  fool ;  and  will  sell  his  fri<md,  or 
his  father,  if  need  be,  for  his  convenience. 

**  In  du>rt :  nothing  can  be  more  disserviceable  to  pro< 


FREFACE.  157 

bity  and  rdigion  than  the  management  of  the  stage.  It 
eherisheB  tho«e  pasdons,  and  rewards  tliose  vices,  which 
'tis  the  business  of  reas<Hi  to  discountenance.  It  strikes 
at  the  root  of  principle,  draws  off  the  indinatioos  from 
-rhrtoe,  and  spoils  good  education.  It  is  the  mo«t  effec- 
tual means  to  emasculate  people*8  spirits,  and  debauch 
their  nuumers.  How  manjf  of  the  uniyary  have  these 
syrens  devoured  ?  and  how  often  has  the  best  blood  been 
tainted  with  this  infecti<mf  what  disappointments  of 
parents,  what  confusion  in  families,  and  wliat  beggary 
in  estates,  have  been  hence  occasioned  ?  and,  which  is 
■till  worse,  the  mischief  spreads  daily,  and  the  malignity 
grows  more  envenomed.  The  fever  works  up  towards 
madness,  and  will  scarcely  endure  to  be  touched.  And 
what  hope  is  there  of  health,  when  the  patient  strikes  in 
■with  the  disease,  and  flies  in  the  face  of  the  remedy  ? 
Gan  religion  ratrieve  us  ?  yes,  when  we  don't  despise  it. 
Bat  while  our  notions  are  naught,  our  lives  will  hardly 
be  otherwise.  What  can  the  assistance  of  the  church 
signify  to  those  who  are  more  ready  to  rally  the  preacher, 
than  practise  the  sermon  ?  to  those  who  are  overgrown 
with  pleasure,  and  hardened  in  ill  custom  P  who  have 
neither  patience  to  hear,  nor  conscience  to  take  hold  of  ? 
yon  may  almost  as  well  feed  a  man  without  a  mouth,  as 
give  advice  where  there's  no  disposition  to  receive  it. 
It  is  true,  as  long  as  there  is  life  there's  hope.  Some- 
times the  force  of  argument,  and  the  grace  of  God,  and 
the  anguish  of  afSiction,  may  strike  through  the  prcgu- 
dice,  and  make  their  way  into  the  soul.  But  these  cir- 
cumstances don't  always  meet,  and  then  the  case  is  Ex- 
tremely dangerous.  For  this  miserable  temper,  we 
may  thank  the  stags,  in  a  great  measure ;  and,  there- 
fore, if  I  mistake  not,  they  have  the  least  pretence  to 
fovonr,  and  the  most  need  of  repentance,  of  all  men 
living.'! 


TBB 

INFLEXIBLE    CAPTIVE 
A   TRAGEDY. 

IN  FIVE  ACTS. 
AS  IT  WAS  ACTED  IN  1774, 

AT  THE  THEATRE  ROYAL  AT  BATH. 


The  man  resoWd,  and  xteady  to  hia  trust, 
Infieaible  to  ill,  and  olnUnatrly  Jnal. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 


Amono  the  creat  njunes  which  have  done  honour  to  antiquity  in 
general,  ani  to  the  Roman  Republic  in  particular,  that  of  Mareus 
Attilltts  Regului  has,  by  the  general  content  -of  all  ages,  been 
considered  as  one  of  the  most  splendid,  since  he  not  only  sacrificed 
his  labours,  his  liberty,  and  his  life,  for  the  good  of  his  country, 
but,  by  a  greatness  of  soul  almost  peculiar  to  himself,  contrived  tc 
make  his  very  mislbrtunes  contribute  to  that  glorious  end. 

After  the  Romans  had  met  with  various  successes  in  the  first 
Punie  war,  under  the  command  of  Regulus,  victory  at  length  de- 
clared for  the  opposite  party — the  Roman  army  was  totally  over- 
thrown, and  Regulus  himself  taken  prisoner  by  Xantippus,  a  Lace- 
dsemonian  general  in  the  service  of  the  Carthaginians :  the  victorious 
enemy,  exulting  in  so  important  a  conquest,  kept  him  many  years 
in  close  Imprisonment,  and  loaded  him  with  the  most  cruel  indig- 
nities. They  thought  It  was  now  in  their  power  to  make  their  own 
terms  with  Rome,  and  determined  to  send  Regulus  thither,  with 
their  ambassador,  to  negotiate  a  peace,  or  at  least  an  exchange  of 
ci4>tlves,  thinking  he  would  gladly  persuade  his  countrymen  to  dis- 
continue a  war  which  necessarily  prolonged  his  captivity.  They 
previously  exacted  from  him  an  o«th  to  return,  should  his  embassy 
prove  unsuceessfVil ;  at  the  same  time  giving  him  to  understand, 
that  he  must  expect  to  suflter  a  cruel  death  if  he  failed  in  it :  this 
they  artfydly  intimated,  as  the  strongest  motive  for  him  to  leave  no 
means  unattempted  to  accomplish  their  purpose. 

At  the  unexpected  arrival  of  this  venerable  hero,  the  Romans 
expressed  the  wildest  transports  of  joy,  and  would  have  submitted 
to  almost  any  conditions,  to  procure  hit  enlargement ;  but  Regulus, 
so  (kr  flrom  availing  himself  of  his  influence  with  the  senate  to  obtain 
any  personal  advantages,  employed  It  to  induce  them  to  reject  pro- 
posals so  evidently  tending  to  dishonour  their  country,  declaring 
his  fixed  resolution  to  return  to  bondage  and  death,  rather  than 
violate  his  oath. 

He  at  last  extorted  flrom  them  their  consent ;  and  departed  amidst 
the  tears  of  his  flunily,  the  importtmities  of  his  fHends,  the  applause 
of  the  senate,  and  the  tomultjious  opposition  of  the  people ;  and,  a 
a  great  poet  of  hli  own  nation  beautiftilly  observes,  *'  he  embarked 
for  Carthage  as  calm  and  unconcerned,  as  if,  on  finishing  the  tedious 
lawsuits  of  his  clients,  he  was  retiring  to  VenafHan  fields,  or  the 
sweet  country  of  Tarentum." 


*«*  This  piece  is  a  pretty  close  imitation  of  the  ^ttilio  JUgoto  of 
Metastasio,  but  enlarged  and  extended  Into  a  tragedy  of  five  acts. 
Historleal  truth  has  in  general  been  followed,  except  in  some  less 
essential  Instances,  particularly  that  of  placing  the  return  of  Regulus 
to  Rome  posterior  to  the  death  of  his  wife.  The  writer  herself  never 
considered  the  plot  as  sufficiently  bustling  and  dramatic  tot  repre* 
fentathn. 


PROLOGUE. 

WRITTBK  BY  THE  REV.  DR  LANGHORMK. 


>BBP  in  tbo  bosim  of  departed  days, 

A^heire  tLe  first  genu  of  human  glory  blaze ; 

tVhere^  crnvm^d  with  flowers,  in  wreaths  immortal  dreat, 

Hm  sacred  shades  of  andent  rirtue  rest ; 

With  joy  they  search,  who  joy  can  feel,  to  find 

Some  honest  reason  still  to  love  mankind. 

There  the  fair  foundress  of  the  scene  to-night, 

Exidores  the  paths  that  dignify  delight ; 

The  r^ons  of  the  mighty  dead  pervades ; 

The  sibyl  she  that  leads  us  to  the  shades. 

O  may  each  blast  of  ruder  breath  forbear 

To  waft  her  light  leaves  on  the  ruthless  fur ; 

i^nce  she,  as  heedless,  strives  not  to  maintain 

Thto  tender  offspring  of  her  teeming  brain ! 

For  this  poor  birth  was  no  provision  made, 

A  flower  that  sprung  and  languished  in  the  shade. 

On  Avon's  banks,  forsaken  and  forlorn. 

This  careless  mother  left  her  elder  bom ; 

And  though  unlike  what  Avon  hail*d  of  yore. 

Those  giant  sons  that  Shakspeare^s  banners  bore. 

Yet  may  we  yield  this  little  offspring  grace. 

And  love  the  last  and  least  of  such  a  race. 

ShaU  the  strong  scenes,  where  senatorial  Rome 

Monm'd  o*er  the  rigour  of  her  patriot's  doom ; 

Where  melting  Nature,  aw*d  by  Virtue's  eye. 

Hid  the  big  drop,  and  held  the  bursting  sigh. 

Where  all  that  mi^oBty  of  soul  can  give. 

Truth,  Honour,  Pity,  fair  Affection  live : 

Shall  scenes  like  these,  the  glory  of  an  age, 

Oleam  from  the  press,  nor  triumph  on  the  stage  f 

ForUd  it,  Britons  I  and,  as  Romans  brave, 

lake  Romans  boast  one  citizen  to  save. 


THB 


INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 


DRAMATIS  PERSONiB. 


Rc8uIiu.->Mr  Hendenon. 
Publius,  bis  ton. — Mr  Dimond. 
MadUus,  the  CunsuU— Mr  Blis- 

aett. 
Lieinius,     a     Tribune.  —  Mr 

Browa. 
HMDilewr,     the     Cutha(iniui 

Ambassador.  —Mr    Rowbo- 

tham. 


Attilia.  daughter  of  Regulus  — 

Miss  Mansell. 
Baree,  a  Carthaginian  eaptlre.— 

Miss  Wheeler. 

Guards,  Lictors,  People,  &e 


SCHKR— Near  the  Gatet  <^Same. 
ACT  I. 

ScBNB. — A  Hall  in  the  CoruuTs  Palace, 
Enter  LiciNius,  Attilia,  Lictort,  and  People. 

Lie.  Attilia  waiting  here  ?    Is't  possible  ? 
Is  this  a  place  for  Regnlas's  daughter  ? 
Just  gods !  must  that  incomparable  maid 
Associate  here  with  Lictors  and  Plebeians  ? 

Alt.  Yes,  on  this  threshold  patiently  I  wait 
I'he  consul's  coming ;  I  would  make  him  blush 
To  see  me  here  his  suitor.    O,  Licinius, 
This  is  no  time  for  form  and  cold  decorum ; 
Five  lagging  years  have  crept  their  tedious  round. 
And  Rsgulus,  alas  I  is  still  a  slave ; 
A  wretched  slave,  unpitied,  and  forgotten ; 
No  other  tribute  paid  his  memory. 
Than  the  sad  tears  of  his  unhappy  child ; 
If  she  be  silent,  who  will  speak  for  Reg^lus  ? 

Lie.  Let  not  her  sorrows  make  my  fair  unjust. 
m»  there  in  Rome  a  heart  so  dead  to  virtue 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  iCS 

That  does  not  beat  in  Regolos's  catue  ? 
That  wearies  not  the  gods  for  his  return? 
That  does  not  tUnk  all  snlt|iigated  Afrie, 
A  slender,  unimportant  acquisition. 
It,  in  retnm  for  this  extended  empire. 
The  fireedom  of  thy  fisther  be  the  purchase  ? 
These  are  the  feelfaigs  of  imperial  Rome ; 
My  own,  it  were  superflnoos  to  declare. 
For  if  Lieinhu  were  to  weig^  his  merit, 
That  lieli  thjfjuther  were  sufficient  glory. 
He  was  my  leader,  train*d  me  np  to  arms ; 
And,  if  I  boast  a  spark  of  Roman  honour, 
I  owe  it  to  hi*  precepts  and  hit  virtues. 

jM.  And  yet  I  have  not  seen  Licinius  stir 

X*e.  Ah  I  qwre  me  thy  reproaches— -what,  when  late 
A  prirate  dticen,  conld  I  attempt  ? 
'Twas  not  the  lust  of  power,  or  pride  of  rank, 
"Which  made  me  seek  the  dignity  of  tribune ; 
Mo,  my  Attilia,  but  I  fondly  hop'd 
'Twould  straogthen  and  enforce  the  just  request 
'Which,  as  a  private  man,  I  vainly  urg'd ; 
But  now,  the  peopled  representative, 
I  Shan  demand,  Attilia,  to  be  heard. 

Att.  Ah !  let  us  not  too  hastily  apply 
This  dangerous  remedy ;  I  would  not  rouse 
Fresh  tumults  *twixt  the  people  and  the  senate : 
Eadi  views  with  jealousy  the  idol,  power. 
Which,  each  possessing,  would  alike  abuse. 
What  one  demands,  the  other  still  denies. 
Might  J  advise  you,  try  a  gentler  method ; 
I  know  that  every  moment  Rome  expects 
Th*  ambassador  of  Carthage,  nay,  *tis  said 
The  cfHiscript  fathers  are  already  met 
To  give  him  audience  in  Bellona's  temple. 
There  might  the  consul  at  my  suit,  Licinius, 
Propose  the  ransom  of  my  captive  father. 

Lie.  Ah  1  think,  Attilia,  who  that  consul  is, 
Manlius,  thy  father's  rival,  and  his  fbe : 
His  ancient  rival,  and  his  foe  {Mrofess'd : 
To  hope  in  him,  my  &ir,  were  fond  ddosion. 

jttt.  Tet  though  his  rival,  Manlins,  is  a  Boman  : 
Nor  will  he  think  of  private  enmities, 
WeighM  in  the  balance  with  the  good  of  Rome, 
Let  me  at  least  make  trial  of  his  honour. 


164  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Lie.  Be  it  so,  my  fair !  but  elsewhere  make  tny  suit ; 
Let  not  the  consul  meet  Attilia  herst 
Confounded  with  the  refuse  of  the  people. 

j4tt.  Yes,  I  will  see  him  heret  e'en  Tiere,  Licinins. 
Let  Manlitu  blush,  not  tM  :  here  will  I  speak, 
Here  shall  he  answer  me. 

Lie.  Behold,  he  comes. 

AH.  Do  thou  retire. 

Lie.  O,  bless  me  with  a  look, 

One  parting  look,  at  least. 

Att.  Know,  my  Lidniiis, 

That  at  this  moment  I  am  all  the  daughter. 
The  filial  feelings  now  possess  my  soul. 
And  other  passions  find  no  entrance  there. 

Lie.  O  sweet,  yet  powerful  influence  of  virtue. 
That  charms  though  cruel,  though  unkind  subdues. 
And  what  was  love  exalts  to  admiration ! 
Yes,  'tis  the  privilege  of  souls  like  thine 
To  conquer  most  when  least  they  aim  at  conquest. 
Yet,  ah !  vouchsafe  to  think  upon  Lidnius, 
Nor  fear  to  rob  thy  father  of  his  due ; 
For  surely  virtue  and  the  gods  improve 
Unwearied  constancy  and  spotless  love. 

iExit  LiciNius. 

Enter  Manlius. 

Att.  Ah  I  Manlius,  stay,  a  moment  stay,  and  hear  mo, 

Man.  I  did  not  think  to  meet  thee  here,  Attilia ; 
The  place  so  little  worthy  of  the  guest. 

Att.  It  would,  indeed,  have  ill  become  Attilia, 
While  still  her  father  was  a  Roman  citizen  ; 
But  for  the  daughter  of  a  slave  to  Carthage, 
It  surely  is  most  fitting. 

Man.  Say,  Attilia, 

What  is  the  purpose  of  thy  coming  hither  ? 

Att.  What  is  the  purpose,  patience,  pitying  Heaven 
Tell  me,  how  long,  to  Rome's  eternal  shame, 
To  fill  with  horror  all  the  wondering  world. 
My  father  still  must  groan  in  Punic  chains. 
And  waste  the  tedious  hours  in  cruel  bondage  ? 
Days  follow  days,  and  years  to  years  succeed. 
And  Rome  forgets  her  hero,  is  content 
That  Regultts  be  a  forgotten  slave. 
WJiat  is  bia  crime  ?  is  it  that  ho  preferr'd 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  165 

His  country^s  profit  to  his  children's  good  ? 
Is  it  th*  nnshalcen  firmness  of  his  soul. 
Just,  uneorrapt,  and,  boasting,  let  me  speak  it, 
Poor  in  the  highest  dignities  of  Rome  ? 
lUostrioos  crime !  O  glorious  poyerty  I 

Man.  But  know,  Attilia— 

jitt.  O,  liave  patience  with  me. 

And  can  ungrateful  Rome  so  soon  forget  ? 
Can  those  who  breathe  the  air  he  brenthM  forget 
The  great,  the  godlike  virtues  of  my  father  ? 
There's  not  a  part  of  Rome  but  speaks  his  praise. 
The  street*— ibxotigh.  them  the  hero  pan^i'd  triumphant  i 
The /orttii»— there  the  legislator  plann'd 
The  wisest,  purest  laws— the  senate-house — 
There  spoke  the  patriot  Boman — ^therc  his  voice 
SecorM  the  public  safety :  Manlius,  yes ; 
The  wisdom  of  his  couxicila  match'd  his  valour. 
Enter  the  temples— mount  the  capitol— 
And  tell  me,  Manlius,  to  what  hand  but  his 
They  owe  their  trophies,  and  their  ornaments, 
Their  foreign  banners,  and  their  boasted  ensigns, 
Tarentine,  Punic,  and  Sicilian  spoils  ? 
Nay,  e'en  those  lictors  who  precede  thy  stops. 
This  consul's  purple  which  invests  thy  limbs, 
All,  all  were  Regulus's,  were  my  father's. 
And  yet  this  hero,  tliis  exalted  patriot, 
This  man  of  virtue,  this  immortal  Roman, 
In  base  requital  for  his  services. 
Is  left  to  linger  out  a  life  in  chains. 
No  honours  paid  him  but  a  daughter's  tears. 
O  Rome  I  O  Regulns  I  O  thankless  citizens ! 

Jifan.  Just  are  thy  tears :— thy  father  well  deser\'e 
them; 
But  know  thy  censure  is  ui^just,  AttiUa. 
The  fate  of  Regulos  is  felt  by  all : 
We  know  and  mourn  the  cruel  woes  he  suffers 
From  barbarous  Carthage. 

Att.  Manlius,  you  mistake ; 

Alas !  it  is  not  Carthage  which  is  barbarouit ; 
'Tis  Rome,  ungrateful  Rome,  is  the  barbarian  ; 
Carthage  but  puQishes  a  foe  profess'd, 
But  Rome  betrays  her  hero  and  her  father : 
Carthage  remembers  how  he  slew  her  souit. 
But  Rome  forarets  the  blood  he  shed  for  her : 


166  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

GarUiage  reyengea  an  acknowledged  foe. 

Bat  Rome  with  basest  perfidy  rewards 

The  glorious  hand  that  bound  her  brow  with  laurels. 

Which  now  is  the  barbarian,  Rome  or  Carthage  ? 

Man,  What  can  be  done  ? 

jttt,  A  woman  shall  inform  yoa. 

Conyene  the  senate ;  let  them  straight  propose 
A  ransom,  or  exchange  for  Regalus, 
To  AMca^  ambassador.    Do  tiiis. 
And  Heav Vs  best  blessings  crown  your  days  with  peace, 

Man,  Thou  speakest  like  a  daughter^  I,  Attilia, 
Most  as  a  cofUuZ  act ;  I  must  consult 
The  good  of  Rome,  and  with  her  good,  her  glory 
Woidd  it  not  tarnish  her  unspotted  fame, 
To  sue  to  Carthage  on  the  terms  thou  wishest  ? 

Att,  Ah  I  rather  own  thouYt  still  my  father's  foe. 

Man,  UngenVous  maid !  no  foult  of  mine  concurred 
To  his  destruction.    *Twas  the  chance  of  war. 
Farewell !  ere  this  the  senate  is  assembled— 
My  presence  is  required. — Speak  to  the  fathers, 
And  try  to  soften  their  austerity ; 
My  rigour  they  may  render  vain,  for  know, 
I  am  Rome^s  eontuXf  not  her  king,  Attilia. 

[Exit  Manlids  with  the  UdorSy  ^c, 

Att,  Cahne.)  This  flattering  hope,  alas!  has  proved 
abortive. 
One  consul  is  our  foe,  the  other  absent. 
What  shall  the  sad  Attilia  next  attempt  ? 
Suppose  I  craye  assistance  from  the  people ! 
Ah !  my  unhappy  father,  on  what  hazards. 
What  strange  yidssitudes,  what  various  turns. 
Thy  life,  thy  liberty,  thy  all  depends  I 

Enter  Barcb  (in  haste.) 

Bar,  Ah,  my  Attilia  I 

Att.  Whence  this  eager  haste  ? 

Bar.  Th*  ambassador  of  Carthage  is  arriv'd. 
Att.  And  why  does  that  excite  such  wondrous  trims- 
port? 
Bar.  I  bring  another  cause  of  greater  still. 
Att,  Name  it,  my  Barce. 

Bar,  Regulut  comes  with  him. 

Att.  My  father !  can  it  be  ? 
Bar,  Thy  father— Regulus. 


THE  INFLBXIBLB  CAPTIVB.  167 

AtL  Thoii  art  deodr'd,  or  thoo  deeeiy'rt  thy  fHokU 
Bar.  Indeed  I  law  Um  not,  bat  every  toogoe 
Speaks  tlie  fl^  tldingi. 

Enter  Fubuus. 

Ati,  See  where  Pnblias  o<Nnet. 

Pub.  My  dster,  I'm  transported  I  Oh  AttUia, 
He*S  here,  oar  fiiUier— Befolas  is  eome  I 

Att,  I  thank  yoo,  gods :  O  my  laU  heart!  where  is  he? 
Hasten,  my  brother,  lead,  O  lead  me  to  him. 

PwA,  It  is  too  soon :  restrain  thy  UxoA  impatience. 
With  Africa's  ambassador  he  waits. 
Until  th*  assembled  senate  give  him  aodianoe. 

AiU  Where  was  he,  Pabliaiw  when  thoa  saw'st  lum 
first? 

Pub,  Ton  know,  in  qaality  of  Roman  qcKstor, 
My  daty  tis  to  find  afit  abode 
For  all  ambassadors  of  fwreign  states. 
Hearing  the  Carthaginian  was  arrived, 
I  hasten'd  to  the  port,  when,  O  jast  gods  1 
No  foreigner,  no  foe,  no  African 
Salutes  my  eye,  bat  Regala»-my  father  I 

AU,  Oh  mighty  Joy  I  too  exqaisite  delight  I 
What  said  the  hero  ?  tell  me,  tell  me  all. 
And  ease  my  anxious  breast 

Pub,  Ere  I  arriv'd. 

My  fitther  stood  already  on  the  shore. 
Fixing  his  eyes  with  anxious  eagerness, 
As  straining  to  descry  the  ci4ntol. 
I  saw,  and  fiew  with  transport  to  embrace  him, 
Fronoanced  with  wildest  joy  the  name  of  fisther— 
With  rcTerence  sdx*d  his  venerable  hand. 
And  would  have  IdasM  it ;  when  the  awful  hens 
With  that  stem  grandeur  which  made  Carthage  tremble^ 
Drew  back— stood  all  collected  in  himself. 
And  said  austerely.  Know,  thou  rash  young  man. 
That  dave$  in  Borne  have  not  the  rights  of  fathers. 
Then  asked,  if  yet  the  senate  was  assembled. 
And  where  ?  which  having  heard,  without  indulcing 
The  fond  efiiisions  of  his  soul,  or  mine, 
He  suddenly  retired.    I  flew  with  speed     .. 
To  find  the  consul,  but  as  yet,  success 
Attends  not  my  pursuit.    Direct  me  to  him. 

Bar.  Publias,  youH  find  him  ia  BeUona*s  temple 


168  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Atk  Then  Rcg^los  retnms  to  Rome  a  slave  ! 

Pub.  Yes,  but  be  comforted ;  I  know  he  brings 
Proposals  for  a  peace ;  his  will's  his  fate. 

Att.  Rome  may  perhaps  refuse  to  treat  of  peace. 

Pttb.  Didst  thou  behold  the  universal  joy 
At  his  retium,  thou  wouldst  not  doubt  success. 
There's  not  a  ton^e  in  Rome  but,  wild  with  transport, 
Proclaims  aloud  that  Regulus  is  come ! 
The  streets  are  filled  with  thronging  mnltitudes, 
Pressing  with  eager  gaze  to  catch  a  look. 
The  happy  man  who  can  descry  him  first, 
P(^t8  him  to  his  next  neighbour,  he  to  his ; 
Then  what  a  thunder  of  applause  goes  round ; 
What  music  to  the  ear  of  filial  love  I 
Attilia  I  not  a  Roman  eye  was  seen, 
But  shed  pure  tears  of  exquisite  delight. 
Judge  of  my  feelings  by  thy  own,  my  sister. 
By  the  laige  measure  of  thy  fond  affection, 
Judge  mine. 

Att.  Where  is  Licinius  ?  find  him  out ; 
My  joy  is  incomplete  till  he  partakes  it. 
When  doubts  and  fears  have  rent  my  anxious  heart. 
In  all  my  woes  he  kindly  bore  a  part : 
Felt  all  my  sorrows  with  a  soul  sincere. 
Sighed  as  I  sigh'd,  and  numb^r'd  tear  for  tear : 
Now  favouring  Heav'n  my  ardent  vows  has  blest. 
He  shall  divide  the  transports  of  my  breast. 

[Exit  ArraiA. 

Pub.  Barce,  adieu ! 

Bar.  Publius,  a  moment  hear  me. 

Know'st  thou  the  name  of  Africa's  ambassador  ? 

Pub.  Hamilcar? 

Bar.  Son  of  Hanno  ? 

Ptib.  Yes !  the  same. 

Bar.  Ah  me !  Hamilcar !— How  shall  I  support  it ! 

C^Uide.) 

Pub.    Ah,  charming  maid!   the  blood  forsakes  thy 
cheek : 
Is  he  the  rival  of  thy  Publius  ?  speak. 
And  tell  me  all  the  rigour  of  my  fate. 

Bar.  Hear  me,  my  lord.    Since  I  have  been  thy  slave. 
Thy  goodness,  and  the  friendship  of  Attilia, 
Have  soften'd  all  the  horrors  of  my  fate. 
Till  now  I  hn""  not  f*»U  *■*»»  woicrht  ^f  ho'iilnre. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  169 

Tin  now— ah,  Publios !— think  me  not  nngratefiil, 
I  would  not  wrong  thee — I  will  be  sincere— 
I  wUl  expose  the  weakness  of  my  sooL 
Know  then,  my  lord— how  shall  I  tell  thee  all  ? 

Pvb,  Stop,  cruel  maid,  nor  wound  thy  Publins  more ; 
I  dread  the  fiitai  frankness  of  thy  words  : 
Spare  me  the  pain  of  knowing  I  am  scom*d ; 
And  if  thy  heart's  devoted  to  another, 
Tet  4p  not  tell  it  me ;  in  tender  pity 
Do  not,  my  fidr,  dissolve  the  fond  illusion. 
The  d«ur  ddigfatful  visions  I  have  form'd 
Of  future  joy,  and  fond  exhaustless  love. 

[Exit  Pdblius. 

Bar,  Calone.J   And  shall  I  see  him  then,  see  my 
Hamilcar, 
Pride  of  my  soul,  and  lord  of  all  my  wishes  ? 
The  only  man  in  all  our  burning  Afric 
Who  ever  taught  my  bosom  how  to  love ! 
Down,  foolish  heart !  be  calm,  my  busy  thoughts  I 
If  at  his  name  I  feel  these  strange  emotions. 
How  shall  I  see,  how  meet  my  conqueror  ? 
O  let  not  those  presume  to  judge  of  joy 
Who  ne^er  have  felt  the  pangs  which  absence  gives. 
Such  tender  transport  those  alone  can  prove. 
Who  long,  like  me,  have  knoiii'n  disastrous  love ; 
The  tears  that  fell,  the  sighs  that  once  were  paid. 
Like  grateful  incense  on  his  altar  laid ; 
The  lambent  flame  rekindle,  not  destroy. 
And  woes  remembered  heighten  present  joy.  iExii, 


ACT  11. 

ScENB—  The  inside  of  the  Temple  qf  BeUona—Seate  for 
the  Senator*  and  Ambauadore — Lictore  guarding  the 
entrance. 

Kanlius,  Publius,  and  Senator*. 

Man.  "Let  Regulus  be  sent  for  to  our  presence ; 
And  with  him  the  ambassador  of  Carthage. 
b  it  then  true  the  foe  would  treat  of  peace  ? 

Pttb.  They  wish  at  least  our  oi^tives  were  exdiang^d, 

X 


170  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

And  send  my  father  to  declare  their  wi&h : 
If  he  obtain  it,  well :  if  not,  then  Reg^ulus 
Retuma  to  meet  the  vengeance  of  the  foe. 
And  pay  for  your  refusal  with  his  blood : 
He  ratified  this  treaty  with  hu  oath, 
And,  ere  he  quitted  Carthage,  heard,  unmoy'd. 
The  dreadful  preparations  for  his  death. 
Should  he  return.    O  Romans !  O  my  countrymen  ! 
Can  yon  resign  your  hero  to  your  foe  ? 
Say,  can  you  give  up  Regnlus  to  Carthage  ? 
Man.  Peace,  Publius,  peace,  for  see  thy  fother  cornea. 

Enter  Hamilcar  and  Rboulvs. 

Ham.  Why  dost  thou  stop?  dost  thou  forget  this 
temple  ? 
I  thought  these  walls  had  been  well  known  to  Regiilus  ? 

B^.  Hamilcar  t  I  was  thinking  what  I  was 
When  last  T  saw  them,  and  what  now  I  am. 

Ham.  (to  the  Conuul.)  Qirthage  by  me  to  Rome  this 
greeting  sends ; 
That  wearied  out,  at  lengtib,  with  bloody  war. 
If  Rome  inclines  to  peace^  die  offers  it. 

Man,  We  will  at  leisure  answer  thee.    Be  seated. 
Come,  Regulus,  resume  thine  ancient  place. 

Seg.  (pointing  to  the  Senator*.)  Who  then  are  these  ? 

Man,  The  Senators  of  Rome. 

Beg.  And  who  art  thou  ? 

Man.  What  mean'at  thou  ?  I^  her  Consul ; 
Hast  thoa  so  soon  forgotten  Manlius  ? 

Beg,  And  diaU  a  tlave  then  have  a  place  in  Rome, 
Among  her  Consuls  and  her  Senators  ? 

Man.  Yes ! — For  her  heroet  Rome  foi^ets  her  law*; 
Softens  their  harsh  austerity  for  thee. 
To  whom  she  owes  her  conquest  and  her  triumphs. 

B^.  Rome  may  forget,  but  Regulus  remembers. 

Man.  Was  ever  man  so  obstinately  good  ?     (Aride.) 

Fub*  Criting.J  Fathers,  your  pardon.    I  can  sit  n«» 
longer.  C  To  the  Senators.} 

Beg.  Publius,  what  dost  thou  mean  ? 

Pub.  ^     To  do  my  duty ; 

Where  Regulus  must  stand,  shall  Publius  sit  ? 

Beg.  Alas !  O  Rome,  how  are  thy  manners  chang'd  1 
When  taut  I  left  thee,  ere  I  saiPd  for  Afric, 
It  WM  a  crime  to  think  of  private  duties 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  171 

When  public  cares  required  attention. Sit, 

Ci0  Pub.J  And  learn  to  occupy  thy  place  with  honour. 

Pub.  Frngiwe  me,  sir,  if  I  refuse  obedience ; 
My  heart  overflows  with  duty  to  my  father. 

B^,  Know,  Publius,  that  thy  duty's  at  an  end ; 
Thy  lather  died  when  he  became  a  slave. 

Man,  Kow  urge  thy  suit,  Hamilcar,  we  attend. 

Hmm.  Afiric  hath  chosen  Regnlus  her  messenger ; 
In  him,  both  Carthai^e  and  Hamikar  speak. 

Man,  (to  Reg.)  We  are  prepar*d  to  hear  thee. 

Ham.  (to  B^.J  Ere  thou  speak'st 

lA^tordy  weigh  what  thou  bast  sworn  to  do. 
Should  Rome  refuse  to  treat  with  us  of  peace. 

JBey.  What  I  have  sworn  I  will  fulfil,  Hamilcar. 
Be  satisfied. 

Pub,  Ye  guardian  gods  of  Rome, 

With  your  own  eloquence  inspire  him  now ! 

Beg,  Carthage  by  me  tliis  embassy  has  sent; 
If  Rome  will  leave  her  undisturbed  possesion 
Of  all  she  now  eqjoys,  she  offers  peace  ; 
But  if  yon  rather  wish  protrai-ted  war. 

Her  next  proposal  is,  exchange  of  captives  ; 

If  you  demand  advice  of  BegtUiUt 
Reject  them  both.-— > 

Hmn.  What  dost  thou  mean? 

Pub.  My  father  I 

Man,  Exalted  fortitude !  Fm  lost  in  wonder.  (Jnde,J 

Beg.  Romans  I  I  will  not  idly  spend  my  breath. 
To  show  the  dire  effects  of  such  a  peace ; 
The  foes,  who  beg  it,  show  their  dread  of  war. 

Man,  But  the  exchange  of  prisoners  thou  proposest  ? 

B^,  That  artful  scheme  conceals  some  Pcmic  fhuid. 

Ham,  Roman,  beware  I  hast  thou  so  soon  forgotten  ? 

Beg.  1  will  fulfil  the  treaty  I  have  sworn  to. 

Pub.  AU  win  be  ruhied. 

iZ0|g.  Conscript  fisthers !  hear  me. 

Though  this  exchange  teems  with  a  thousand  ills. 
Yet  *tis  th*  example  I  would  deprecate. 
This  treaty  fix^d,  Rome's  honour  is  no  more. 
Should  her  degenerate  sons  be  promis'd  life, 
Dishonest  Bfe,  and  worthless  liberty,  - 
Her  glory,  valour,  military  fnide. 
Her  fiune,  her  fortitude,  her  all  were  lost. 
What  honest  capttve  of  them  all  would  wish 


172  THE  INFLiiXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

With  shame  to  enter  her  imperial  gates. 
The  flagrant  acoorge  of  slavery  on  his  back  ? 
None,  none,  my  fnenda,  would  wish  a  fate  so  vile. 
But  those  base  cowards  who  resign'd  their  arms, 
Unstain'd  with  hostile  blood,  and  poorly  sued. 
Through  ignominious  fear  of  death,  for  bondage ; 
The  scorn,  the  laughter,  of  th  insulting  foe. 
O  shame  !  shame !  shame  !  eternal  infamy ! 

Man.  However  hurtful  this  exchange  may  be. 
The  liberty,  the  life  of  Regulus, 
More  than  compensates  for  it. 

Beg.  Thou  art  mistaken. — 

This  Regulus  is  a  mere  mortal  man. 
Yielding  apace  to  all  th'  infirmities 

Of  weak  decaying  nature. 1  am  old, 

Nor  can  my  future,  feeble  services 
Assist  my  country  much ;  but  mark  me  well ; 
The  young  fierce  heroes  youM  restore  to  Carthage, 
In  lieu  of  this  old  man,  are  her  chief  bulwarks. 
Fathers !  in  vig*rous  youth  this  well  strung  arm 
Fought  for  my  country,  fought  and  conquered  for  her : 
That  was  the  time  to  prize  its  service  high. 
Now,  weak  and  nerveless,  let  the  foe  possess  it. 
For  it  can  harm  them  in  the  field  no  more. 
Let  Carthage  have  the  poor,  degrading  triumph 
To  dose  these  foiling  eyes ;  but,  O  my  countrymen  ! 
Check  their  vain  hopes,  and  show  aspiring  Afric 
That  heroes  are  the  common  growth  of  Rome. 

Man.  UnequallM  fortitude. 

Pub.  O  fatal  virtue  1 

Ham.  What  do  I  hear  ?  this  constancy  confounds  me. 

Man.  (to  the  SenatorsJ  Let  honour  be  the  spring  of 
all  our  actions, 
Not  interest,  fathers.    Let  no  selfish  views 
Preach  safety  at  the  price  of  truth  and  justice. 

Beg.  If  Rome  would  thank  me,  I  will  teach  her  how. 
— Know,  fathers,  that  these  savage  Africans 
Thought  me  so  base,  so  very  low  of  soul, 
Tliat  the  poor  wretched  privilege  of  breathing. 
Would  force  me  to  betray  my  country  to  them. 
Have  these  barbarians  any  tortures  left. 
To  match  the  crneltv  of  such  a  thought? 
Revenge  me,  fathers  1  and  I*m  still  a  Roman. 
Arm,  arm  yourselves,  prepare  your  citizens, 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  178 

Snatch  your  imprison'd  eagles  from  their  Ames, 
fly  to  the  shores  of  Carthage,  force  her  gates. 
Dye  every  Roman  sword  in  Punic  blood— 
And  do  such  deeds— 4hat  when  I  shall  retnm, 
(As  I  haTe  swomt  and  am  resolved  to  do,) 
I  may  behold  with  joy,  reflected  back. 
The  terrors  of  your  rage  in  the  dire  visages 
Of  my  astonish'd  executioners. 

Ham.    Surprise  has  chill'd  my  blood!   I'm   lost  in 
wonder  I  • 

Pub.  Does  no  one  answer?  must  my  father  perish  I 

Mmn.  Romans,  we  must  defer  th'  important  question : 
Ifatnrest  counsels  must  determine  on  it. 
Rest  we  awhile :— Nature  requires  some  pause 
From  high-rais'd  admiration.    Thou,  Hamilcar, 
Shalt  sh(ntly  know  our  final  resolution. 
Meantime,  we  go  to  supplicate  the  gods. 

Beg.  Have  you  a  doubt  remaining?    Manlius,  speak. 

Man.  Yes,  R^ruloSi  I  think  the  danger  less 
To  lose  th*  advantage  thy  advice  suggests. 
Than  would  accrue  to  Rome  in  losing  thee. 
Whose  wisdom  might  direct,  whose  valour  guard  her. 
Athirst  for  glory  thou  would'st  rush  on  death, 
And  for  thy  country's  sake  would'st  greatly  peritsh. 
Too  vast  a  sacrifice  thy  seal  requires. 
For  Rome  must  bleed  when  Regulus  expires. 

iExettnt  Consul  and  Senatmt. 

Manent  Rboulus,  Publids,  Hamilgar;  to  them  enttr 
Attilia  and  Licinics. 

Ham.  Does  Regulus  fulfil  his  promise  thus  ? 

B^.  Fve  promis'd  to  return,  and  I  will  do  it. 

Jtt.  My  father !  think  a  moment. 

Lie.  Ah!  my  friend! 

Lie.  and  Att.  O  by  this  hand  we  beg— 

Reg.  Away!  no  more. 

Thanks  to  Rome's  guardian  gods,  I'm  yet  a  slave 
And  will  be  still  a  slave,  to  make  Rome  free ! 

Att.  Was  the  exchange  refused  ?  Oh  I  ease  my  fears. 

Reg.  Publius !  conduct  Hamilcar  and  myself 
To  the  abode  thou  hast  for  each  provided. 

Att.  A  foreign  residence  ?  a  strange  abode  ? 
And  will  my  father  spurn  his  household  gods  ? 

Pub.  Mj  shre  a  stronger  ? Will  he  taste  no  more 


J  74  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

The  tmiling  bleedngs  of  his  dieerful  home  ? 

JZey.  Dost  tfaoa  not  know  the  laws  of  Rome  forbid 
A  fee%  ambMsador  within  her  gates  ? 

FtA,  This  rigid  law  does  not  extenid  to  thee. 

B^.  Yes ;  did  it  not  alike  extend  to  all, 
*Twere  tyranny. — ^The  law  rights  every  man, 
Bat  favours  none. 

jtti.  Then,  O  my  father. 

Allow  thy  daughter  to  partake  thy  fate  I 

Beg.  itttUia !  no.    The  present  exigence 
Demands  far  other  thoughts,  than  the  soft  cares. 
The  fond  effusions,  the  delightful  weakness. 
The  dear  affections  twixt  the  child  and  parent. 

jttt.  How  is  my  iadier  diangM  from  what  Vye  known 
Mml 

Beg.  The  fete  of  Regulus  to  chang*d,  not  R^ni^us, 
I  am  the  same ;  in  laurels  or  in  chains. 
*Tis  the  same  principle ;  the  same  fix*d  soul, 
Unmov'd  itsdf^  though  drcumstances  change. 
The  native  vigour  of  the  free-bom  mind 
Still  stru^^es  with,  still  conquers  adverse  fortune ; 
Soars  above  du^ns,  invincible  though  vanquish'd. 

{ExeterU  RsauLUS  and  Fublius. 

Attilia,  Hamilcar,  gomgt  enter  Barcb. 

Bar,  Ah  I  my  Hamilcar. 

Ham,  Ah !  my  long-lost  Barcb  : 

Again  I  lose  thee  ;  Regulus  rejects 
Th*  exchange  of  prisoners  Africa  proposes. 
My  heart's  too  ftdl.    Oh,  I  have  much  to  say ! 

Bar.  Tet  you  unkindly  leave  me,  and  say  nothing. 

Ham.  Ah !  didst  thou  love  as  thy  Hamilcar  loves. 
Words  were  superfluous ;  in  my  eyes,  my  Barce, 
ThouMst  read  the  tender  eloquence  of  love, 
Th*  uncounterfeited  language  of  my  heart. 
A  single  look  betrays  the  soul's  soft  feelings. 
And  shows  imperfect  speech  of  little  worth. 

[Exit  Hamilcar. 

Att,  My  fether  then  conspires  his  own  destruction. 
Is  it  not  so  ? 

Bar.  Indeed,  I  fear  it  mnch ; 

But  as  the  senate,  has  not  yet  resolved. 
There  is  some  room  for  hope ;  lose  not  a  moment ; 
And,  en  the  conscript  fethers  are  assembled 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE,  175 

Try  all  the  powers  of  winning  rioqoaice, 
Each  gentle  art  of  feminine  persuasion. 
The  lore  of  kindred,  and  the  fsith  of  friends. 
To  bend  the  rigid  Romans  to  thy  purpose. 
jftt.  Tea,  Barce,  I  will  go ;  I  will  exert 
My  little  pow Y,  though  hopeless  of  success. 
Undone  AttiHa  I  fidlen  from  hope's  gay  heights 
Down  the  dread  precipice  of  deep  despair. 
So  some  tir*d  mariner  the  coast  espies, 
And  his  lov'd  home  expUtrea  with  straining  eyes : 
Prepares  with  joy  to  quit  the  treacherous  deep^ 
Hnsh'd  every  wave,  and  every  wind  asleep ; 
But  ere  he  lands  upon  the  wdl-known  shore. 
Wild  stonns  arise,  and  furious  billows  roar, 
T«v  the  fond  wretch  from  all  his  hopes  away. 
And  drive  his  shattered  bark  again  to  sea. 


ACT  111. 

ScBNB— ^  portko  <if  a  Palace  without  the  gates  qf  Rome, 
The  abode  ttfthe  CarthetguUan  ambaeteubr. 

Enter  Rbgulus  and  Pdblius  meeting. 

Beg,  Ah !  Publius  here  at  such  a  time  as  this  ? 
Know'st  thou  the  important  question  that  the  senate 
This  very  hour  debate  ?— Thy  country's  glory, 
Thy  fisther's  h<moor,  and  tiie  public  good  ? 
Dost  thou  know  this,  and  fondly  linger  here  ? 

Fub,  They're  not  yet  met,  my  father. 

B^.  Haste— away— 

Suiqport  my  counsel  in  th*  assembled  senate, 
Conftrm  their  wav*ring  virtue  by  thy  courage, 
And  Regulus  shall  glory  in  his  boy. 

P«6.  Ah !  spare  thy  son  the  most  ungrateful  task. 
What^— suiq^icate  the  ruin  of  my  fother  ? 

Seg,  The  good  of  Rome  can  never  hurt  her  sons. 

Fttb,  In  pity  to  thy  diildren,  spare  thyself. 

Beg,  Dost  thou  then  think  that  miners  a  frantic 
teavery? 
That  Regulus  would  rashly  seek  his  fate  ? 
Publius !  how  little  dost  tiion  know  thy  rire  ! 
Ifiigudging  youth  I  learn,  that  like  o^Aer  men, 


176  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

I  shun  the  evU  and  I  seek  the  g^ood  ; 
Bot  that  I  find  in  guilt,  and  this  in  virtue. 
"Vfete  it  not  guilt,  guilt  of  the  blackest  dye, 
Even  to  thiit^  of  freedom  at  th*  expense 
Of  my  dear  bleeding  country  ?  to  me,  therefore. 
Freedom  and  life  would  be  the  heaviest  evils ; 
But  to  preserve  that  country,  to  restore  her. 
To  heal  her  wounds,  though  at  the  price  of  life. 
Or,  what  is  dearer  far,  the  price  of  liberty, 
Is  OM-fue— therefore  slavery  and  death, 
Are  Regulus's  good— his  wish— his  choice. 
Pub.  Yet  sure  our  country—— 
Beg,  Is  a  whole,  my  Publius, 

Of  which  we  all  are  parttt  nor  should  a  citizen 
Regard  Aw  interests  as  distinct  from  hers  ; 
No  hopes  or  fears  should  toudi  his  patriot  soul ; 
But  what  affect  her  honour  or  her  shame. 
E'en  when  in  hostile  fields  he  bleeds  to  save  her, 
'Tia  not  his  blood  he  loses,  'tis  his  country^s  ; 
He  only  pays  her  back  a  debt  he  owes. 
To  her  he's  bound  for  birth  and  education : 
Her  /711V  secure  him  from  domestic  fends. 
And  from  the  foreign  foe  her  arms  protect  him. 
She  lends  him  honours,  dignity,  and  rank, 
His  wrongs  revenges,  and  his  merit  pays ; 
And,  like  a  tender  and  indulgent  mother. 
Loads  him  with  comforts,  and  would  make  his  state 
As  blest  as  nature  and  the  gods  design^  it. 
Such  gifts,  my  son,  have  their  alloy  of  patn, 
And  let  1 1*  unworthy  wretch,  who  will  not  bear 
His  portion  of  the  public  burden,  lose 
Th'  advantages  it  yields ;— let  him  retire, 
From  the  dear  blessings  of  a  social  life. 
And  from  the  sacred  laws  which  guard  those  blessings  v 
Renounce  the  civilized  abodes  of  man, 
"With  kindred  brutes  one  common  dielter  seek 
In  horrid  wilds,  and  dens,  and  dreary  caves. 
And  with  their  shaggy  tenants  share  the  spoil ; 
Or  if  the  savage  hunters  miss  their  prey. 
From  scatter'd  acorns  pick  a  scanty  meal  ;— 
Far  from  the  sweet  ciiilities  of  life ; 
There  let  him  live,  and  vaunt  his  wretched  freedom : 
IVhile  we,  obedient  to  the  laws  that  guard  us. 
Guard  them,  and  live  or  die  as  they  decree. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  177 

Pub*  With  rey'rence  and  astonishment  I  hear  thee  I 
Thy  words,  my  father,  have  convinced  my  reason, 
But  camiot  touch  my  heart ;— nature  denies 
Obedience  so  repugnant     I'm  a  son. 

Reg.  A  poor  excuse,  unworthy  of  a  Roman ! 
Brutus,  Virginius,  Manlius— they  were  fathers. 

Pub.  *Ti8  true,  they  were ;  but  tliis  heroic  greatnesib 
This  glorious  eleyation  of  the  soul. 
Has  been  confin'd  to  fathers, — Rome,  till  now 
Boasts  not  a  son  of  such  unnatural  virtue, 
Who^  spuming  all  the  powerful  ties  of  blood. 
Has  labour'd  to  procure  his  £Ather*s  death. 

Beg.  Then  be  the  first  to  give  the  great  example- 
Go,  hasten,  be  thyself  that  son,  my  Fublius. 

Pvb.  My  father,  ah  I 

Beg.  Publius,  no  more ;  begone— > 

Attend  the  Senate— let  me  know  my  fate, 
'Twill  be  more  glorious  if  announc'd  by  thee. 

Pub,  Too  much,  too  much,  thy  rigid  virtue  claims 
From  thy  unhi^py  son.    O  nature,  nature  ! 

Beg,  Fublius !  am  I  a  stranger,  or  thy  father  ? 
In  either  case  an  obvious  duty  waits  thee ; 
If  thou  regard'st  me  as  an  alien  here. 
Learn  to  prefer  to  mine  the  good  of  Rome ; 
If  as  a  father— reverence  my  commands. 

Pvb.  Ah !  couldst  thou  look  into  my  inmost  soul. 
And  see  how  warm  it  bums  with  love  and  duty. 
Thou  wonldst  abate  the  rigour  of  thy  words. 

Rag.  Could  I  explore  the  secrets  of  thy  breast, 
The  virtue  I  would  wish  should  flourish  there. 
Were  fortitude,  not  weak  complaining  love. 

Pub.  If  thou  requir'st  my  bloody  I'll  shed  it  all ; 
But  when  thou  dost  ei^oin  the  harsher  task 
That  I  shoold  labour  to  procure  thy  death. 
Forgive  thy  son^-he  has  not  so  much  virtue. 

[Exit  Fublius. 

Beg.  Th'  important  hour  draws  on,  and  now  my  soul 
Loses  her  wonted  calmness,  lest  the  Senate 
Should  doubt  what  answer  to  return  to  Carthage. 

O  ye  protecting  deities  of  Rome ! 
Ye  guardian  gods !  look  down  propitious  on  her, 
Inspire  her  Senate  with  your  sacred  wisdom. 
And  call  up  all  that's  Roman  in  their  souls  1 

12 


178  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 


Enter  Mamlius  (gpedking.) 

See  that  the  licton  wait,  and  guard  the  eutrance- 
Take  care  that  none  intrude. 

Reg.  Ah!  Bfanlius here ? 

l¥hat  can  this  mean  ? 

Mem,  Where,  where  ivR^uIus 

The  great,  the  godlike,  the  invincible  ?    . 
INi  let  me  strain  the  hero  to  my  breast — 

Reg,  (avoiding  himj  BfanUus,  stand  off,  remembei 
I'm  a  slave  ? 
And  thou  Rome's  ConsoL 

Mtm,  I  am  something  more : 

I  am  a  man  enamour'd  of  thy  virtues ; 
Thy  f(Mtitude  and  courage  have  subdued  me. 
I  toae  thy  rival— I  am  now  thjfiiend  ; 
Allow  me  that  distiboietion,  dearer  fax 
Than  all  the  honours  Rome  can  give  without  it. 

Reg,  This  is  the  temper  still  of  noble  minds. 
And  these  the  blessings  of  an  humble  fortune. 
Had  I  iM>t  been  a  tUme^  I  ne'er  had  gain'd 
The  treasure  of  thy  friendship. 

Man,  I  confess, 

Thy  grandeur  cast  a  veil  before  ray  eyes. 
Which  the  reverse  of  fortune  has  removed. 
Oft  have  I  seen  thee  on  the  day  of  triumph, 
A  conqueror  of  nations,  enter  Rome ; 
Now,  thou  hast  conquered  >!»rfttra«  and  thytelf. 
Thy  laurels  oft  have  mov'd  my  soul  to  envy, 
Thy  chains  awaken  my  respect,  my  reverence ; 
Then  Regulus  appeared  a  Juro  to  me. 
He  rises  now  a  god. 

Reg,  Manlius,  enough. 

Cease  thy  applause ;  *tis  dangerous ;  praise  like  thine 
Might  tempt  the  most  severe  and  cautious  virtue. 
Bless'd  be  the  gods,  who  gild  my  latter  days 
With  the  bright  glory  of  the  Consul's  friend«hip ! 

Man,  Forbid  it,  Jove !  saidst  thou  thy  kUter  da)  s  ? 
May  gracious  heav'n  to  a  far  distant  hour 
Protract  thy  valued  life.    Be  it  my  care 
To  crown  the  hopes  of  thy  admiring  country. 
By  giving  back  her  long-lost  hero  to  her. 
I  wUi  exert  my  powo-  to  bring  about 
Th*  exchange  of  captives  Africa  proposes. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  179 

B0g.  Manliaa,  md  is  it  thus,  is  thk  tlie  way 
Thoa  dost  begin  to  g^ve  me  pro<^  of  firiendsliip  ? 
Ahl  if  thy  love  be  so  destmetiTe  to  me, 
Vnat  would  thy  hatred  be  ?    Ifistaken  Consul  I 
Shall  I  then  lose  the  {n-ofit  of  my  wrongs  ? 
Be  thus  defrauded  of  the  benefit 
I  Tainly  hopM  from  all  my  years  of  bondetgef 
I  did  not  come  to  show  my  chains  to  Rome, 
To  move  my  country  to  a  wealc  compassion ; 
I  came  to  save  her  hof%our,  to  presorve  her 
Trom  tarnishing  her  giory ;  came  to  snatch  her 
From  offers  so  destructive  to  her  fiune. 

0  Manlius  I  either  give  me  proofs  more  w<»1;hy 
A  Roman's  ftiendship,  or  renew  thy  hate. 

Man.  Dost  thou  not  know,  that,  tins  esrehangerefosM 
Inevitable  death  must  be  thy  fttte  ? 

Beg,  And  has  the  name  of  death  such  terror  in  it, 
To  strike  with  dread  the  mighty  soul  of  Manlius  ? 
*T1s  not  tO'day  I  learn  that  I  am  mortal. 
The  foe  can  <mly  take  from  Regulns 
What  wearied  nature  would  have  shortly  yielded  \ 
It  will  be  now  a  voluntary  gift, 
*Twould  then  become  a  tribute  seiz'd,  not  offered. 
Yes,  Manlius,  tell  the  worid  that  as  I  liv'd 
For  Rinne  alone^  when  I  could  live  no  longer, 
*Twas  my  last  care  how,  dying,  to  assist 
To  save  that  country  I  had  Ilv'd  to  serve. 

Jfon.  O  unexampled  worth !  O  godlike  Regulus  t 
Thrice  han;>y  Rome !  unparalleled  in  heroes ! 
Hast  thou  tiien  sworn,  thou  awfully  good  man  t 
Never  to  Uess  the  Consul  with  thy  friendship  P 

Beg.  If  thou  wilt  love  me,  love  me  like  a  Bomanp 
These  are  the  terms  on  whidi  I  take  thy  friendshipb 
We  both  must  make  a  sacrifice  to  Rome, 

1  of  my  life,  and  tiiou  of  Beguhu : 

One  must  resign  his  being,  one  his  friend. 

It  is  but  just,  that  what  procures  our  country 

Such  real  blessings,  such  substantial  good. 

Should  cost  thee  something— I  shall  lose  but  little.      * 

Go  then,  my  friend  I  but  promise,  ere  thou  goest« 

With  all  the  consular  authority. 

Thou  wilt  support  my  counsel  in  the  senate. 

If  thou  art  willing  to  accept  these  terms. 

With  transport  I  embrace  thy  proffer'd  friendships 


180  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Man,  (after  a  pause. J  Yes,  I  do  promise. 

B^,  Bounteous  gods,  I  thank  you ! 

Te  never  gave,  in  all  your  round  of  blessing, 
A  gift  8o  greatly  welcome  to  my  soul, 
As  Bfanlius*  friendship  on  the  terms  of  honour! 

Man.  Immortal  Powers !  why  am  not  I  a  slave  ? 
By  heav*n  I    I  almost  envy  thee  thy  bonds. 

B^.  My  friend  I  there's  not  a  moment  to  be  lost ; 
Ere  this,  perhaps  the  senate  is  assembled. 
To  thee,  and  to  thy  virtues,  I  commit 
The  dignity  of  Rome— my  peace  and  honour. 

Mem.  Illustrious  man,  farewell  I 

Heg.  Farewell,  my  friend ! 

Man.  The  sacred  flame  thou  hast  kindled  in  my  soul 
Glows  in  each  vein,  trembles  in  every  nerve. 
And  raises  me  to  something  more  than  man. 
My  blood  is  fired  with  virtue,  and  with  Rome, 
And  every  pulse  beats  an  alum  to  glory. 
Who  would  not  spurn  a  sceptre  when  compared 
With  chains  like  thine  ?    Thou  man  of  every  virtue, 

0  fiurewell !  may  all  the  gods  protect  and  bless  tht^e. 

[Exit  Manlius. 

Enter  Licinius. 

Beg.  Now  I  begin  to  live :  Propitious  Heaven 
Inclines  to  favour  me. ^Licinius  here  ? 

Lie.  '\^th  joy,  my  honour'd  friend,  I  seek  thy  preseuce. 

,Beg.  And  why  with  joy  ? 

Lie.  Because  my  heart  once  more 

Beats  high  with  flatt'ring  hope.    In  thy  great  cause 

1  have  been  labouring. 

Beg.  Say*8t  thou  in  my  cause  ? 

Lie.  In  thine  and  Rome^s.  Does  it  excite  thy  won(i«*  "* 
Couldst  thou  then  think  so  poorly  of  Licinius, 
That  base  ingratitude  could  find  a  place 
Within  his  bosom  ?— Can  I  then  forget 
Thy  thousand  acts  of  friendship  to  my  youth  ? 
Forget  them  too  at  that  important  moment 
When  most  I  might  assist  thee  ? — Regulus, 
Thou  wast  my  leader,  general,  father— all. 
Didst  thou  not  teach  me  early  how  to  tread 
The  path  of  glory ;  point  the  way  thjrself. 
And  bid  me  follow  thee  ? 

Beg.     •  •  But  say,  Licinius, 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  181 

What  hast  thon  d<Hfe  to  serve  me  ? 

Lie.  I  have  defended 

Thy  liberty  and  life! 

Beg.  Ah  !  speak — explun,— 

Lie  Jost  as  the  fiithers  were  about  to  meet, 
I  hasten'd  to  the  temple— at  the  entrance 
Tlieir  passage  I  retarded,  by  the  force 
Of  strong  entreaty ;  then  addressed  myself 
So  well  to  each,  that  I  from  each  obtained 
A  declaration,  that  his  utmost  power 
[%ould  be  exerted  for  thy  life  and  freedom. 

Beg.  Great  gods  I  what  do  I  hear  1    I<icinius  too  I 

Lie.  Not  he  alone ;  no,  'twere  indeed  unjust 
To  rob  the  fair  Attilia  of  her  claim 
To  filial  merit.— What  I  could,  I  did. 
But  she—4ihj  charming  daughter— heav*n  and  eartli. 
What  did  she  not,  to  save  her  father  ? 

Beg.  Who! 

Lie.  Attilia,  thy  beloT'd— thy  age's  darling ! 
Was  ever  father  bless'd  virith  such  a  child  1 
Gods  t  how  her  looks  took  captive  all  who  saw  her ! 
How  did  her  soothing  eloquence  subdue 
The  stoutest  hearts  of  Rome !    How  did  she  rouse 
Contending  passions  in  the  breasts  of  all  I 
How  sweetiy  temper  dignity  with  grief! 
With  what  a  soft,  inimitable  grace. 
She  {vais'd,  reproach'd,  entreated,  flattered,  sooth'd. 

Beg.  What  said  the  senators  ? 

Lie.  What  could  they  say  ? 

Who  could  resist  the  lovely  conqueror? 
See  where  she  comes — Hope  dances  in  her  eyes. 
And  lights  up  all  her  beauties  into  smiles. 

Enter  Attilia. 

jIU.  Once  more,  my  dearest  father 

Beg.  Ah,  presume  not 

To  call  me  by  that  name.    For  know,  Attilia, 
I  number  thee  among  the  foes  of  Regulus. 

Jtt.  What  do  I  hear  ?  thy  foe  ?  my  father's  foe  ? 

Beg.  His  worst  of  foes— the  murderer  of  his  glory. 

jitt.  Ah!  is  it  then  a  proof  of  enmity 
To  wish  thee  all  the  good  that  gods  can  give  thee. 
To  yield  my  life,  if  needful,  for  tliy  service  ? 

Beg.  Thou  rash,  imprudent  girl !  thou  Uttle  knov'st 


182  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

The  digtAtj  and  weight  of  public  carM. 
Who  made  a  weak  and  inexperienc'd  woman 
The  arbiter  of  Regnlua's  fate  ? 

Lie,  Forpity*8Bake,  mylordl 

Eeg.  Peace,  peace,  young  man! 

Her  idlenee  better  than  thy  language  pleads. 
That  bears  at  least  the  semblance  of  repentance. 
Immortal  powers ! A  daughter  and  a  Roman ! 

Att  Because  I  am  a  daughter,  I  presum'd 

Lie.  Because  I  am  a  Roman,  I  aspfared 
T*  oppose  th*  inhuman  rigour  of  thy  fete. 

Beg.  No  more,  Licinius.    How  can  he  be  eaU*d 
A  Roman  who  would  live  with  infamy  ? 
Or  how  can  she  be  Regulus^  daughter. 
Whose  coward  mind  wants  fortitude  and  honour  ? 
Unhappy  children  I  now  you  make  me  feel 
The  burden  of  my  chains :  your  feeble  souls 
Have  made  me  know  I  am  indeed  a  slave. 

lEteit  Rboulus. 

Att.  Tell  me,  Lidnius,  and  oh !  tell  me  truly. 
If  thou  believVt  in  all  the  round  of  time 
There  ever  breatii*d  a  maid  so  truly  wretched  ? 
To  weep,  to  mourn,  a  fother's  crudi  fate — 
To  love  him  with  soul-rending  tenderness — 
To  Imow  no  peace  by  day,  or  rest  by  night — 
To  bear  a  bleeding  heart  in  this  poor  bosom, 
Which  aches  and  trembles  but  to  think  he  sufEers : 
This  is  my  crime— in  any  oQux  child 
'Twould  be  a  merit. 

Lie.  Oh !  my  best  Attilia, 

Do  not  repent  thee  of  the  pious  deed : 
It  was  a  virtuous  error.     That  in  tu 
Is  a  just  duty,  which  the  godlike  soul 
Of  R^^us  would  think  a  shameful  weakness. 
If  the  contempt  of  life  in  him  be  virtue, 
It  were  in  us  a  crime  to  let  him  perish. 
Perhaps  at  last  he  may  consent  to  live ; 
He  then  will  thank  us  for  our  cares  to  save  him : 
Let  not  his  anger  fright  thee.    Though  our  love 
Offend  him  now,  yet,  when  his  mighty  soul 
Is  reconcil'd  to  life,  he  will  not  chide  us. 
The  sick  man  loathes,  and  with  reluctance  takea 
The  remedy  by  which  his  health's  restor'd. 

Att,  Licinius  I  his  reproaches  wound  my  mmiL 


THB  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  183 

I  eumot  live,  vid  bear  lii*  indignation. 

lAe,  WooM  my  Attiiia  ratlier  lose  her  father 
Than  by  offending  him,  preserre  his  life  P 

Ati,  Ah  I  no.    If  he  but  liye,  I  am  contented. 

Ide,  Yes,  he  shall  live,  and  we  again  be  bless'd : 
Thai  dry  thy  tears,  and  let  those  lovely  orbs 
Beam  with  their  wonted  lostre  on  Lic^us, 
Who  Uvea  bat  in  the  sunshine  of  thy  smiles. 

[EsU  LioiNius. 

AH.  (alone,)  Oh  Fortune,  Fortune,  thou  capricious 
goddess! 
Thy  frowns  and  fovours  have  alike  no  bounds  s 
Utmost,  or  prodigal  in  each  extreme. 
MThea  thou  wouldst  humble  human  vanity. 
By  singling  out  a  wretch  to  bear  thy  wrath. 
Thou  cmshest  him  with  anguish  to  excess ; 
If  thou  wouldst  Men,  thou  mak'st  the  happiness 

Too  poignant  for  his  giddy  sense  to  bear. 

Immortal  gods,  who  rule  the  fates  uf  men. 
Preserve  my  father !  bless  him,  bless  him,  heaven  I 
If  your  avenging  thunderbolts  mutt  foil. 
Strike  Atfra— this  bosom  will  invite  the  blow, 
And  thank  you  for  it :  but  in  mercy  spare, 
Oh  1  spare  hi»  sacred,  venerable  head ; 
Respect  in  him  an  image  of  yourselves ; 
And  leave  a  worid,  who  wants  it,  an  example 
Of  courage,  wisdom,  constancy,  and  truth. 

Yet  if,  Eternal  Powers  who  rule  this  ball  I 
You  have  decreed  that  Regulus  must  fsll ; 
Teach  me  to  yield  to  your  divine  command. 
And  meekly  bow  to  your  correcting  hand  \ 
Contented  to  redgn,  or  pleas'd  receive. 
What  reastm  may  withhold,  or  mercy  give. 

[Exit  Attilm 


ACT  IV. 

ScBNK — Gallery  in  the  Ambauadot't  Palace. 

Beg.  {alone.)    Be  calm  my  soul  1  what  strange  enia- 
tions  shake  thee  ? 
Emotions  thou  hast  never  felt  till  now. 
Thou  hast  defied  the  dangers  of  the  deep, 


184  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Th*  impetuous  hurricane,  the  thunder's  roar, 

And  all  the  terrors  of  the  Tarinus  war ; 

Yet,  now  thou  tremblest,  fearful  and  dismayed. 

With  anxious  expectation  of  thy  fate. 

Yes,  thou  hast  amplest  reason  for  thy  fears ; 
For  till  this  hour,  so  pregnant  with  events, 
Thy  fEune  and  glory  never  Were  at  stake. 

Soft-^et  me  think— what  is  this  thing  called  gloiy  ? 
'Tis  the  soul's  tyrant,  that  should  be  dethrouM, 
And  learn  subjection  like  her  other  passions ! 
Ah  1  no  I  'tis  false :  this  is  the  coward's  plea ; 
The  lazy  language  of  refining  vice. 
That  man  was  bom  in  vain,  whose  wish  to  serve 
Is  circumscribed  within  the  wretched  bounds 
Of  $elf—9k  narrow  miserable  sphere  1 
Glory  exalts,  enlarges,  dignifies, 
Absorbs  the  telfith  in  the  tocicU  claims. 
And  renders  man  a  blessing  to  mankind. — 
It  is  this  principle,  this  spark  of  Deity, 
Rescues  debased  humanity  from  guilt. 
And  elevates  it  by  her  strong  excitements. — 
It  takes  off  sensibility  from  pain. 
From  peril,  fear ;  plucks  out  the  sting  from  death ; 
Changes  ferocious  into  gentle  manner? ; 
And  teaches  men  to  imitate  the  gods. 
It  shows, — but  see,  alas !  where  Fublius  comes. 
Ah !  he  advances  with  a  downcast  eye. 
And  step  irresolute. 

Enter  Fublius. 

Beg.  My  Fublius,  welcome  I 

What  tidings  dost  thou  bring  ?    What  says  the  Senate  ? 
Is  yet  my  fate  determin'd  ?.  quickly  tell  me. — 

JPud.  I  cannot  speak,  and  yet,  alas  I  I  must. 

Iteg.  Tell  me  the  whole. — 

I^.  Would  I  were  rather  dumb ! 

Reg.  Fublius,  no  more  delay : — I  charge  thee  speak. 

PtJ).  The  Senate  has  decreed  you  shall  depart. 

Reg.  Blest  spirit  of  Rome !  thou  hast  at  last  prevail'd— 
I  thank  the  gods,  I  have  not  liv'd  in  vain ! 
Where  is  Hamilcar  ?— find  him— let  us  go. 
For  Regulus  has  nought  to  do  in  Rome ; 
1  have  accomplished  her  important  work. 
And  must  depart. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  185 

Pub.  Ah,  my  nnhappy  fother  I 

B^,  Unhapi^,  PabUai  I  didst  thou  say  unhappy  f 
Does  he,  does  that  blest  man  deserve  this  name, 
fftoo  to  his  latest  Inreath  can  serve  his  country  ? 

Pub,  Like  thee,  my  fether,  I  adore  my  country. 
Yet  weep  with  anguish  o'er  thy  cruel  chains. 

R^,  Dost  thou  not  know  that  Ufe's  a  slavery  ? 
Hie  body  is  the  chahi  that  binds  the  soul ; 
A  yoke  that  every  mortal  must  endure. 
Wouldst  thou  lament— lament  the  general  fate. 
The  chain  that  nature  gives,  entail'd  on  all, 
Notthiese  /wear. 

Pub,  '  Forgive,  forgive  my  sorrows : 

I  know,  alas !  too  well,  those  fell  barbarians 
Intend  thee  instant  death. 

Meg,  So  shall  my  life 

And  servitude  together  have  an  end. — 
Publius,  farewell  I  nay,  do  not  follow  me. 

Pub.  Alas  I  my  father,  if  thou  ever  lov*dst  me. 
Refuse  me  not  the  mournful  consolation 
To  pay  the  last  sad  ofiBces  of  duty 
I  e'er  can  show  thee. — 

Beg,  No !— thou  canst  fulfil 

Thy  duty  to  thy  father  in  a  way 
More  grateful  to  him :  I  must  straight  embark. 
Be  it  meanwhile  thy  pious  care  to  keep 
My  lov'd  Attilia  from  a  sight,  I  fear. 
Would  rend  her  gentle  heart. — Her  tears,  my  son. 
Would  dim  the  glories  of  thy  father's  triumph. 
Her  sulking  spirits  are  subdued  by  grief, 
And,  should  her  sorrows  pass  the  bounds  of  reason, 
Pubtius,  have  pity  on  her  tender  age. 
Compassionate  the  weakness  of  her  sex ; 
We  must  not  hope  to  find  in  her  soft  soul 
The  strong  exertion  of  a  manly  courage. — 
Support  her  fainting  spirit,  and  instruct  her. 
By  thy  example,  how  a  Roman  ought 
To  bear  misfortune.    O,  indulge  her  weakness ! 
And  be  to  her  the  father  she  will  lose. 
I  leave  my  daughter  to  thee— I  do  mor^~ 
I  leave  to  thee  the  conduct  of— thyself. 
— Ah,  Publius !  I  perceive  thy  courage  fails— 
I  see  the  quivering  lip,  the  starting  tear  ;— 
That  lip,  that  tear  calls  down  my  mounting  souL 


186  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Reaome  thyself— oh !  do  not  blast  my  hope  I 

Yes — I'm  compoa'd— thoa  wilt  not  mock  my  age — 

Thou  orl— thou  art  a  JSoman— and  my  mm. 

I  Exit. 
Pub.  And  is  he  gone  ?— now  M§  thyself,  my  soul-  ^ 
Hard  is  the  conflict,  bat  the  triumph  glorious. 
Yes, — I  must  conquer  these  too  tender  feelings ; 
The  blood  that  fills  these  Tehu  demands  it  of  me ; 
My  fiMiier*s  great  example,  too,  requires  it. 
Foi^Te  me.  Some,  and  ghry,  if  I  yielded 
To  nature^s  strong  attack : — I  must  subdue  it. 
Now,  B^n^lus,  I  feel  I  am  thy  eon. 

Enter  Athlia  and  Babcb. 

jttt.  My  brotho*,  I*m  distracted,  wild  with  fear— 
Tdl  me,  O  tell  me,  what  I  dread  to  know — 
Is  it,  then,  true  ?— I  cannot  speak—my  fitther  ? 

^ar,  l^y  we  believe  the  fatal  news? 

Pub,  Yes,  Baroe. 

It  is  determined.    Regulns  must  go. 

Att,  Imm(utal  powers ! — What  saylst  thou  ? 

Bar.  Can  it  be? 

Thou  canst  not  mean  it. 

Mt.  Then  yonVe  all  betrayed  me. 

Piib.  Thy  grief  avails  not. 

Enter  Hamilcar  and  Licinius. 

Bar.  Pity  us,  Hamilcar ! 

jitt.  Oh,  help,  Lidnius,  help  the  lost  Attilia ! 

Ham.  My  Barce !  there's  no  hope. 

Lie.  Ah !  my  fair  mourner 

AU'slost! 

ML  What  all,  Lidnius  ?  said'st  thou  aU  ? 

Not  one  poor  glimpse  of  comfort  left  behind  ? 
Tell  me  at  least  where  Regulus  is  gone : 
The  daughter  shall  partake  the  father's  chains. 
And  share  the  woes  she  knew  not  to  prevent.    C  Going. 

Pub.  What  would  thy  wild  despair  ?  Attilia,  stay. 
Thou  must  not  follow ;  this  excess  of  grief 
Would  much  offend  him. 

Att.  Dost  thou  hope  to  stop  me  ? 

Pub.  I  hope  thou  wilt  resume  thy  better  self, 
And  recollect  thy  father  will  not  bear— 

Ati.  I  only  recollect  I  am  a  daughter. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  187 

A  poor,  defenceless,  helpless^  wretched  daughter ! 
Away— and  let  me  fidlow. 

Pub,  No,  my  sister. 

AU.  Detain  me  not— Ah !  wMle  thou  hcdd^t  me  here. 
He  goes,  and  I  shall  never  see  him  more. 

Bcur,  Mf  friend,  be  comforted,  he  cannot  go 
IVhilBt  here  Hamilcar  stays. 

AtL  O,  Barce,  Barce  I 

Who  will  advise,  who  comfort,  who  assist  me  ? 
Hamilcar,  |dty  me. — Thoa  wilt  not  answer  ? 

Ham.  Bage  and  astonishment  divide  my  soul. 

JtU.  Licanias,  wilt  thou  not  relieve  my  soirows  ? 

Lie.  Yes,  at  my  life*s  expense,  my  heart's  best  treasure, 
Wouldst  thou  instruct  me  how. 

Att,  My  brother,  too— 

Ah  I  look  with  mercy  on  thy  sister's  woes ! 

Fub.  I  will  at  least  instruct  thee  how  to  bear  them. 
My  sister—- yield  thee  to  thy  adverse  fate ; 
Think  of  thy  father,  think  of  Regulus ; 
Has  he  not  taught  tiiee  how  to  brave  misfortune  ? 
"lis  but  by  following  his  illustrious  steps 
Thou  e'er  canst  merit  to  be  call'd  his  daughter. 

jtti.  And  is  it  tiius  thou  dost  advise  thy  sister  ? 
Are  these,  ye  gods,  the  feelings  of  a  son  ? 
Indifference  here  becomes  impiety — 
Thy  savage  heart  ne'er  felt  the  dear  delights 
Of  filial  tenderness— the  thousand  joys 
That  flow  from  blessing  and  from  being  bless'd ! 
No— didst  thou  love  thy  father  as  /love  him. 
Our  kindred  souls  would  be  in  unison ; 
And  all  my  dghs  be  echoed  back  by  thhie. 
Thou  wotddst— alas ! — I  know  not  what  I  say. — 
Forgive  me,  Publins,— but,  indeed,  my  brother, 
I  do  not  understand  this  cruel  coldness. 

Ham.  Thou  mayst  not— but  I  understand  it  well. 
Ifis  mighty  soul,  full  as  to  thee  it  seems 
Of  Rome,  and  glory— is  enamour'd— caught— 
Enraptur'd  with  the  beauties  of  foir  Barce.— 
She  stays  behind,  if  Regulus  departs. 
Behold  the  cause  of  all  the  weU-feign'd  virtue 
Of  this  mock  patriot— curst  dissimulation ! 

Pub.  And  canst  thou  entertain  such  vile  suspicious  ? 
Gods  I  what  an  outrage  to  a  son  like  me. 

Ham,  Yes,  Roman :  now  I  see  thee  as  thou  art. 


188  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Tliy  naked  soul  divested  of  its  veil. 
Its  specious  colouring,  its  dissembled  virtues : 
Thou  hast  plotted  with  the  senate  to  prevent 
Th'  exchange  of  captives.    All  thy  subtle  arts. 
Thy  smooth  inventions,  have  been  set  to  work — 
The  base  refinements  of  your  polith'd  land. 

Pub.  In  truth,  the  doubt  ia  worthy  of  an  African. 

(  Contemptuoiuly* 

Ham.  I  know — 

Pub.  Peace,  Carthaginian,  peace,  and  hear  mo, 

Didst  thou  not  know,  that  on  the  very  man 
Thou  hast  insulted,  Barce's  fate  depends  ? 

Ham.  Too  well  I  know,  the  cruel  chance  of  war 
Gave  her,  a  blooming  captive,  to  thy  mother ; 
Who,  dying,  left  the  beauteous  prize  to  thee. 

Pub.  Now,  see  the  use  a  Roman  makes  of  power 
Heav'n  is  my  witness  how  I  lov'd  the  maid ! 

0  she  was  dearer  to  my  soul  than  light  I 
Dear  as  the  vital  stream  that  feeds  my  heart  I 
But  know  my  Tumour's  dearer  tlian  my  love. 

1  do  not  even  hope  thou  wilt  believe  me ; 
Thy  brutal  soul,  as  savage  as  thy  dime, 
Can  never  taste  those  elegant  delights. 
Those  pure  refinements,  love  and  glory  yield. 
*Ti8  not  to  thee  I  stoop  for  vindication, 
Alike  to  me  thy  friendship  or  thy  hate ; 

But  to  remove  from  others  a  pretence 

For  branding  Publius  with  the  name  of  villain ; 

That  they  may  see  no  sentiment  but  honour 

Informs  this  bosom. — Barce,  thou  art  free. 

Thou  hast  my  leave  with  him  to  quit  this  shore. 

Now  learn,  barbarian,  how  a  BoTnan  loves  I  [Exit. 

Bar.  He  cannot  mean  it  I 

Ham.  Oh  exalted  virtue ! 

Which  challenges  esteem  though  from  a  foe. 

C  Looking  after  Publius. 

Att.  Ah !  cruel  Publius,  wilt  thou  leave  me  thus  ? 
Thus  leave  thy  sister  ? 

Bar.  Didst  thou  hear,  Hamilcar  ? 

Oh  !  didst  thou  hear  the  godlike  youth  resign  me  ? 
C  Hamilcar  and  Liciniut  seem  lost  in  thought.J 

Ham.  Farewell,  I  will  return. 

Lie.  Farewell,  my  love !      (to  Attilia.) 

Bar,  Hamilcar,  whcre-^ 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  189 

ML  Alaa !  where  art  tiioa  going  ? 

(to  I/tcmtta.) 

Lie.  If  possible,  to  save  the  life  of  Regius. 

^tt.  Bat  by  what  means ! — Ah !  how  canst  thoa  ef- 
fect it? 

Lie    Since  the  disease  so  desperate  is  become. 
We  most  apply  a  desperate  remedy. 

Ham,  (etfter  a  bmg  pause.)  Yes,  I  will  mortify  this 
generoos  foe ; 
I'll  be  revenged  npon  this  stobbom  Roman ; 
Not  by  defiance  bold,  or  feats  of  arms, 
Bttt  by  a  means  more  sore  to  work  its  end ; 
By  emulating  his  exalted  worth. 
And  showing  him  a  virtue  like  his  own ; 
Such  a  refin'd  rerenge  as  noble  minds 
Alone  can  practise,  and  alone  can  feel. 

Att.  If  thou  wot  go^  Lidnius,  let  Attilia 
At  least  go  with  thee. 

Lie.  No,  my  gentle  love, 

Too  much  I  prize  thy  safety  and  thy  peace. 
Let  me  entreat  thee,  stay  with  Barce  here 
Till  our  return. 

Att.  Then,  ere  ye  go,  in  pity 

Explain  the  latent  purpose  of  your  souls. 

Lie.  Soon  Shalt  thou  know  it  all— Farewell !  ferewellt 
Let  us  keep  Regulus  in  Bomet  or  die. 

(to  HamUcar  as  he  goes  out) 

Ham,  Tes. — ^Iliese  smooth,  polished  Romans  shall  con- 
fess 
The  soil  of  Afrie  too  induces  heroes. 
What,  though  our  pride  pertiaps  be  less  than  theirs. 
Our  virtue  may  be  equal :  they  shall  own 
The  path  of  honour's  not  unknown  to  Carthage, 
Nor,  as  they  arrogantly  think,  confin'd 
To  their  proud  capitol : — Yes,  they  shall  learn 
The  gods  look  down  on  other  climes  than  theirs 

iExit, 

Att.   What  I  gone,  both  gone  ?    What  can  I  think 
or  do? 
Lldnins  leaves  me,  led  by  love  and  virtue 
To  rouse  the  citizens  to  war  and  tumult. 
Which  may  be  fatal  to  himself  and  Rome, 
And  yet,  alas !  not  serve  my  dearest  father. 
Protecting  deities  I  preserve  them  both  I 


190  THE  IMFLBXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Bar.  Nor  is  thy  Barce  more  at  ease,  my  friend  x 
I  dread  the  fierceness  of  Hamilcar's  coorage ; 
RousM  by  the  grandeur  of  thy  brother's  deed. 
And  stung  by  his  reinroacbes,  his  great  soul 
¥nU  scorn  to  be  outdone  by  him  in  glory. 
Yet,  let  us  rise  to  courage  and  to  life. 
Forget  the  weakness  of  our  helpless  sex. 
And  mount  above  these  coward  woman^s  fears. 
Hope  dawns  upon  my  mind— my  prospect  clears. 
And  eyery  cloud  now  brightens  into  day. 

AU.   How  different  are  our  souls !    Thy  sanguine 
temper, 
Flush'd  with  the  natiye  vigour  of  thy  soil. 
Supports  thy  spirits ;  while  the  sad  Attilia, 
Sinking  with  more  than  all  her  sex's  fears. 
Sees  not  a  beam  of  hope ;  or,  if  she  sees  it, 
*TSs  not  the  bright,  warm  splendour  of  the  sun ; 
It  is  a  uckly  and  uncertain  glimmer. 
Of  instantaneous  light'ning,  passing  by. 
It  shows,  but  not  diminishes  the  danger. 
And  leaves  my  poor  benighted  soul  as  dark 
As  it  had  never  shone. 

Bar.  Come,  let  us  ^o. 

Yes,  joys  unlook'd  for  now  shall  gild  thy  days. 
And  brighter  suns  reflect  propitious  rays. 

[Exeunt, 

ScBMB — A  HM  looking  towards  the  Garden. 
Enter  Rbgulus  speaking  to  one  of  Hamilcar's 

aitendanJts, 
Where's  your  ambassador  I  where  is  Hamilcar  ? 
Ere  this  he  doubtless  knows  the  senate's  will. 
Go  seek  him  out— tell  him  we  must  depart— 
Rome  has  no  hope  for  Atm,  or  vAsh  for  me, 
linger  delay  were  criminal  in  both. 

Enter  Maklius. 

Reg.  He  comes.    The  Consul  comes !  ray  noble  friend ! 
O  let  me  strain  thee  to  this  grateful  heart. 
And  thank  thee  for  the  vast,  vast  debt  I  owe  tliee  ! 
But  for  thy  friendship  I  had  been  a  wretch — 
Had  been  compell'd  to  shameful  liberty. 
To  thee  I  owe  the  glory  of  these  chains, 
My  foith  inviolate,  my  fame  preserv'd. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  191 

My  honour,  Tirtne,  glory,  bondago,~«n ! 

Alan.  But  we  shall  lose  thee,  so  xt  is  decreed— i 
Thoa  most  depart  P 

Reg,  Becanae  I  mnst  depart 

You  will  not  lose  me ;  I  were  lost  Indeed 
Did  I  remain  in  Rome. 

Jfon.  Ah!  Regulus, 

Why,  why  so  late  do  I  begin  to  lore  thee  ? 
Alas  I  why  have  the  adv««e  fates  decreed, 
I  ne*a*  must  give  thee  other  proofs  of  friendship. 
Than  those,  so  fatal,  and  so  full  of  wo  ? 

Reg.  Thou  hast  perform'd  the  duties  of  a  friend ; 
Of  a  just,  faithful,  true,  and  noble  friend : 
Yet,  generous  as  thou  art,  if  thou  constrain  me 
To  sink  ^neath  a  weight  of  obligation, 
I  could— yes,  Manlius— I  could  ask  still  more. 

Man.  Explain  thysell 

Reg.  I  think  I  hare  fulfill'd 

Tlie  various  duties  of  a  citixoi ; 
Nor  have  I  aught  beside  to  do  for  Rome. 
Now,  nothing  for  the  puldic  good  remains. 
Manlius,  I  recollect  I  am  a  fisther ! 
My  PubUus !  my  Attilia  I  ah  I  my  friend. 
They  are— (forgive  the  weakness  of  a  parent) 
To  my  fond  heart  dear  as  the  drops  that  warm  it. 
Next  to  my  country,  theyYe  my  all  of  life ; 
And,  if  a  weak  old  man  be  not  deceived. 
They  will  not  shame  that  country.    Yes,  my  friend. 
The  love  of  virtue  blazes  in  their  souls. 
As  yet  these  tender  plants  are  immature. 
And  ask  the  fostering  hand  of  cultivation : 
Heav*n  in  its  wisdom  would  not  let  their  fathtr 
Accomplish  this  great  work.— To  thee,  my  friend, 
The  tender  parent  delegates  the  trust : 
Do  not  refuse  a  poor  man*s  legacy ; 
I  do  bequeath  my  orphans  to  thy  love — 
If  thou  wilt  kindly  take  them  to  thy  bosom, 
Tlieir  loss  will  be  repaid  with  usury. 
O  let  the  ftither  owe  his  glory  to  thee. 
The  children  their  protection ! 

Man,  Regulus, 

With  grateful  joy  my  heart  accepts  the  trust ; 
Oh!  I  will  shield  with  jealous  tenderness. 
The  precious  blossoms  from  a  blasting  world. 


192  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

In  me  thy  cMIdren  shall  possess  a  father, 
Though  not  as  worthy,  yet  as  fond  as  thee. 
The  pride  be  mine  to  fill  their  youthful  breasts 
With  every  virtue— *tw111  not  cost  me  much  : 
I  shall  have  nought  to  teach,  nor  they  to  learn, 
But  the  great  history  of  their  godlike  sire. 

R^.  I  will  not  hurt  the  graqdeur  of  thy  virtue. 
By  paying  thee  so  poor  a  thing  as  thanks. 
Now  all  is  over,  and  I  bless  the  gods, 
I've  nothing  more  to  do. 

Enter  Fcblius  in  hcute. 

Pub.  O  Regulus ! 

Reg,  Say  what  has  happen'd  ? 

Pub.  Rome  is  in  a  tumult— 

There*d  scarce  a  citizen  but  runs  to  arms — 
They  Mrill  not  let  thee  go. 

Beg,  lt!%  possible  ? 

Can  Rome  so  far  forget  her  dignity 
As  to  desire  this  infiunous  exchange  ? 
I  blush  to  think  it  I 

Pub.  Ah  I  not  so,  my  father. 

Rome  cares  not  for  the  peace,  nor  for  th*  exchange ; 
She  only  wills  that  Regulus  shall  stay. 

Beg.  How,  stay  ?  my  oath— my  faitlv— my  honour !  ah ! 
Do  they  forget  ? 

Pub.  No :  Every  man  exclaims 

That  neither  faith  nor  honour  should  be  kept 
With  Carthaginian  perfidy  and  fraud. 

Reg.  Gods  1  gods !  on  what  vile  principles  they  reason ! 
Can  guilt  in  Carthage  palliate  guilt  in  Rome, 
Or  vice  in  one  absolve  it  in  another  ? 
Ah  I  who  hereafter  shall  be  criminal. 
If  precedents  are  used  to  Justify 
The  blackest  crimes ! 

Pub.  Th*  infatuated  people 

Have  called  the  augurs  to  the  sacred  fane. 
There  to  determine  this  momentous  point. 

Reg.  I  have  no  need  of  oracles,  my  son ; 
Honour*s  the  oracie  of  honest  men. 
I  gave  my  promise,  which  I  will  observ* 
^^th  most  religious  strictness.    Rome,  'tis  true. 
Had  power  to  choose  the  peace,  or  change  of  slavee ; 
But  whether  Regulus  return,  or  not, 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  193 

Is  hi*  concern,  not  the  concern  of  Rome. 
That  was  »  pablie,  this  a  pfrivate  care. 
Pablhis  I  tbj  ta^OuT  is  not  what  he  was ; 
/  am  Hm  slave  of  Carthaget  nor  has  Rome 
Power  to  dispose  ct  captives  not  her  own. 
Ooards  I  let  us  to  tlie  port. — ^Fsrewell,  my  firiend. 

Man,  "Let  me  entreat  thee  stay ;  for  shooldst  thou  go 
To  stem  this  tamolt  of  the  populace. 
They  will  by  force  detain  thee :  then,  alas ! 
Both  Regnlns  and  Rome  must  break  their  fsith. 

J?«gr*  "What !  must  I  then  remain? 

Man,  No,  Regnlns, 

I  will  not  check  thy  great  career  of  glory : 
Thoa  shalt  depart ;  meanwhile,  HI  try  to  calm 
This  wild  tumultuous  uproar  of  the  pe<^e. 
The  consular  authority  shall  still  them. 

JKegf.  Thy  virtue  is  my  safeguard— but — 

Man.  Enough.^ 

/  know  thy  honour,  and  trust  thou  to  mine, 
I  am  a  Bomant  and  I  feel  some  sparks 
Of  Regulus's  virtue  in  my  breast. 
Though  fate  denies  me  thy  illustrious  chains, 
I  will  at  least  endeavour  to  deserve  them.  [  Exit, 

Reg.  How  is  my  country  alter'd-I  how,  alas, 
Is  the  great  spirit  of  old  Rome  extinct  1 
Restraint  waA  force  must  now  be  put  to  use. 
To  make  her  virtuous.    She  must  be  eompeWd 
To  feith  and  honour. — Ah !  what  PubUus  here  ? 
And  dost  thou  leave  so  tamely  to  my  firiend 
The  honour  to  asdst  me  1    Qo,  my  boy, 
'Twill  make  me  more  in  love  with  chidns  and  death* 
To  owe  them  to  a  son. 

Pub.  I  go,  my  father-^ 

I  will,  I  wiU  obey  thee. 

Reg.  Do  not  dgh — 

One  sigh  will  check  the  progress  of  thy  glory. 

Pub.  Yes,  I  will  own  the  pangs  of  death  itself 
Would  be  less  cruel  than  these  agonies : 
Yet  do  not  firovn  austerely  on  thy  son  : 
His  anguish  is  his  virtue  .*  if  to  c-onquer 
The  feelings  of  my  soul  were  etuy  to  me, 
*Twould  be  no  merit.    Do  not  then  defraud 
The  sacrifice  I  make  thee  of  its  worth. 

i  Exeunt  several fu. 

K 


194  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 


Manlius,  Attilia. 

AU.  f>peaJi»n^  <u  the  enters. J  Wliere  is  the  consul? 
—Where,  oh  I  where  is  Manlios  ? 
I  come  to  breathe  the  voice  of  moomiDg  to  him, 
I  come  to  ersre  hia  mercy,  to  coiqure  him 
To  whisper  peace  to  my  afflicted  bosom. 
And  heal  the  anguish  of  a  wonnded  spirit. 

Man.  What  woold  the  daughter  of  my  noble  friend  ? 

jitt.  (kneeUn^i.)  If  erer  [nty*8  sweet  emotions  touch'd 
thee, — 
If  ever  gentle  lore  assailed  thy  breast— 
If  eyer  virtooos  friendship  fir'd  thy  soul— 
By  the  dear  names  of  husband  and  of  parent— 
By  all  the  soft  yet  powerful  ties  of  nature-^ 
If  e*er  thy  lisping  infants  charm'd  thine  ear. 
And  waken'd  all  the  father  in  thy  soul,— 
If  e*er  thou  hopVt  to  have  thy  latter  days 
Blest  by  their  love,  and  sweeten'd  by  their  duty— 
Oh  I  hear  a  kneding,  weeping,  wretched  daughter. 
Who  begs  a  father^s  life— nor  her*s  alone. 
But  Rome's— his  country's  father. 

Man,  Gentle  maid  I 

Oh !  spare  this  sofb,  subduing  eloquence  I— ^ 
Nay,  rise.    I  shall  forget  I  am  a  Roman — 
Forget  the  mighty  debt  I  owe  my  country- 
Forget  the  fame  and  glory  of  thy  father. 
I  must  conceal  this  wealmess.  (turns  from  herJ) 

AtU  Crises  eagerly, )  Ah  I  yon  weep  1 

Indulge,  indulge,  my  lord,  the  virtuous  softness : 
Was  ever  right  so  graeefid,  so  becoming. 
As  pity^s  tear  upon  the  hero's  cheek  ? 

Man,  No  more — I  must  not  hear  thee.  Cgoing.J 

Att,  How  I  not  hear  me  I 

Yon  must— you  shaD— nay,  nay,  return,  my  lord — 
Oh  I  fly  not  from  me— look  npon  my  woes. 
And  imitate  the  mercy  of  the  gods : 
*ns  not  their  thunder  that  excites  our  reverence, 
*Ti8  their  mild  mercy  and  fingiving  loftt* 
*TwiU  add  a  brighter  lustre  to  thy  laoreils. 
When  men  shall  say,  and  proudly  point  thee  out, 
*'  Behold  the  ooiisnl  I— he  who  sav^d  his  friend.** 
Ob  1  what  a  tide  itf  Joy  will  overwhelm  thee  1 
"Who  will  not  envy  thee  thy  glorious  feelings? 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  195 

Man,  Thy  fother  Bcoms  his  liberty  and  life. 
Nor  will  accept  of  either,  at  th*  expense 
Of  honour,  Tirtae,  glory,  faith,  and  Rome. 

Jtt,  Think  yoa  behold  the  godlike  Regains, 
The  prey  of  unrelenting  savage  foes. 
Ingenious  only  in  contriving  iU  :— 
Eager  to  glut  fheir  hunger  of  revenge. 
They'll  plot  such  new,  such  dire,  unheard-of  tortures^ 
Such  dreadfiil  and  such  complicated  vengeance. 
As  ev*n  the  Funic  annals  have  not  known ; 
And,  as  they  hei^  fresh  torments  on  his  head, 
Theyll  glory  in  their  genius  for  destruction. 
Ah  I  Mimlius—now  methinks  I  see  my  father — 
My  foithful  fancy,  full  of  his  idea. 
Presents  him  to  me — mangled,  gash'd,  and  torn — 
Stretched  on  the  rack  in  writhing  agony— 
The  torturing  pincers  tear  his  quivering  flesh, 
"While  the  dire  murderers  smile  upon  his  wounds — 
His  groans  their  music,  and  his  pangs  their  sport. 
And  if  they  lend  some  interval  of  ease. 
Some  dear-bought  intermission,  meant  to  make 
The  following  pang  more  exquisitely  felt, 
Th'  insulting  executioners  exclaim, 
**  Now,  Roman  1  feel  the  vengeance  thou  hast  scorned  !** 

Man,  Repress  thy  sorrows — 

jttt.  Can  the  friend  of  Regulus 

Advise  his  daughter  not  to  mourn  his  fate  ? 
How  cold,  alas  I  is  fHendship  when  compar'd 
To  ties  of  blood— to  nature's  powerful  impulse ! 
Yes— she  asserts  her  empire  in  my  soul, 
*Tis  nature  pleads— she  will— she  must  be  heard ; 
With  warm,  resistless  eloquence  she  pleads. 
Ah,  thou  art  soften'd  I — see— the  consul  yields^ 
The  feelings  triumph— tenderness  prevails— 
The  Roman  is  subdued— the  daughter  conquers ! 

(catching  hold  ofhU  robe.) 

Man,  Ah  I  hold  me  not— I  must  not»  cannot  stay, 
The  softness  of  thy  sorrow  is  contagious ; 
I  too  may  feel  wheA  I  should  only  reason. 
I  dnre  not  hear  thee— Regulus  and  Rome, 
The  patriot  and  the  friend— all,  all  forbid  it. 

(breaks  from  her,  and  exit.) 

Att.  Oh  feeble  grasp  I— and  is  he  gone,  quite  gone  ? 
Held,  hold  thy  empire,  reason,  firmly  hold  it^ 


196  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE, 

Or  r&ther  quit  at  once  thy  feeble  throne,  ^ 

Since  thou  bat  tery'st  to  show  me  what  IVe  lost^ 

To  heighten  all  the  horrors  that  await  me ; 

To  sommon  np  a  wild,  distracted  crowd 

Of  fatal  images,  to  shake  my  soul. 

To  scare  sweet  peace,  and  banish  hope  itself. 

Farewell !  delusive  dreams  of  Joy,  fiurewell ! 

Come,  fell  despair  I  thou  pale-eyed  spectre,  come. 

For  thou  Shalt  be  Attilia's  inmate  now. 

And  thou  shalt  grow,  and  twine  about  her  heart. 

And  she  shall  be  so  much  enamour*d  of  thee. 

The  pageant  pleasure  ne*er  shall  interpose 

Her  gaudy  presence  to  divide  you  more. 

(ttandt  in  an  attitude  qftUent  grief.) 

Enter  Licinius. 

Lie.  At  length  I've  found  thee— ah,  my  charming 
maid! 
How  have  I  sought  Uiee  out  with  anxious  fondness  f 
Alas  1  she  hears  me  not.    My  best  AttiUa  I 
Ah  I  grief  oppresses  every  gentle  sense. 
StlU,  still  she  hears  not— 'tis  Licinius  speaks. 
He  comes  to  soothe  the  anguish  of  thy  spirit, 
And  hush  thy  tender  sorrows  into  peace. 

Att,  Who's  he  that  dares  assume  the  voice  of  love, 
And  comes  unbidden  to  these  dreary  haunts  f 
Steals  on  the  sacred  treasury  of  wo. 
And  breaks  the  league  despair  and  I  have  made  ? 

Lie,  *Tis  one  who  comes  the  messenger  of  Heav'n, 
To  talk  of  peace,  of  comfort,  and  of  joy. 

Att»  Didst  thou  not  mock  me  with  the  sound  of  Joy  f 
Thou  little  know'st  the  anguish  ot  my  soul. 
If  thou  believ*st  I  ever  can  again, 
So  long  the  wretched  sport  of  angry  fortune. 
Admit  delusive  hope  to  my  sad  bosom. 
No— I  attJure  the  flatterer  and  her  train. 
Let  those,  who  ne'er  have  been  like  me  deceived, 
Embrace  the  fair  fantastic  sycophant— 
For  I,  alas  I  am  wedded  to  deqplair. 
And  will  not  hear  the  sound  of  comfort  more. 

Lie,  Cease,  cease,  my  love,  this  tender  voice  of  wo^ 
Though  softer  than  the  dying  cygnet's  plaint  t 
She  ever  chants  her  most  melodious  strain 
When  death  and  torrow  harmonise  her  note 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  197 

jitt.  Yes,  I  will  listen  now  with  fond  delight ; 
Tor  death  and  sorrow  are  my  darling  themes. 
Well ! — ^what  hast  thou  to  say  of  death  and  sorrow  ? 
BeUeve  me,  fhoa  wilt  find  me  apt  to  listen, 
And,>if  my  tongoe  be  slow  to  answer  thee. 
Instead  of  words  HI  giye  thee  sighs  and  tears. 

Lie,  I  come  to  dry  thy  tears,  not  make  them  flow  ; 
The  gods  once  more  profriltious  smile  upon  us, 
Joy  shall  again  await  each  happy  mom. 
And  eyer-new  delight  shall  crown  the  day  I 
Yes,  Regnlos.  shall  live. 

jfti.  Ah,  me !  what  say'st  thou  ? 

Alas !  Pm  bat  a  poor,  weak,  trembling  woman— 

I  cannot  bear  these  wild  extremes  of  fate- 
Then  mock  me  not.    I  think  thou  art  Lidnios, 

The  genotnis  lover,  and  the  faithful  friend  1 

I  think  thou  wonldst  not  sport  with  my  afflictions. 
Lie.  Mock  thy  afflictions?    May  etemalJoye, 

And  every  power  at  whose  dread  shrine  we  worship, 

Blast  all  the  hopes  my  fond  ideas  form, 

If  I  deceive  fhee  I  Regnlos  shall  live, 

Shall  live  to  give  thee  to  Licinius*  arms. 

Oh  I  we  will  smooth  his  downward  path  of  life, 

And  after -a  long  length  of  virtaous  years. 

At  the  last  verge  of  honourable  age, 

When  nature's  glimmering  lamp  goes  gently  out. 

Well  close,  together  dose,  his  eyes  in  peace, 

Together  drop  the  sweetly-painful  tear. 

Then  copy  out  his  virtues  in  our  lives. 
Att.  And  shall  we  be  so  blest  ?  is*t  possible  ?  .    4 

Forgive  me,  my  Lidnius,  if  I  doubt  thee. 

Fate  nevor  gave  sndi  exquisite  delight 

As  flattering  hope  hath  imaged  to  thy  sooU 

But  how  I    Explain  this  bounty  of  the  gods. 
Lie,  Thouknow'st  what  influence  the  name  of  tribone 

Gives  its  possessor  o'er  the  people's  minds  t 

That  power  I  have  exerted,  nor  in  vain  $ 

AU  are  preparM  to  second  my  designs : 

The  plot  is  ripe— there's  not  a  man  but  swears 

To  keep  thy  godlike  fother  here  in  Rome— 

To  save  his  life  at  haxard  of  his  own. . 
Jtt,  By  what  gradation  does  my  joy  ascend  I 

I  thought  that  if  my  father  had  been  sav'd 

By  any  means,  I  had  been  rich  in  bliss : 


198  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

But  that  he  lives,  and  Uves  presenr'd  by  thee. 

In  such  a  prodigality  of  fate, 

I  cannot  bear  my  Joy  with  moderation : 

Heaven  should  have  dealt  it  with  a  scantier  hand, 

And  not  have  showered  such  plenteous  blessings  on  me ; 

They  are  too  great,  too  flattering  to  be  real ; 

*TiB  some  delightful  vision  whidi  enchants. 

And  cheats  my  senses,  weakraM  by  misfortune. 

Lie  Well  seek  thy  &ther,  and,  meanwhile,  my  fair. 
Compose  thy  sweet  emotions  ere  thou  see'st  him. 
Pleasure  itself  is  painful  in  excess ; 
For  joys,  like  sorrows,  in  extreme,  oppress : 
The  gods  themselves  our  pious  cares  approve. 
And  to  reward  our  virtue,  crown  our  love. 


ACT  V. 

An  Apartment  in  the  Ambcusador's  palace^  Guards  and 
other  attendants  seen  at  a  distance. 

Ham.  Where  is  this  wondrous  man,  this  matchlPHs 
hero. 
This  arbiter  of  kingdoms  and  of  kings. 
This  delegate  of  Heaven,  this  Roman  god  ? 
I  long  to  show  his  soaring  mind  an  equal. 
And  bring  it  to  the  standard  of  humanity. 
What  pride,  what  glory  will  it  be  to  fix 
An  obligation  on  his  stubborn  soul ! 
Oh !  to  constrfun  a  foe  to  be  obliged  I 
The  very  thought  exalts  me  e^en  to  rapture. 

Enter  Rbgulus  and  Guards. 

Ham.  Well,  Regulus  !  At  last — 

Reg.  I  know  it  all ; 

I  know  the  motive  of  thy  just  complaint- 
Be  not  alarm'd  at  this  licentious  uproar 

Of  the  mad  populace.    I  will  depart — 

Fear  not ;  I  will  not  stay  in  Rome  alive. 

Ham.  What  dost  thou  mean  by  uproar  and  alarms  ? 

Hamilcar  does  not  come  to  vent  complaints ; 

He  rather  comes  to  prove,  that  Afric  too 

Prodacea  heroes,  and  that  Tiber's  Imuks 


THB  INFLEXIBLB  CAPTIVE.  199 

May  find  »  rival  <m  the  Panic  coast. 

Beg.  Be  it  sow— *T1s  not  a  time  for  Tain  debate : 
CoUect  thy  people.— I«et  ns  rtraiffht  depart 
Ham,  Lend  me  thy  bearing  tnL 
Beg,  O  patience,  patience ! 

Ham.  It  is  eetesffi'd  a  gkury  to  be  grateful  ? 
Beg,  The  time  has  been  when  twai  a  duty  only. 
But  *tis  a  duty  now  so  Uttle  practised. 
That  to  perform  it  is  become  a  glory. 

Ham.  If  to  fulfil  it  should  expose  to  danger  ? — 
Beg,  It  rises  then  to  an  illustrioos  Tirtue. 

Horn.  Then  grant  this  merit  to  an  African. 
Give  me  a  patient  hearing— Thy  great  son. 
As  delicate  in  honour  as  in  loye. 
Hath  nobly  given  my  Barce  to  tny  arms ; 
And  yet  I  Imow  he  doats  upcm  the  maid. 
I  come  to  emulate  the  generous  deed ; 
He  gave  me  back  my  love,  and  in  return 
I  wiU  restore  his  fitUier. 

Beg,  Ah!  what say'jit thou f 

Wilt  thou  preserve  tne  then  ? 

Ham,  I  wilL 

Beg,  But  how  ? 

Ham.  By  loavingthee  at  liberty  to/y. 

Beg.  Ah! 

Ham.  I  will  dismiss  my  guards  on  some  pretence, 
Meanwhile  do  thou  escape,  and  lie  coneeal'd : 
I  will  affect  a  rage  I  shall  not  fed. 
Unmoor  my  ships,  and  sail  for  Africa. 

Beg.  Abhorred  barbarian  1 

Ham.  W^  what  doet  thou  say  ? 

Art  thoa  not  much  surjvis'd  ? 

Beg.  I  am  indeed. 

Ham.  Thou  couldst  not  then  have  hoped  it  ? 

Beg.  Nol  I  could  not. 

Htnn.  And  yet  Tm  not  a  Roman. 

Beg.  (emUing  contempiuotuljf.J  I  perceive  it. 

Ham.  You  may  retire.    Caloud  to  the  gmar4». ) 

Beg.  No ! — Stay,  I  charge  you,  stay. 

Ham,  And  wherefore  stay? 

Beg.  I  thank  thee  for  thy  offer. 

But  I  shall  go  with  thee. 

Ham.  *Ti8  well,  proud  man ! 

Thou  do6t  despise  me,  then  ? 


200  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Reg.  No,  but  I  pity  thee. 

Ham,  Why  pity  me  ? 

R^.  Because  thy  poor,  dark  soul 

Hath  never  felt  the  piercing  ray  of  virtue. 
Know,  African  I  the  sdieme  thou  dost  propose 
Wonld  iqjore  me,  fhy  country,  and  thyself. 

Ham,  Thou  dost  mistake. 

Reg,  Who  was  it  gave  thee  power 

To  rule  the  destiny  of  Regulus  ? 
Am  I  a  slave  to  Carthage,  or  to  thee  ? 

Ham,  What  does  it  signify  from  whom,  proud  Roman, 
Thou  dost  receive  this  benefit  ? 

Reg.  A  benefit? 

0  savage  ign(Mrance  I  is  it  a  benefit 

To  lie,  elope,  deceive,  and  be  a  villain  ? 

Ham,  What  I  not  when  life  itself  when  all*s  at  stake? 
Know^t  thou  my  countrymen  prepare  thee  tortures 
That  shock  imagination  but  to  tliink  of? 
Thou  wilt  be  mangled,  butcher'd,  rack'd,  impaled. 
Does  not  thy  nature  shrink  ? 

Reg.  (tmUing  at  his  threats.)  Hamilcar !  no.  ' 

Dost  thou  not  know  the  Romui  genius  better  ? 
We  live  on  honour — 'tis  our  food,  our  life. 
The  motive  and  the  measure  of  our  deeds ! 
We  look  on  death  as  on  a  common  object ; 
The  tongue  nor  falters,  nor  the  cheek  turns  pale 
Nor  the  calm  eye  is  mov^d  at  sight  of  him : 
We  court,  uid  we  embrace  him  undismay'd ; 
We  smile  at  tortures  if  they  lead  to  glory. 
And  only  cowardice  and  guilt  appal  us. 

Ham,  Fine  sophistry  S  the  valour  of  the  tongue. 
The  heart  disclaims  it ;  leave  this  pomp  of  words, 
And  cease  dissembling  with  a  friend  like  me. 

1  know  that  life  is  dear  to  all  who  live, 

That  death  is  dreadful,— yes,  and  must  be  fear*d, 
£*en  by  the  frozen  apathists  of  Rome. 

Reg.  Did  I  fear  death  when  on  Bagrada's  banks 
I  faced  and  slew  the  formidable  serpent 
That  made  your  boldest  Africans  recoil, 
And  shrink  with  horror,  though  the  monster  liv'd 
A  native  inmate  of  their  own  parched  deserts  ? 
Did  I  fear  death  before  the  gates  of  Adis?— 
Ask  Bostar,  or  let  Asdrubal  confess. 

Ham,  Or  shall  I  rftther  of  Xantippus  ask. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  201 

'Who  dar*d  to  undeceiye  deladed  Rome, 
And  prove  this  vaanter  not  inyincible  ? , 
*T1s  even  aaid,  in  Africa  I  mean. 
He  made  a  prisoner  of  this  demi-god.— • 
Did  we  not  triomph  then  ? 

Reg,  Vain  boaster!  no. 

No  Carthaginian  conqner'd  Regolua ; 
Xantippoft  was  a  Greek— a  brave  one  too : 
Yet  what  distinction  did  yoor  Afric  make 
Between  the  man  who  served  her,  and  her  foe  f 
I  was  the  ol)|}ect  of  her  open  hate: 
He,  of  her  secret,  dark  malignity. 
He  dnrst  not  tnut  the  nation  he  had  sav'd ; 
He  knew,  and  therefore  fear'd  you. — Yes,  he  Imew 
Where  once  you  were  <^liged,  you  ne'er  fui^ve. 
Could  you  foi^ve  at  all,  you'd  rather  pardon 
The  man  who  hated,  than  the  man  who  serv*d  you. 
Xantippos  found  his  ruin  ere  it  reach'd  him, 
Lnrldng  behind  your  honours  and  rewards. 
Found  it  in  your  feign'd  courtesies  and  fawnings. 
When  vice  intends  to  strike  a  master  stroke, 
Its  veil  is  smiles,  its  language  protestations. 
The  Spartan^  meA%  threaten'd,  but  his  service 
Compell'd  his  ruin. — Both  you  could  not  pardon. 

Ham,  Come,  come,  I  know  full  well— 

Beg*  Barbarian!  peai'e. 

l*ve  heard  too  much— Go,  call  thy  followers ; 
Prepare  thy  ships,  and  learn  to  do  thy  duty. 

Ham,  Yes  I— show  thyself  intrepid,  and  insult  me ; 
Can  mine  the  blindness  of  barbarian  friendship. 
On  Tiber'to  banks  I  hear  thee,  and  am  cahn : 
But  know,  thou  scornful  Roman  I  that  too  soon 
In  Carthage  thou  may'st  fear  uid  feel  my  vengeance : 
Thy  cold,  obdurate  pride  shall  there  confess. 
Though  Rome  may  talk— 'tis  Africa  can  punish. 

{Exit. 

Reg.  Farewell!  Fve  not  a  fhonght  to  waste  on  thee. 
Where  is  the  consul  I  why  does  Publius  stay  ? 
Alas  I  I  fear— but  see  Atttlia  comes  I — 

Enter  Attilia. 

Reg.  What  brings  thee  here,  my  child  ?  what  eager 

joy 

Transports  thee  thus  ? 

K2 


202  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Att.  I  eaonot  8|»flak— my  fiither ! 

Joy  choaks  my  utterance— Rome,  dear  grateful  Roum^ 
(Oh  1  may  her  cup  with  Ueniags  overfloHs) 
Gives  up  our  common  destiny  to  thee ; 
Faithful  and  constant  to  th'  aidrice  thou  ^v'st  her. 
She  will  not  hear  of  peace,  or  change  of  slaves. 
But  she  insists— reward  and  bless  her,  gods  !— 
That  thou  shalt  here  remain. 

Jteg,  What  I  with  the  shame — 

jttt.  Oh!  no— the  sacred  senate  hath  considered 
That,  when  to  Carthage  thou  didst  pledge  thy  iaith. 
Thou  wast  a  Ci4>tive,  and  that,  being  such. 
Thou  conldst  not  bind  thsrself  in  covenant. 

B^.  He  who  can  die  is  always  free,  my  child  I 
Learn  farther,  he  who  owns  another^  strengtii 
Confesses  his  own  weakness.    Let  them  know, 
I  swore  I  would  return  because  I  chose  it. 
And  will  return,  because  I  swore  to  do  it. 

Enter  Fublids. 

Pub,  Vain  is  that  hope,  my  father. 

Beg.  Who  shaU  stop  roe  ? 

Fub.  All  Rome. — The  dticens  are  up  in  arms : 
In  vain  would  reason  stop  the  growing  torrent ; 
In  vain  would'st  thou  attempt  to  reach  the  port, 
The  way  is  barr'd  by  thronging  multitudes : 
The  other  streets  of  Rome  are  all  deserted. 

Beg,  Whore,  where  is  Manlius  t 

Pub,  He  is  still  thy  friend  •, 

His  single  voice  opposes  a  whole  pe(^>le ; 
Ho  threats  this  moment,  and  the  next  entreats. 
But  all  in  vidn :  none  hear  him,  none  obey. 
The  general  fury  rises  e*en  to  madness. 
The  axes  tremble  in  the  Bctors'  hands. 
Who  pale  and  spiritless  want  power  to  use  them — 
And  one  wild  scene  of  anarchy  prevails. 

Jleg*.  Farewell !  my  daughter.    PuUius,  follow  me. 

iExit  PUBLIOS. 

jitt.  Ah  I  where  ?  I  tren^le — 

(detaming  Rboulus.) 

Beg.  .   To  asskt  my  friend — 

T*  iHibraid  my  hapless  country  with  hat  crirae-^ 
To  keep  unstain'd  the  glory  of  these  chains-^ 
To  go,  oar  peridi. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  S03 

yitt.  Oh !  hare  mercy  I 

Beg  Hold ; 

I  haye  been  patient  with  thee;  have  indulK'd 
Too  much  the  fond  affections  of  thy  aool ; 
It  is  enough ;  thy  grief  would  now  offend 
Thy  other's  honour ;  do  not  let  thy  tears 
Conspire  with  Borne  to  rob  me  of  my  triumph. 

ML  Alas  1  it  wounds  my  soul. 

Reg,  I  know  it  does. 

I  know  'twill  grieve  thy  gentle  heart  to  lo«e  me ; 
But  think,  thou  mak'st  the  sacrifice  to  Borne, 
And  all  is  well  again. 

jitt.  Alas!  my  father. 

In  aught  beside — 

B^,  What  wonldst  thou  do,  my  child  ? 

Canst  thou  direct  the  destiny  of  Borne, 
And  boldly  plead  amid  th*  assembled  senate  ? 
Canst  thou,  forgetting  aU  thy  sex's  softness, 
Fiercely  engage  in  hardy  deeds  of  arms  ? 
Canst  thou  encounter  labour,  toU,  and  famine. 
Fatigue  and  hardships,  watchings,  cold  and  heat 
Canst  thou  attempt  to  serve  thy  country  thus  ? 
Thou  canst  not  x—hvit  thou  mayst  sustain  my  loss 
Without  these  agonizing  pangs  of  grief. 
And  set  a  bright  example  of  submission. 
Worthy  a  Boman's  daughter. 

ML  Tet  such  fortitudfr^ 

Beg,  Is  a  most  painful  virtue ;— but  Attilia 
Is  Begxdus's  daughter,  and  must  have  it. 

uitL  I  will  entreat  the  gods  to  give  it  me. 
Ah !  thou  art  offended  I  I  have  lost  thy  love. 

Beg.  Is  this  concern  a  mark  that  thou  hast  lost  it  ? 
I  cannot,  cannot  spurn  my  weeping  child. 
Beceive  this  proof  of  my  paternal  fondness  ;— 
Thou  lov'st  Licinins— He  too  loves  my  daughter. 
I  give  thee  to  his  wishes ;  I  do  more — 
I  give  thee  to  his  virtues. — Tes,  Attilia, 
The  noble  youth  deserves  this  dearest  pledge 
Thy  fiUher's  friendship  ever  can  bestow. 

Jtt,  My  lord !  my  father  I  wilt  thou,  canst  thou  leave 
me? 
The  tender  father  will  not  quit  his  child  * 

Beg.  I  am,  I  am  thy  father !  as  a  proof, 
I  leave  thuo  my  example  how  to  sufier. 


804  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

My  child !    I  hare  a  heart  within  this  bosom ; 
That  heart  has  passions— see  in  what  we  differ ; 
Passion— which  is  thy  tyrant— is  my  slaye. 
Att.  Ah  I  stay  my  fother.    Ah  I 
Beg.  Farewell !  farewell !        [Exit, 

AH,  Yes,  Regolus !  I  feel  thy  spirit  here, 
Thy  mighty  spirit  struggling  in  this  breast, 
And  it  shall  conquer  all  these  coward  feelings. 
It  shall  subdue  the  womui  in  my  soul ; 
A  Roman  virgin  should  be  something  rnore^ 
Should  dare  above  her  sex*s  narrow  limits — 
And  I  will  dare— and  misYy  shall  assist  me — 
My  &ther  I  I  will  be  indeed  thy  daughter  I  -^ 

The  hero  shall  no  more  disdain  his  child ;  •*> 

Attilia  shall  not  be  the  only  brandi        ■  ^ 
That  yields  dishonour  to  the  parent  tree. 

Enter  Barcb. 

Bar,  Attilia !  is  it  true  that  Regulus, 
In  spite  of  senate,  people,  augurs,  friends. 
And  children,  will  deport  ? 

Att.  ■>  Yes,  it  is  true. 

Bar.  Oh !  what  romantic  madness ! 

Att.  You  forget — 

Barce  I  the  deeds  of  heroes  claim  respect. 

Bar,  Dost  thou  approve  a  virtue  which  must  lead 
To  chains,  to  tortures,  and  to  certain  death  ? 

Att.  Barce!   those  chains,  those  tortures,  and  that 
death. 
Will  be  his  triumph. 

Bar,  Thou  art  pleased,  Attilia : 

By  heaven  thou  dost  exult  in  his  destruction ! 

Att.  Ah!  pitying  powers.  (weeps.) 

Bar.  I  do  not  comprehend  thee. 

Att.    No,  Barce,  I  believe  it. — Why,  how  shouldst 
thou? 
If  I  mistake  not,  thou  wast  bom  in  Carthage, 
In  a  barbarian  land,  where  never  child 
Was  taught  to  triumph  in  a  fother^s  chains. 

Bar.  Yet  thou  dost  weep— thy  tears  at  least  are  honest, 
For  they  refuse  to  share  thy  tongue's  deceit ; 
They  speak  the  genuine  language  of  affliction. 
And  tell  the  sorrows  that  oppress  thy  soul. 

Att  Griefi  that  dissolves  in  tears,  relieves  the  heart, 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  205 

When  ocmgregBted  vapours  melt  in  rain, 

The  sky  is  eahn'd,  and  all's  serene  again.  [  Exit. 

Bar,  Why,  what  a  strange,  fieuitastic  land  is  this ! 
This  love  of  glory's  the  disease  of  Rome ; 
It  makes  her  mad,  it  is  a  wild  delirium. 
An  nniversal  and  contagions  frenzy ; 
It  prejrs  on  all,  it  spares  nor  sex  nor  age : 
The  Consul  envies  Regulus  his  chains — 
He,  not  less  mad,  contemns  his  Hfe  and  freedom — 
The  daughter  glories  in  the  father's  ruin — 
And  Publius,  more  distracted  thui  the  rest. 
Resigns  the  object  that  his  soul  adores. 
For  this  vain  phantom,  for  this  empty  glory. 
This  may  be  virtue ;  but  I  thank  the  gods. 
The  soul  of  Barce's  not  a  Roman  soul.  [  Exit. 

Scvsn-^uritAin  sight  of  the  Tiber— Ships  ready  far  the 
embarkation  qfRegtdus  and  the  Ambcusador—  Tribune 
and  People  stopping  up  the  passage—  Consul  and  Lie- 
tors  endeavourit^  to  dear  it, 

Manlius  and  Licinius  advance. 

Lie.  Rome  will  not  suffer  R^^us  to  go. 

Man.  I  thought  the  Consul  and  the  Senators 
Had  been  a  part  of  Rome. 

Lie  I  grant  they  are — 

But  still  the  people  are  the  greater  part. 

Man.  The  greater,  not  the  wiser. 

Lie.  The  less  cruel. 

Full  itf  esteem  and  gratitude  to  Regulus, 
We  would  preserve  his  life. 

Man.  And  we  his  honour. 

Lie.  His  honour! 

Man.  Yes.    Time  presses.    Words  are  vidn. 
Make  way  there— clear  the  passage. 

Lie.  On  your  lives. 

Stir  not  a  man. 

Man.  I  do  command  you,  go. 

Lie.  And  I  forbid  it. 

Man.  Clear  the  way,  my  friends. 

Row  dares  Lidnius  thus  oppose  the  Consul  ? 

Lie.  How  darM  thou,  ManUus,  thus  oppose  the  Tri- 
bune f 

Man,  TU  diow  thee  what  I  dare,  imprudent  boy  t 


S06  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE. 

Licton,  force  through  tiie  passage. 

Lie.  Romans,  guard  it. 

Man.  Gods  I  is  my  power  resuted  then  with  arms ! 
Thou  dost  affiront  the  migesty  of  Rome. 

Lie.  The  migesty  of  Rome  is  in  the  peoj^e ; 
Thou  dost  insult  it  by  opposing  them. 

People.  Let  noble  Regulus  remain  in  Rome. 

Man.   My  friends,  let  me  explain  this  treacherous 
adieme. 

People.  We  will  not  hear  thee—Regulus  shall  stay. 

Man.  What !  none  obey  me  ? 

People.  Regulus  shall  stay. 

Man.  Romans,  attend. 

People.  Let  Regulus  remain. 

Enter  Regulus,  foUovoed  by  Publius,  Attilm,  Ham- 
ILCAR,  Barcb,  &c. 

Beg^.  Let  Regulus  remain !    What  do  I  hear  ? 
Is't  possible  the  wish  should  come  from  you  ? 
Can  Romans  give,  or  Regulus  accept^ 
A  life  of  infamy  ?    Is't  possible  ? 
Where  is  the  andent  virtue  of  my  country  ? 
Rise,  rise,  ye  mighty  spirits  of  ciA  Rome ! 
I  do  invoke  you  from  your  silent  tombs ; 
Fabridus,  Codes,  and  Camillus,  rise. 
And  show  your  sons  what  their  great  fathers  were. 
My  countrymen,  what  crime  have  I  committed  ? 
Alas !  how  has  the  wretched  Regulus 
Deserv*d  your  hatred  ? 

Lie.  Hatred  ?  ah  !  my  friend. 

It  is  our  love  would  break  these  cruel  chains. 

Iteg.  If  you  deprive  me  of  my  chwns,  Fm  nothing; 
They  are  my  honours,  riches,  titles, — all  I 
They'll  shame  my  enemies,  and  grace  my  country ; 
Theyll  waft  her  glory  to  remotest  dimes. 
Beyond  her  provinces  and  conquer'd  realms. 
Where  yet  her  conq'ring  eagles  never  flew } 
Nor  shall  she  blush  hereafter  if  she  find 
Recorded  with  her  faithful  dtizens. 
The  name  of  Regulus,  the  captive  Regulus. 
My  countrymen  1  what,  thmk  you,  kept  in  awe 
The  Volsd,  Sabinee,  JEqui,  and  Hemid  ? 
The  arms  of  Rome  alone  ?  no,  'twas  her  virtue  ; 
That  sole  surviving  good,  which  brave  men  keep 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  207 

Thongh  Ate  and  wvrinf  worids  eonddnaagaiBst  tbem : 

This  atill  ia  urine— aad  VU  presenre  it,  Romanit ! 

The  wealth  of  Piotas  ahall  not  bribe  it  fhnn  me  I 

If  yoa,alaal  require  this  laerifice, 

Carthage  herself  was  less  017  foe  than  Rome ; 

She  took  my  freedom    she  eoold  take  no  more ; 

Bat  Rome,  to  crown  her  woric,  would  take  my  honour. 

My  fiiendst  if  yon  deprive  me  of  my  duin^ 

I  am  no  more  tlian  any  other  slare : 

Yes,  Regulns  becomes  a  eommtm  ea|itiTe^ 

A  wretched,  lying,  peijnr'd  fc^fitiTe ! 

But  if,  to  grace  my  bonds,  you  leave  my  honour, 

I  shall  be  stitt  a  Roman,  though  a  slave. 

Lie.  What  fUth  shoald  be  observ'd  with  savagm  ? 
What  promise  siwuld  be  kept  ^riiich  bonds  extort  f 

Reg,  Unwotthy  sabterfuge  I  ah  I  let  as  leave 
To  the  wild  Arab  and  the  fiaithless  Moor 
These  wretched  maxims  <rf  deceit  and  fraud : 
Examples  ne'er  can  jnstif  y  tiie  coward. 
The  brave  man  never  seeks  a  vindication, 
Save  from  his  own  just  bosom  and  the  gods ; 
From  principle,  not  precedmt,  he  acts : 
As  that  arraigns  him,  or  as  that  acquits. 
He  stands  or  falls ;  condeian^d  or  jostified. 

Lie,  Rome  is  no  more,  if  Regi^u  departs. 

B^.  Let  Rome  remember  Regains  must  die ! 
Nor  would  tiie  moment  of  my  death  be  distasit. 
If  nature's  work  had  been  reserv'd  ftnr  nature : 
What  Carthage  means  to  do,  she  woold  hanre  done, 
As  speedily,  periiaps,  at  least  as  sorely. 
My  wearied  Ufe  has  almost  readi'd  its  goal ; 
The  once  warm  current  stagnates  in  these  veins. 
Or  throng h  its  icy  channelrslowly  creeps — 
View  the  weak  arm  j  mark  tiie  pale,  furrowed  cheek» 
The  slacken'd  sinew,  and  the  dim  sank  eye. 
And  tell  me  then  I  mast  not  think  ot  dying! 
How  can  I  serve  yon  else  ?    My  feeble  limbs 
Would  totter  now  beneath  the  armour's  wmght. 
The  bnrthen  of  ttiat  body  it  once  shidded. 
You  see,  my  friends,  you  see,  my  coontrymen, 
I  can  no  longer  show  myself  a  Roman, 
Except  by  dying  Hke  one.— Oradous  Heaven 
Points  out  a  way  to  crown  my  days  with  glory ; 
O  do  not  frustrate  then  the  will  of  Jore, 


208  THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  { 

And  dose  a  life  of  rirtne  with  disgrace. 
Come,  come,  I  know  my  noble  Romans  better ; 
I  see  your  souls,  I  read  repentance  in  them ; 
You  all  applaud  me — ^nay,  yon  wish  my  chains ; 
Twas  nothing  but  excess  of  Ioyo  misled  you. 
And,  as  you're  Romans,  you  wiU  conqu^  that. 
Yes ! — I  perceive  your  weakness  is  subdued — 
Seize,  seize  the  moment  of  returning  virtue ; 
Throw  to  the  ground,  my  sons,  those  hostile  arms ; 
Retard  no  longer  Regulus's  triumph  ; 
I  do  request  it  of  you  as  a  friend, 
I  call  you  to  your  duty  as  a  patriot. 
And— were  I  still  your  gen'ral,  Td  command  you. 

Lie.  Lay  down  your  arms-4et  Regnlns  depart. 
C  To  thePeopfe,  who  dear  the  way,  and  quit  their  amu.J 

Beg,   Gods  I   gods  I    I  thank  you— you  indeed  are 
righteous. 

Pub.  See  every  man  disarm'd.  Oh,  Rome !  oh,  father! 

uitt.  Hold,  hold,  my  heart.    Alas  I  they  all  obey. 

Beg.  The  way  is  clear.    Hamilcar,  I  attend  thee. 

Ham,  Whjt  I  begin  to  envy  this  old  man  I  (aside.) 

Man,  Not  the  proud  victor  on  the  day  of  triumph. 
Warm  from  the  slaughter  of  dispeopled  realms, 
Though  conquered  princes  grace  his  chariot  wheels. 
Though  tributary  monarchs  wait  his  nod, 
And  vanquished  nations  bend  the  knee  before  him. 
E'er  shone  with  half  the  lustre  that  surrounds 
This  volantary  sacrifice  for  Rome  I 
"Who  loves  his  country  wiU  obey  her  laws 
Who  most  obeys  them  is  the  truest  patriot 

Beg.  Be  our  last  parting  worthy  of  ourselves. 
Farewell !  my  friends.    I  bless  the  gods  who  rule  us, 
Since  I  must  leave  you,  that  I  leave  you  Romans. 
Preserve  the  glorious  name  untainted  still. 
And  you  Shall  be  the  rulers  of  the  globe. 
The  arbiters  of  earth.    The  forthe&t  east. 
Beyond  where  Gtanges  rolls  his  n^nd  flood. 
Shall  proudly  emulate  the  Roman  name. 
(Kneels.)  Ye  gods,  the  guardians  of  this  glorious  people^ 
Who  watch  with  jealous  eye  JEneas'  race. 
This  land  of  heroes  I  commit  to  you ! 
This  ground,  these  walls,  this  people  be  your  care. ! 
Oh  I  bless  them,  bless  them  with  a  liberal  hand  I 
Let  fortitude  and  valour,  truth  and  justice. 


THE  INFLEXIBLE  CAPTIVE.  209 

For  ever  flooriah  and  increase  among  them  ! 

And  if  some  baneful  planet  threat  the  CapiUd 

With  its  malignant  inflaence,  oh  I  avert  it 

Be  Regains  the  victim  of  your  wratli. — 

On  this  white  head  be  all  your  vengeance  pour'd. 

But  spare,  oh  I  spare,  and  bless  immortal  Rome  I 

Ah.I  tears?  my  Romans  weep  1  Farewell !  fore  well  I 

AmuA'  timgglet  to  get  Rboulus,  m  prevented— 4h4 
Jtrint$—k0/ixei  hie  eye  eteadUy  on  her/or  Mome  ttme,  and 
then  departs' to  the  thipe. 

Xanuvs  (looking  after  i<m.)  Farewell!  fiurewettl 
thou  glory  of  mankind  I 
Protector,  fether,  saviour  of  thy  country  I 
Through  Regulus  the  Roman  name  shall  live, 
Shall  Momi^  over  time,  and  mock  oblivion. 
FareweO  t  thou  pride  of  this  immortal  coast  I 
*I1t  Borne  alone  a  R^otus  can  boast. 


V'. 


EPILOGUE. 

BY  DAVID  OARRICK,  ESQ. 


What  son  of  physic,  bat  his  heart  extends. 

As  well  as  hand,  when  callM  on  by  his  friends  ? 

What  landlord  is  so  weak  to  make  you  fast, 

When  guests  like  you  bespeak  a  good  repast  ? 

Bnt  weaker  still  were  he  whom  fate  has  placed 

To  soottko  yonr  cares,  and  gratify  yoor  taste. 

Should  he  neglect  to  bring  before  your  eyes 

Those  dainty  dramas  which  from  genius  rise ; 

Whether  your  luxury  be  to  smile  or  weep^ 

His  and  your  profits  just  proportion  keep. 

To-night  he  brought,  nor  fears  a  due  reward, 

A  Roman  Patriot  by  a  Female  Bard. 

Britons,  who  feel  his  flame,  his  worth  will  rate. 

No  common  spirit  his,  no  common  fate. 

Inflexible  and  Captive  musf  b^  jpleat. 

*'  How  r  cries  a  sucking  fop,  thlKloui^ng,  straddling, 

(Whose  head  shows  want  of  bjiU^st^by  its  noddling) 

**  A  woman  write  ?  Learn,  madam^ 'of  your  betters, 

**  And  read  a  noble  lord*s  posthuteous  letters. 

*'  There  you  will  learn  the  sex  may  merit  praise 

**  By  making  puddings— not  by  making  plays : 

*'  They  can  make  tea  and  mischief,  dance  and  sing ; 

'*  Their  heads,  though  full  of  feathers,  can't  take  wing.'* 

I  thought  they  could,  sir ;  now  and  then,  by  chance. 

Maids  fly  to  Scotland,  and  some  wives  to  France. 

He  still  went  nodding  on—"  Do  all  she  can, 

••  Woman's  a  trifle— plaything— like  her  fan."* 

Right,  sir,  and  when  a  wife,  the  rattle  of  a  man. 

And  shall  surJi  things  as  these  become  the  teU 

Of  female  worth  ?  the  fairest  and  the  best 

Of  all  heaven's  creatures  ?  for  so  Milton  sung  u». 

And  with  such  champions,  who  shall  dare  to  wrung  us? 


i 


EPILOGUE.  211 

Come  forth,  proad  man,  in  all  your  pow^  arniy*d ; 

'Shine  oat  in  all  your  splendour— who's  afiraid  ? 

IVho  on  F^nch  wit  has  made  a  glorious  war. 

Defended  Shakspeare,  and  subdued  Voltaire  ?— 

Woman  1  * — Who,  ridi  in  knowledge,  knows  no  pride. 

Can  boast  ten  tongues,  and  yet  not  satisfied  ? 

Woman !  t  ^^Vho  lately  sung  the  sweetest  lay  ? 

A  woman  I  woman !  woman !  X  >till  I  say. 

Well  then,  who  dares  deny  our  power  and  might  ? 

Will  any  married  man  dispute  our  right  ? 

Speak  boldly,  sirs,— your  wives  are  not  in  sight 

What !  are  you  dlent  ?  then  you  are  content ; 

Silence,  the  proverb  tells  us,  gives  consent. 

Critics,  will  you  allow  our  honest  claim  ? 

Are  yon  dumb  too  ?  This  night  has  fix*d  our  fame. 

*  Mn  If  oBtagM,  anthor  of  an  enay  on  the  writings  of  Shalupeara. 
t  Mn  Carter,  wall  known  for  her  •kill  in  ancient  and  modem  lao> 

fuagea. 
t  MIm  Aiken,  wluwe  poema  were  juat  publiitbad. 


i 


PERCY; 

A  TRAGEDY,  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

AS  IT  WAS  ACTED  IN  1778, 

AT 

THE  THKATBB  ROYAL,  DRUST  LANE. 


TO 

EARL  PERCY: 

THIS  TRAGEDY, 

A  SMALL  TRIBUTE 
TO   HIS  ILLUSTRlOirs  CHAKACTER, 

IB 
YERT  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED. 

BY 
HIS  LORDSHIFS 

MOST  OBEDIINT  AND  MOST  HUMBLE  SERVANT, 

THE  AUTHOR. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


The  French  drenu,  foanded  on  the  iSunous  old  story  of  R«oul 
de  Coneyi  luggetted  to  the  author  many  circuautaneei  in  thie 
rraccdy. 

[Tboqgh  tfali  fltory  li  pretty  generelly  known,  being  fuund  in 
many  wrtten,  Engliih  and  French,  it  may  be  proper  to  gire  it 
briefly  in  thie  plaee.  Bodes  de  Fkiel,  lord  of  yermandolii  In  the 
twelfth  eentory,  eeponied  Gabrielle  de  Yergy,  whose  affections 
were  pnvloiuly  engaged  to  Baonl  de  Coney,  one  of  the  young  Cru- 
sadei*.  Coney  being  mortally  wounded  in  a  battle  with  the  Sara- 
eeiia»  called  hie  Caithftil  esqalrst  and  durged  him.  oa  his  retnm  te 
Franee,  to  delirer  to  Ifartanw  Falel  a  letter,  and  a  silrer  casket 
eontalning  the  heart  of  her  lover.  The  messenger,  in  Tlslting  the 
castle  of  FaleU  met  the  lord  of  the  mansion,  who,  havinff  obtained 
the  fhtal  deposit  caused  it  to  be  hashed,  and  serred  up  to  his  lady 
aaadelieioo»treat.  When  she  had  flnlsbed  eating,  0ie  malignant 
demon  tdd  her  what  tt  was  %  and,  at  the  same  time,  placed  before 
her  the  casket  and  die  letter.  Madame  Falel  receiTCd  both  with 
Joy,  applied  her  lips  to  the  dish,  andtaaTing  cleared  every  particle 
thakvemalaed,  raftased  all  ftirther  snstenanee,  and  died  soon  after. 
Belloy,  anthor  of  the  tragedy  of  the  "  fflege  of  Calais.**  dramatised 
the  story  of  **  Gahrlelle  de  Yergy**  also,  but  it  was  too  horrible  a 
snhJeet  for  the  French,  or  indeed  any  otiier  stage.  In  *'  Perey' 
there  is  only  a  dight  resemblanee  to  the  tale  of  the  Cmsade  i  and 
witti  respect  to  the  French  poet,  Hannah  MorCb  in  one  of  her  let* 
ters  to  Oarridi,  says,  **  1  have  endeavoured  to  dlflto  flrom  Belloy 
as  mneh  as  possible,  particularly  by  introduciiw  the  ftrthtr  of  Sit 
Ilnberl  1  have  followed  him  where  it  waa  neeessary,  in  his  plan  ; 
aa  to  the  rest,  I  do  not  believe  I  have,  in  the  whole,  ten  liMsArom 
hini.»-.BD.3 


PROLOGUE. 

WRITTEN  BY  MR  GARRICK. 

8POKBN  BY  MRS  BULKELT. 


Tbough  rm  a  female,  and  the  rule  is  ever. 

For  us,  in  Epilogue,  to  beg  your  favour, 

Yet  now  I  take  the  lead — and,  leaving  art 

And  envy  to  the  men— with  a  warm  heart, 

A  woman  here  I  come— to  take  a  woman's  part. 

No  little  jealousies  my  mind  perplex, 

I  come,  the  friend  and  champion  of  my  sex : 

111  prove,  ye  fair,  that,  let  us  have  our  swing. 

We  can,  as  well  as  men,  do  any  tiling ; 

Nay,  better  too,  perhaps— for  now  and  then. 

These  times  prodace  some  bungling  among  men. 

In  spite  of  lordly  wits — ^with  force  and  ease, 

Can't  we  write  plays,  or  crush  'em,  if  we  please  ? 

The  men,  who  grant  not  much,  allow  us  diarms— 

Are  eyes,  shapes,  dimples,  then,  our  only  arms  ? 

To  rule  this  man,  our  sex  dame  Nature  teaches ; 

Mount  the  high  horse  we  can,  and  make  long  speeches. 

Did  not  a  lady  knight,  late  chevalier,* 

A  brave,  smart  soldier  to  your  eyes  appear  ? 

Hey  I  presto !  pass  I  his  sword  becomes  a  fan, 

A  comely  woman  rising  from  the  man. 

The  Firmch  their  amazonian  maid  invite— 

She  goes— alike  well  sldll'd  to  talk  or  write. 

Dance,  ride,  negotiate,  scold,  coquet,  or  fight. 

If  she  should  set  her  heart  upon  a  rover, 

And  he  prove  false,  she*d  kick  her  faithless  lover. 

The  Greeks  and  Romans  own  our  boundless  daim— 

The  Moses,  Graces,  Virtues,  Fortune,  Fame, 

*  CheTslier  D'Eon. 


PROLOGUE.  217 

Wisdom  and  Nature  too,  they  women  call ; 
With  tlus  sweet  flattVy,  yet  they  mix  some  gall— 
*TwiIl  oat— the  Furies  too  are  females  all. 
The  pow'rs  of  Riches,  Physic,  War,  and  Wine, 
Sleeis  Death,  and  Deyila  too— are  masculine. 
Are  we  unfit  to  rule  ?— a  poor  suggestion  I 
Austria  and  Russia  answer  well  that  question. 
If  joy  lirom  sense  and  matchless  grace  arise. 
With  your  own  treasure,  Britons,  bless  your  eyes. 
If  such  there  are— sure,  hi  an  humbler  way. 
The  sex,  without  much  guilt,  may  write  a  play : 
That  they've  done  nobler  things,  there's  no  denial ; 
With  all  your  judgment,  then,  prepare  for  trial- 
Summon  your  critic  pow'rs,  your  manhood  summcna, 
A  brave  roan  will  protect,  not  hurt,  a  woman ; 
Let  us  wish  modestly  to  share  with  men. 
If  not  the  force,  the  feather  of  the  pen. 


PERCY. 


DRAMATIS  PBRSON^K. 


Perey,  Earl  of  Northumberland. 
Barl  Douglaa. 
Earl  Raby,  Blwina's  ftuhcr. 
Edrle,  (Hend  to  Douglas. 
Hareourt,  friend  to  Perey. 


Sir  Hubert,  a  Rni(bt. 
Elwina. 
Birtha. 

Kolgbtc    Guards,   Attendanta, 
tie. 


SCBint— ilaby  Catttet  in  Durhun, 

ACT  I. 

ScBNB— ^  Gothic  HaU. 

Enter  Edrio  and  Birtha. 

Bir.  What  may  this  mean?    Earl  Douglas  has  en- 
join'd  thee 
To  meet  him  here  in  private  ? 

Ed.  Yes,  my  sister, 

And  this  ii^jonction  have  I  oft  receiv'd ; 
But  when  he  comes,  true  to  th'  appointed  hour, 
He  starts,  looks  wild,  then  drops  ambiguous  hints. 
Frowns,  hesitates,  turns  pale,  and  says  'twas  nothing ; 
Then  feigns  to  smile,  and  by  his  anxious  care 
To  prove  himself  at  ease,  betrays  his  pain. 

Bir.  Since  my  short  sqjoum  here,  Fve  mark'd  this 
earl. 
And  though  the  ties  of  blood  unite  us  closely, 
I  shudder  at  his  haughtiness  of  temper. 
Which  not  his  gentle  wife,  the  bright  Elwina, 
Can  charm  to  rest.    Ill  are  their  spirits  pair'd ; 
His  heart's  the  seat  of  frenzy,  hers  of  softness ; 
His  love  is  transport,  hers  is  trembling  duty ; 
Bage  in  his  soul  is  as  the  whirlwind  fierce, 
"While  hers  ne*er  felt  the  powV  of  that  rude  passion. 
Ed.  Perhaps  the  mighty  soul  of  Douglas  mourns, 
Because  inglorious  love  detains  him  here, 


PERCY.  219 

While  OUT  bold  knights,  beneath  the  Christian  standard, 
Press  to  the  bulwarks  of  Jerusalem. 

Bir.  Though  every  various  charm  adorns  Elwina, 
And  though  the  noble  Douglas  dotes  to  madness. 
Yet  some  dark  mystery  involves  their  fate : 
The  canker  grief  devours  Elwina's  bloom, 
And  on  her  brow  meek  resignation  sits. 
Hopeless,  yet  uncomplaining. 

Ed.  'Tis  most  strange. 

Bir.  Once,  not  long  since,  she  thought  herself  alone : 
*Twas  then  the  pent-up  anguish  burst  its  bounds ; 
With  broken  voice,  clasp'd  hands,  and  streaming  eyes. 
She  call*d  upon  her  father,  caird  him  cruel. 
And  said  her  duty  claim*d  far  other  recompense. 

Ed.  Perhaps  the  absence  of  the  good  lord  Raby, 
Who,  at  her  nuptials,  quitting  this  fair  castle, 
R^gn'd  it  to  Elwina,  thus  afflicts  her. 
Hast  thou  e'er  question'd  her,  good  Birtha  ? 

Sir.  Often; 

But  hitherto  in  vain,  and  yet  she  shows  me 
Th*  endearing  kindness  of  a  sister*s  love ; 
But  if  I  speak  of  Douglas — 

Ed,  See !  he  comes. 

It  would  ofifend  him,  should  he  find  you  here. 

Enter  Docolas. 

Doug,  How !  Edric  and  his  sister  in  close  conference ! 
Do  they  not  seem  alarm 'd  at  my  approach  ? 
And  see,  how  suddenly  they  part  I    Now,  Edric, 

lExU  BiftTHA. 

Was  this  well  done  ?  or  was  it  like  a  friend. 
When  I  desired  to  meet  thee  here  alone. 
With  all  ^laf  warmth  of  trusting  confidence. 
To  lay  my  bosom  naked  to  thy  view. 
And  show  thee  all  its  weakness ;  was  it  well 
To  call  thy  sister  here,  to  let  her  witness 
Thy  friend*s  infirmity  ?— perhaps  to  toll  her— 

Ed.  My  lord,  I  could  not  tell ;  1  nothing  know. 

Dottg,  Nay,  then,  thou  dost  suspect  there's  sometliing 
wrong  I 

Ed,  If  we  were  bred  from  infancy  together. 
If  I  partook  in  all  thy  youthful  griefs. 
And  every  Joy  thou  knew'st  was  doubly  mine  ; 
Then  tell  me  all  the  secret  of  thy  soul. 


220  PERCY. 

Or  have  these  few  short  months  of  separation. 
The  only  absence  we  have  ever  known. 
Have  these  so  rent  the  bands  of  love  asunder, 
That  Douglas  should  distrust  his  Edric'fe  truth  ? 

Doug.  Mjr  friend,   I  know  thee  faithful  as  thouM 
brave. 
And  I  will  trust  thee— but  not  now,  good  Edric ; 
*Tis  past,  *tis  gone,  it  is  not  w<Hrth  the  telling ; 
*Twas  wrong  to  cherish  what  disturb'd  my  peac« ; 
I'll  think  of  it  no  more. 

Ed.  O,  most  wise  promise  I 

I  fear*d  some  ludden  trouble  vex'd  your  quiet. 
In  secret  I  have  watch'd— 

Doug.  Ha !  watch*d  in  secret  ? 

A  spy  ?  employ'd,  perhaps,  to  note  my  actions  ? 
What  have  I  said  P    Foi^ve  me,  thou  art  noble : 
Yet  do  not  press  me  to  disclose  my  grief, 
For  when  thou  know'st  it,  I  perhaps  shall  hate  thee 
As  much,  my  Edric,  as  I  hate  myself 
For  my  suspicions ;  I  am  ill  at  ease. 

Ed.  How  will  the  fair  Blwina  grieve  to  hear  it! 

Doug.  She  grieve  ?    Elwina  grieve  ?  thou'st  toodi'd 
the  string 
That  wakes  me  into  madness.    Hear  me,  then. 
But  let  the  deadly  secret  be  secur'd 
With  bars  of  adamant  in  thy  close  breast. 
Think  of  the  curse  which  waits  on  broken  oaths ; 
A  knight  is  bound  by  more  than  vulgar  ties. 
And  peijury  in  thee  were  doubly  damn'd. 
Well,  then,  our  gallant  king 

Ed.  Is  soon  expected 

From  distant  Palestine. 

Doug.  Forbid  it.  Heaven ! 

For  with  him  comes — 

Ed.  Ah!  who? 

Doug.  Peace,  peace, 

For  see,  Elwina^a  here.    Retire,  my  Edric ; 
When  next  we  meet,  thou  shalt  know  all.    FarewelL 

lExit  Edric. 
Now,  to  conceal  with  care  my  bosom's  anguish. 
And  let  her  beauty  chase  away  my  sorrows ! 
Yes,  I  would  meet  her  with  a  face  of  smiles — 
But  *twill  not  be. 


PERCY.  221 


Enter  Elwina, 

EL  Alas,  tto  erer  thus ! 

That  ever  dooded  is  hia  gloomjr  brow.  {Jtide. 

Doug.  I  were  too  blest,  Elwku^  conld  I  hope 
Yon  met  me  here  by  durice,  or  that  your  bosom 
Shared  the  warm  tranqrarts  mine  most  ever  feel 
At  yooT  approach. 

EL  My  lord,  if  I  intmde, 

The  cause  whidi  brings  me  claims  yoor  gentle  pardon. 
I  fear  you  are  not  well,  and  come,  unbidden. 
Except  by  fidthful  duty,  to  inquire. 
If  haply  in  my  power,  my  little  power, 
I  have  the  means  to  minister  rdief 
To  your  affliction  ? 

Doug.  What  unwonted  goodness ! 

O,  I  were  blest  above  the  lot  of  man. 
If  tODdemess,  not  duty,  brought  Elwina ; 
Cdd,  ceremonious,  hard,  unfeeling  duty. 
That  wretched  substitute  for  lore :  but  know, 
The  heart  demands  a  heart ;  nor  will  be  paid 
With  less  than  what  it  gives.    E*en  now,  Elwina, 
The  glistening  tear  stands  trembling  in  your  eyes. 
Which  cast  their  moumfiil  sweetness  on  the  ground. 
As  if  they  fear'd  to  raise  their  beams  to  mine, 
And  read  the  language  of  reproachful  love. 

El.  My  lord,  I  hoped  the  thousand  daily  proofs 
Of  my  obedience— 

Doug,  Death  to  all  my  hopes ! 

Heart-rending  word !  obedience  I  what*s  obedience  ? 
ma  fear,  'tis  hate,  'tis  temn*.  *tb  aversion ; 
*Tls  the  cold  debt  of  ostentatious  duty. 
Paid  with  insulting  caution ;  pidd  to  tell  me 
How  much  you  tremble  to  offend  a  tyrant 
80  terrible  as  Douglas. — O,  Elwina— 
While  duty  portions  out  the  debt  it  owes, 
With  scrupulous  precision  and  nice  justice. 
Love  never  measures,  but  profusely  gives. 
Gives,  like  a  thoughtless  prodigal,  its  all, 
And  trembles  then,  lest  it  has  done  too  llttie- 
^    EL  I'm  most  unhappy  that  my  cares  offend. 

Doug.  True  tenderness  is  less  solicitous, 
Less  prudent  and  more  fond ;  th*  enamour'd  heart» 
Ccmsciotts  it  loves,  and  blest  in  being  lov'd. 


222  PERCY. 

Reposes  on  the  object  it  adores. 

And  trusts  the  passion  it  inspires  and  feels. — 

Thou  hast  not  learnt  how  terrible  it  is 

To  feed  a  hopeless  flame. — But  hear,  Blwina, 

Thou  most  obdurate,  hear  me. — 

El,  Say,  my  lord. 

For  your  own  lips  shall  vindicate  my  fame. 
Since  at  the  altar  I  became  your  wife, 
Can  malice  charge  me  with  an  act,  a  word, 
I  ought  to  bluiih  at  ?    Have  I  not  still  lived 
As  open  to  the  eye  of  observation. 
As  fearless  innocence  should  ever  live  ? 
I  call  attesting  angels  to  be  witness. 
If  in  my  open  deed,  or  secret  thought, 
My  conduct,  or  my  heart,  they've  ought  disceni'd 
'Whicli  did  not  emulate  their  purity. 

Doug.  This  vindication  ere  you  were  ac4;us'd. 
This  warm  defence,  this  warding  off  attacks 
Ere  they  are  made,  and  construing  casual  w'ord^ 
To  formal  accusations,  trust  me,  madam. 
Shows  rather  an  aiarm'd  and  vigilant  spirit, 
For  ever  on  the  watch  to  guard  its  secret. 
Than  the  sweet  calm  of  fearless  innocence. 
Who  talk'd  of  guilt  ?    Who  testifloii  suspicion  ? 

EL  Learn,  sir,  that  virtue,  while  *tis  free  from  blame. 
Is  modest,  lowly,  meek,  and  unassuming ; 
Not  apt,  like  fearful  vice,  to  shield  its  weakness, 
Behind  the  studied  pomp  of  boastful  phrase. 
Which  swells  to  hide  the  poverty  it  shelters ; 
But  when  this  virtue  feels  itself  suspected, 
Insulted,  set  at  nought,  its  whiteness  stain'd. 
It  then  grows  proud,  forgets  its  humble  worth. 
And  rates  itself  above  its  real  value. 

Doug.  I  did  not  mean  to  ddde  !    But  think,  O  think. 
What  pangs  must  rend  this  fearful,  doting  heart, 
To  see  you  sink  as  if  in  love  with  deatib. 
To  fear,  distracting  thought !  to  feel  you  hate  me. 

El.  What  if  the  slender  thread  by  which  I  hold 
This  poor  precarious  being  soon  must  break ; 
Is  it  Elwina's  crime,  or  heaven's  decree  ? 
Yet  I  shall  meet,  I  trust,  the  king  of  terrors. 
Submissive  and  resign'd,  without  one  pang, 
One  fond  regret  at  leaving  this  gay  world. 

Doug.  Yes,  madam,  there  is  one,  one  man  ador'd. 


PERCY.  223 

For  whom  your  sighs  will  heave,  yoar  tears  will  flow. 
For  whom  this  hated  worid  will  still  be  dear, 
For  whom  you  still  would  liye 

El.  Hold,  hold,  my  lord 

What  may  this  mean  ? 

Doug.  Ah  I  I  have  gone  too  fiur. 

What  have  I  said  ?— Your  £sther,  sure,  your  father. 
The  good  lord  Raby,  may  at  least  expect 
One  tender  tigh. 

El,  Alas,  my  lord,  I  thought 

The  harmleas  incense  of  a  dangfater^  si^ 
Might  rise  to  heaven,  and  not  offend  its  rulor. 

Doug.  *Tis  true ;  yet  Raby's  self  is  less  belov*d 
Since  he  bestow'd  his  daughter's  hand  on  Douglas : 
That  was  a  crime  the  dutiful  Elwina 
Can  never  pardon ;  and  believe  me,  madam, 
My  love*8  so  nice,  so  delicate  my  honour, 
I  am  ashamM  to  owe  my  happiness 
To  ties  which  make  you  wretched.         iExii  Douglas. 

El.  Ah!  how's  this? 

Though  I  have  ever  found  him  fierce  and  rash. 
Full  of  obscure  surmise  and  distant  hints. 
Till  now  he  never  ventured  to  accuse  me. 
"  Yet  there  is  one,  one  man  belov'd,  ador*d. 
For  whom  your  tears  will  flow :"— these  were  his 

words— 
And  then  the  wretdied  subterfuge  of  Raby^ 
How  poor  th*  evasion !— But  my  Birtha  comes. 

Enter  Birtha. 

Bir.  Crossing  the  portico  I  met  lord  Douglas. 
DisOTder'd  were  his  looks,  his  eyes  shot  fire ; 
He  called  upon  your  name  with  such  distraction, 
I  fear'd  some  sudden  evil  had  befall'n  you. 

Ei.  Not  sudden ;  no ;  long  has  the  storm  been  gatiicr. 

ing. 
Which  threatens  speedily  to  burst  in  ruin 
On  this  devoted  head. 

Bir.  I  ne'er  beheld 

Your  gentle  soul  so  rufBed.  yet  I've  mark'd  you. 
While  others  thought  you  hiHppiest  of  the  happy. 
Blest  with  whatever  the  world  calls  great  or  good, 
With  all  that  nature,  all  that  fortune  gives, 
I've  mark'd  you  bending  with  a  weight  of  sorrow. 


224  FERCY. 

El.  O,  I  will  tell  thee  all  I  thou  couldst  not  flnd 
An  hour,  a  moment  in  Elwina's  life, 
"When  her  full  heart  to  long*d  to  ease  its  load. 
And  poor  its  sorrows  in  thy  friendly  bosom : 
Hear  then,  with  pity  hear  my  tale  of  woe. 
And,  O  let  filial  ^ety  forgive, 
If  my  presumptuous  lips  arraign  a  father ! 
Yes,  Birtha,  that  beIov*d,  that  cruel  father 
Has  doomed  me  to  a  life  of  hopeless  anguish, 
Doom'd  me  to  die  ere  half  my  days  are  number*d. 
Doomed  me  to  give  my  trembling  hand  to  Douglas, 
'Twas  all  I  had  to  give,  my  heart  was— Percy's. 

Sir.  What  do  I  hear  ? 

EL  My  misYy,  not  my  crime. 

Long  since  the  battle  'twikt  the  rival  houses 
Of  Douglas  and  of  Percy,  for  whose  hate 
The  world  itselTs  too  small  a  theatre ; 
One  summer's  mom  my  father  chas'd  the  deer 
On  Cheviot  hills,  Northumbrians  fiur  domain — 

Sir.  On  that  fom'd  spot  where  first  the  feuds  com- 
menced 
Between  the  Earls  ? 

El.  The  same.    During  the  chase. 

Some  of  my  father's  knights  receiv'd  an  insult 
From  the  Lord  Percy's  herdsmen,  churlish  foresters. 
Unworthy  of  the  gentle  blood  they  serv'd. 
My  father,  proud  and  jealous  of  his  honour, 
(Thou  know'st  the  fiery  temper  of  our  barons,) 
Swore  that  Northumberland  had  been  conc^m'd 
In  this  rude  outrage,  nor  would  hear  of  peace 
Or  reconcilement,  which  the  Percy  offer'd  ; 
But  bade  me  hate,  renounce,  and  banish  him. 
Oh !  'twas  a  task  too  hard  for  all  my  duty ; 
I  strove,  and  wept ;  I  strove— but  still  I  lov*d. 

Eir.  Indeed  'twas  most  unjust;  but  say  what  fol- 
lowed ? 

El.  Why  should  I  dwell  on  the  disastrous  tale  ? 
Forbid  to  see  me,  Percy  straightway  join'd 
The  great  crusade  against  the  Saracen. 
Soon  as  the  jarring  kingdoms  were  at  peace. 
Earl  Douglas,  whom  till  then  I  ne'er  had  seen, 
C^ame  to  tliis  castle ;  'twas  my  hapless  fftte 
To  please  him,  Birtha ;  thou  canst  tell  what  followed  ? 
But  who  shall  tell  the  agonies  I  felt? 


PERCY.  225 

Mf  barbarous  fitther  forced  me  to  dissolve 
The  tender  vows  himself  had  bid  me  form- 
He  dragv*d  me  trembling,  dying,  to  the  altar, 
I  sighed,  I  struggled,  feinted,  and— complied. 

Bir.  Did  Douglas  know  a  marriage  had  been  once 
Proposed  ^wixt  you  and  Percy  ? 

SL  If  he  did. 

He  thought,  like  you,  it  was  a  match  of  policy. 
Nor  knew  our  love  outran  our  father's  prudence. 

Sir.  Should  he  now  find  he  was  the  instrument 
Of  the  lord  Raby's  vengeance  ? 

SI,  *Twere  most  dreadful ! 

My  fiUher  lock'd  this  motive  in  his  breast. 
And  feign*d  to  have  forgot  the  diase  of  Cheviot. 
Some  moons  have  now  completed  their  slow  course 
Since  my  sad  marriage.    Percy  still  is  absent. 

Bir,  Nor  will  return  before  his  sov'reig^  comes. 

SI.  Talk  not  of  his  return!  this  coward  heart 
Can  know  no  thought  of  peace  but  in  his  absence. 
How,  Dou|^  here  again  ?  some  firesh  alarm ! 

Enter  Douglas,  agitated,  with  Uttert  in  his  hand, 

Doug,  Ifadam,  your  pardon— 

El,  What  disturbs  my  lord  ? 

Doug,  Nothing.   Disturb  ?  I  ne'er  was  more  at  ease. 
These  letters  from  your  fiither  give  us  notice 
He  will  be  here  to-night ;  he  further  adds 
The  king's  each  hour  expected  to  return. 
The  grand  crusadet  accomplish'd. 

EL  How!  the  king? 

Said  you  the  king? 

Dot^,  And  'tis  lord  Raby's  pleasure 

That  you,  among  the  foremost,  bid  him  welcome. 
You  must  attend  the  court. 

SI.  Must  I,  my  lord  ? 

Doug,  Now  to  observe  how  she  receives  the  news ! 

(Aeide,) 

EL  I  must  not— cannot.    By  the  tender  love 
You  have  so  oft  profess'd  for  poor  Elwina, 
Indulge  this  one  request — O  let  me  stay ! 

Doug.  Enchanting  sounds !  die  does  not  wish  to  go— 

(Aside.) 

SI.  The  bustling  world,  the  pomp  which  waits  ou 
courts, 

L  2 


226  PERCY. 

Ill  soito  my  humble,  unambitious  soul ; — 
Then  leave  me  here,  to  tread  the  safer  path 
Of  private  life ;  here,  where  my  peaceful  course 
Shaiu  be  as  silent  as  the  shades  around  me ; 
Nor  shall  one  vagrant  wish  be  e'er  allow'd 
To  stray  beyond  the  bounds  of  Raby  castle. 

Doug.  O  music  to  my  ears !  (cuide.)  Can  you  resolve 
To  hide  those  wondrous  beauties  in  the  shade. 
Which  rival  king^  would  cheaply  buy  with  empire  ? 
Can  you  renounce  the  pleasures  of  a  court, 
Whose  roofs  resound  with  minstrelsy  and  mirth  ? 

El,  My  lord,  retirement  is  a  wife's  best  duty, 
And  virtue*8  safest  station  is  retreat 

Doug.  My  soul's  in  transports !  (aside.)    But  can  you 
forego 
What  wins  the  soul  of  woman — admiration  ? 
Forego  a  world,  where  far  inferior  charms 
Only  presume  to  shine  when  you  are  absent? 
W^ill  you  not  long  to  meet  the  public  gaze  ? 
Long  to  eclipse  the  fair,  and  charm  the  brave  ? 

£1.  These  are  delights  in  which  the  mind  partakes  not. 

Doug.  rU  try  her  farther.    (^  A  tide.) 

(  Takes  her  handt  and  looks  stedfastly  at  her  at  he  tpeakt.) 

But  reflect  once  more ; 
When  you  shall  hear  that  England's  gallant  peers. 
Fresh  from  the  fields  of  war,  and  gay  with  glory, 
Elate  with  fame,  and  vain  with  victory ; 
When  you  shall  hear  these  princely  youths  contend 
In  many  a  tournament  for  beauty's  prize  ; 
When  you  shall  hear  of  revelry  and  masking. 
Of  mimic  combats,  and  of  festive  halls. 
Of  lances  shiver'd  in  the  cause  of  love. 
Will  you  not  then  repent,  then  wish  your  fate, 
Your  happier  fate,  had  till  that  hour  reserv'd  you 
For  some  plum'd  conqueror  ? 

£1.  My  fate,  my  lord. 

Is  now  bound  up  with  yours,  nor  do  I  wish 
To  gain  another  heart. 

Doug.  Here  let  me  kneel- 

Yes,  I  will  kneel,  and  gaze,  and  weep,  and  wonder ; 
Thou  paragon  of  goodness !— pardon,  pardon ! 

(Kittet  her  hand,) 
1  am  conviucM — I  can  no  longer  doubt. 


PERCY.  22: 

Nor  talk,  nor  hear,  nor  reason,  nor  refloct.— 
1  most  retire,  and  give  a  loose  to  joy. 

lExU  DOUGI.A 

Sir,  The  king  returns. 

SL  And  with  him  Percy  comes ' 

Bir,  You  needs  must  gou 

El,  O  never,  never,  Bir: 

That  rock  111  shon.    Shall  I  solicit  ruin. 
And  puU  destruction  on  me  ere  Its  time  f 
I  M  ho  have  held  it  criminal  to  name  him ! 
1  will  not  go— I  disobey  thee,  Douglas, 
But  disobey  thee  to  preserve  thy  honour. 


ACT  II. 
ScBNB — Tfie  JmU, 


Dmig.  (speaking  at  he  enters.^    See  that  the  traitor 
instantly  be  seiz'd. 
And  strictly  watch'd ;  let  none  have  access  to  him. 
O  jealousy,  thou  aggregate  of  woes ! 
Were  there  no  hell,  thy  torments  would  create  one. 
But  yet  she  may  be  guiltless — may  1  she  ron^t 
How  beautiful  she  look'd  I  pernidons  beauty ! 
Yet  innocent,  as  warm,  seemM  the  sweet  blu^ 
That  mantled  on  her  cheek.    But  not  for  me. 
But  not  for  me  those  breathing  roses  blow ! 
And  when  she  wept— what  I  can  1  bear  her  tears ! 
Well— let  her  weep— her  tears  are  for  anotlier ; 

0  did  they  &11  for  me,  to  dry  their  streams 

rd  drain  the  choicest  blood  that  feeds  the  heart. 
Nor  think  the  drops  I  shed  were  half  so  precious. 
(  He  stands  in  a  muting  potture.) 

Enter  LoRD  Raby. 
Rubff.  Sure  I  mistake— Am  I  in  Rnby  castle  ? 
Impossible !  that  u  as  the  scat  of  smiles ; 
There  cheerfulness  and  joy  were  househcdd  gods. 

1  used  to  scatter  pleasures  when  I  came. 
And  every  servant  shar'd  his  lord^s  delight. 
But  now  suspicion  and  mistrust  preside, 
And  discoutcnt  maintains  a  aulleu  sway. 


228  PERCY. 

Where  is  the  smile  unfeigned,  the  jovial  wekome, 
WUeh  cheerM  the  sad,  b^ail'd  the  pilgrim's  pMi^ 
And  made  dependoiey  forget  its  bonds  ? 
Where  is  the  andent,  hospitable  haD, 
Whose  Tanlted  roof  <mce  mng  with  harmless  mirtb  * 
Where  every  passing  stranger  was  a  guest. 
And  ererj  guest  a  friend  ?  I  fear  me  modi. 
If  onee  oar  nobles  seom  their  mral  seats. 
Their  mral  greatness,  and  thdr  vassal's  love. 
Freedom  and  English  grandeor  are  no  more. 
Doug,  {advancing.)  My  lord,  you  are  welcome* 
Babjf.  Sir,  I  trust  I  am ; 

But  yet,  methinks,  I  shall  not  feel  I'm  welcome. 
Till  my  Elwina  bless  me  with  her  smiles : 
She  was  not  wont  with  lingering  step  to  meet  me. 
Or  greet  my  coming  with  a  cold  emlnraoe ; 
Now  I  extend  my  longing  arms  in  vain. 
My  child,  my  darling,  does  not  come  to  fill  them. 
O  they  were  happy  days  when  she  would  fly 
To  meet  me  from  the  camp,  or  from  the  chase. 
And  with  her  fondness  overpay  my  toils ! 
How  eager  would  her  tender  hands  unlnrace 
llie  ponderous  armour  from  my  war-worn  limbs. 
And  pluck  the  helmet  which  oppos'd  her  kiss ! 
Doug.  O  sweet  delights  that  never  must  be  mine 
Rahy.  What  do  I  hear  ? 

Doug,  Nothing :  inquire  no  farther. 

Raby,  My  lord,  if  you  respect  an  old  man's  peace : 
If  e'er  yocrdoted  on  my  much-lov'd  child. 
As  *tis  most  sure  you  made  me  think  you  did ; 
Then,  by  the  pangs  which  you  may  one  day  feel. 
When  you,  like  me,  shall  be  a  fond,  fond  father. 
And  tremble  for  the  treasure  of  your  age, 
Explain  what  this  alarming  silence  means ! 
You  sigh,  yet  do  not  speak ;  nay,  more,  you  hear  not ! 
Your  labouring  soul  turns  inward  on  itself, 
As  there  were  nothing  but  your  own  sad  tiioughts 
Deserv'd  regard.    Does  my  child  live  ? 
Dot^,  She  does. 

Ai^.  To  bless  her  father ! 

JM*W*  And— to  curse  her  husband  I 

$M^.  Ah  I  have  a  care,  my  lord ;  I'm  not  so  old — 
Dmg.  Nor  I  so  base  that  I  should  tamely  bear  it ; 
Kor  am  I  so  mured  to  infamy, 


PERCY.  229 

Tltat  I  can  say  without  a  burning  blush, 
She  lires  to  be  my  curse. 

Baby,  How's  this  ? 

Doug,  I  thought 

The  lily  opening  to  the  hear Vs  soft  dews. 
Was  not  so  fragrant,  and  was  not  so  chaste. 

Xa^.  Has  she  int>v*d  otherwise?  Til  not  believe  it. 
Who  has  traduced  my  sweet,  my  innocent  child  ? 

0  she^  too  good  to  'scape  calumnious  tongues. 
Detraction  ever  loves  a  lofty  mark ; 

It  saw  her  soar  a  flight  above  her  fellows, 
And  hurl'd  its  arrow  to  her  giorious  height. 
To  reach  her  heart,  and  bring  her  to  the  ground. 

Doug.  Had  the  rash  tongue  of  slander  so  presumed. 
My  vengeance  had  not  been  of  that  slow  sort. 
To  need  a  prompter;  nor  should  any  arm. 
No  not  a  ftither's,  dare  dispute  with  mine 
The  privilege  to  die  in  her  defence. 
None  dare  accuse  Elwina,  but — 

Raby,  But  who? 

Doug,  But  Douglas. 

Baby,  (putting  hit  hand  to  hi*  sword,)  You  ?  O  spore 
my  age's  weakness ! 
You  do  not  know  what  tis  to  be  a  father. 
Yon  do  not  know,  or  you  would  pity  me 
The  thousand  tender  throbs,  the  nameless  feelings. 
The  dread  to  ask.  and  yet  the  wish  to  know. 
When  we  adore  and  fear ;  but  wherefore  fear  ? 
Does  not  the  blood  of  Raby  fill  her  veins  ? 

Dot^(,  Percy  I — know'st  thou  that  name? 

Bnby,  Howl  what  of  Percy? 

Doug.  He  loves  Elwina,  and,  my  curses  on  him ! 
He  is  belov'd  again. 

Baby,  I  m  on  the  rack ! 

Doug.  Not  the  two  Theban  brothers  bore  each  other 
Such  deep,  such  deadly  hate,  as  I  and  Percy. 

BeAy,  But  tell  me  of  my  child. 

Doug,  (not  minding  him.)       As  I  and  Percy  ! 
When  at  the  marriage  rites,  O  rites  accurs'd ! 

1  seix*d  her  trembling  hand,  she  started  back ; 
Odd  horror  thrill'd  her  veins,  her  tears  flow'd  fast. 
TofA  that  I  was,  I  thought  'twas  maiden  fear. 
Dull,  doting  ignorance !  beneath  those  terrors. 
Hatred  for  me,  and  love  for  Percy,  Iturk'd. 


230  PERCY. 

Raby.  What  proof  of  guilt  is  this  ? 

Doug.  E'er  since  our  marringe 

Our  days  have  still  beon  cold  and  joyless  all ; 
Painful  restndnt,  and  hatred  ill  disguis'd, 
Her  sole  return  for  all  my  waste  of  fondness. — 
This  very  mom  I  told  her  'twas  your  will 
She  shoiUd  repair  to  court.    With  all  those  graces. 
Which  first  subdued  my  soul,  and  still  enslave  it. 
She  begg'd  to  stay  behind  in  Raby  castle. 
For  courts  and  cities  had  no  charms  for  her. 
Curse  my  blind  love!  I  was  again  insnar'd. 
And  doated  on  the  sweetness  which  deeeiv'd  me. 
Just  at  the  hour  she  thought  I  should  be  absent, 
(For  chance  could  ne'er  have  timed  their  guile  so  well,) 
Arrived  young  Harcourt,  one  of  Percy's  knights, 
Strictly  e^join^d  to  speak  to  none  but  her : 
1  seiz'd  the  miscreant ;  hitherto  he's  silent. 
But  tortures  soon  shall  force  him  to  confess. 

Raby.  Percy  is  absent — They  have  never  met. 

Doug.  At  what  a  feeble  hold  you  grasp  for  succour? 
Will  it  content  me  that  her  person's  pure  ? 
No ;  if  her  alien  heart  dotes  on  another. 
She  is  unchaste,  were  not  that  other  Percy. 
Let  vulgar  spirits  basely  wait  for  proof, 
She  loves  another— that^  enough  for  Douglas. 

Raby.  Be  patient. 

Doug.  Be  a  tame  convenient  husband  ? 

And  meanly  wait  for  circumstantial  guilt  ? 
No — I  am  nice  as  the  first  Csesar  was. 
And  start  at  bare  suspicion.  ( Going.) 

Raby.  {holding  him.)       Douglas,  hear  me ; 
rhou  hast  nam'd  a  Roman  husband  ;  if  she's  false, 
I  mean  to  prove  myself  a  Roman  father. 

[Exit  Douglas 
This  marriage  was  my  work,  and  thus  I'm  puuish'd  ! 

Enter  Elwina. 

El.  Wliere  is  my  father  ?  let  me  fly  to  meet  him  ; 
O  let  me  clasp  his  venerable  knees, 
And  die  of  joy  in  his  belov'd  embrace. 

Raby.  (avoiding  her  enUtrace.)  Elwina ! 

El.  And  is  that  all  ?  so  cold  ? 

Raby.  (sternly.)  Elwina! 

El.  Then  I'm  undone  indood  I  How  stem  his  looks! 


PERCY.  231 

I  will  not  be  repuls'd,  I  am  your  child, 
The  child  of  that  dear  mother  yoo  adorM ; 
You  shall  not  throw  me  off ;  1  will  grow  here. 
And,  like  the  patriarch,  wrestle  for  a  blessinff . 

JMy.  (holding  her  from  him.)  Before  1  take  tliee  in 
these  ag^  arms. 
Press  thee  with  transport  to  this  beating  heart. 
And  give  a  loose  to  all  a  parent's  fondness. 
Answer,  and  see  thou  answer  me  as  truly 
As  if  the  dread  Inquiry  came  from  hear'n — 
Does  no  interior  sense  of  guilt  confound  tiiee  ? 
Canst  thou  lay  all  thy  naked  sonl  before  me  ? 
Can  thy  uncoiiscionB  eye  encounter  mine  ? 
Canst  tiiou  endure  the  probe,  and  never  shrink  ? 
Can  thy  firm  hand  meet  mine,  and  never  tremble  ? 
Art  thou  prepar'd  to  meet  the  rigid  Judge  ? 
Or  to  embrace  the  fond,  the  melting  father  ? 

EL  Mysterious  heav'n  I  to  what  am  I  reserv*d  ? 

Raby,  Should  some  rash  man,  regardless  of  thy  fame, 
And  in  defiance  of  thy  marriage  row?. 
Presume  to  plead  a  guilty  passion  for  thee. 
What  wouldst  thou  do  ? 

El,  What  honour  bids  me  do. 

Baby.  Come  to  ray  arms !  (  They  embrace.) 

El.  My  father  I 

Rfiby.  Yes,  Elwina, 

Thou  art  my  child— thy  mother's  perfect  image. 

El.  Forgive  these  tears  of  mingled  joy  and  doubt ; 
For  why  that  question?  who  should  seek  to  please 
The  desolate  Elwina? 

Raby.  But  if  nny 

Should  so  presume,  canst  thou  resolve  to  hate  him. 
Whatever  his  name,  whatever  his  pride  of  blood. 
Whatever  hh^finmer  arrogant  pretensions  ? 

El.  Hat 

Jtofty.  Dost  thou  falter  ?  Have  a  care,  Elwina. 

El.  Sir,  do  not  fear  me  ;  am  I  not  yoiur  daughter  ? 

Raby.  Thou  bast  a  higher  claim  upon  thy  honour ; 
Thou  art  Earl  Douglas*  wife. 

XI.  (weept.)  I  am  indeed ! 

Raby.  Unhappy  Douglas  I 

El.  Has  he  then  complain'd  ? 

Has  he  presum'd  to  sully  my  white  fame  ? 

Raby.  He  knows  that  Porcy— 


232  PERCY. 

El.  Was  my  destined  huslNUMl ; 

Bf  four  own  promise,  by  a  fiUher*fe  word ; 
And  by  a  tie  more  strong,  more  sacred  stUK 
Mine,  by  the  fast,  firm  bond  of  mutual  love. 

Baby.  Now,  by  my  fears,  thy  husband  told  me  tnith. 

El.  If  he  has  told  thee  that  thy  only  child 
Was  forced,  a  helpless  victim  to  the  altar  ; 
Tom  from  his  arms  who  had  her  yirgin  heart. 
And  forc'd  to  make  false  vows  to  one  she  hated. 
Then,  I  confess,  that  he  has  told  thee  truth. 

Baby.  Her  words  are  barbed  arrows  in  my  heart. 
But  *tiB  too  late  (aside.)  Thou  hast  appointed  Harcourt 
To  see  thee  here  by  stealth  in  Douglas*  absence. 

El.  No,  by  my  life  I  nor  knew  I  till  this  moment 
That  Harcourt  was  returp*d.    Was  it  for  this 
I  taught  my  heart  to  stru^le  with  its  wrongs  ? 
Was  it  for  this  I  bore  my  woes  in  silence  ? 
When  the  fond  ties  of  early  love  were  broken. 
Did  my  weak  soul  break  out  in  fond  complaints  ? 
Did  I  reproach  thee  ?    Did  I  call  thee  cruel  ? 
No — I  endnr'd  it  all ;  and  wearied  Heaven 
To  bless  that  father  who  destroy 'd  my  peace. 

Enter  Messenger. 

Mes.  My  lord,  a  knight,  Sir  Hubert  as  I  think, 
But  newly  landed  from  the  holy  wars. 
Entreats  admittance. 

Baby.  Let  the  warrior  enter. 

Exit  Mbssbnobb. 
All  private  interests  sink  at  his  i4>proach  ; 
Ye  selfish  cares,  be  for  a  moment  banished  1 
I've  now  no  child ;  my  country  claims  me  all. 

El.  Weak  heart,  be  still,  for  what  hast  thou  to  fear  ? 

Enter  Sir  Hubert. 

Baby.    Welcome ;  thou  gallant  knight,  Sir  Hubert, 
welcome ! 
Welcome  to  Raby  Castle ! — In  one  word. 
Is  the  king  safe  ?    Is  Palestine  subdued  ? 

Sir  Hub.  The  king  is  safe,  and  Palestine  subdued. 

Bafiy.  Blest  be  the  god  of  armies !    Now,  Sir  Hubert, 
By  all  the  saints,  thou'rt  a  right  noble  knight  1 

0  why  was  I  too  old  for  this  crusade  ? 

1  think  it  would  have  made  me  young  again. 


PERCY.  933 

Could  I,  like  thee,  have  seen  the  hated  Crescent 
Yield  to  tlie  Christian  cross.    How  now,  Elwina ! 
What  1  cold  at  news  which  might  awake  the  dead ! 
If  there^s  a  drop  in  thy  degenerate  reins 
That  fl^ows  not  now,  thou  art  not  Baby's  daughter. 
It  is  religion's  caose,  the  cause  of  heav'n ! 

EX.  When  policy  assumes  religion's  name. 
And  wears  the  sanctimonious  garb  of  fisith. 
Only  to  colour  fraud  and  license  murder. 
War  then  is  tenfold  guilt. 

Baby,  Blasfriieming  giii ! 

Bl,  Tis  not  the  croder,  nor  the  pontiff's  robe. 
Nor  outward  show,  nor  form  of  sanctity. 
Nor  Palestine  destroy'd,  nor  Jordan's  banks 
Ddug'd  with  blood  of  slaughter'd  infidels, 
No,  nor  th*  extinction  of  the  Eastern  worid. 
Nor  all  the  wild,  pernicious,  bigot  rage 
Of  mad  crusades,  can  bribe  that  Pow'r,  who  sees 
The  motive  with  the  act    O,  blind  to  think 
Fnnatic  wars  can  please  the  Prince  of  peace  I 
He  who  erects  his  altar  in  the  heart, 
AUiors  the  sacjrifice  of  human  blood. 
And  hates  the  false  devotion  of  that  zeal 
Which  massacres  the  world  he  died  to  save. 

Baby.  O  impious  rage  I  If  thou  wouldst  shun  my  curse, 
No  more,  I  charge  thee.    Tell  me,  good  Sir  Hubert, 
Say,  have  our  arms  achieved  this  glorious  deed, 
I  fear  to  ask,  without  much  Christian  bloodshed  ? 

El.  Now  Heaven  support  me  I    (Jside.) 

Sir  Hub,  My  good  lord  of  Raby, 

Imperfect  is  the  sum  of  human  glory  I 
Would  I  could  tell  thee  that  the  field  was  won 
AVithout  the  death  of  such  illustrious  knights, 
As  makes  the  higfa-flush'd  cheek  of  victory  pale. 

El.  Why  should  I  tremble  thus  ?  (Aside.) 

Baby.  Whom  have  we  lost  ? 

Sir  Hub.  The  noble  Clifford,  Walsingham,  and  Grey. 
Sir  Harry  Hastings,  and  the  valiant  Pembroke. 
All  men  of  choicest  note. 

Baby.  O,  that  my  name 

Had  been  enroU'd  in  such  a  list  of  heroes ! 
If  I  was  too  infirm  to  serve  my  country, 
I  might  have  prov'd  my  love  by  dying  for  her. 

El.  Were  there  no  more  ? 


234  PERCY. 

Sir  Hub.  But  few  of  noble  blood. 

But  the  brave  youth  who  gaia'd  bright  glory's  palm ; 
The  flower  of  knighthood,  and  the  plume  of  war. 
Who  bore  its  banner  foremost  in  the  field. 
Yet  conquered  more  by  mercy  than  the  sword. 
Was  Percy. 

El.  Then  he  lives  ?       (Jnde.) 

Rahy.  Did  he  ?  Did  Percy  ? 

O,  gallant  youth,  then  Vm  thy  foe  no  more ; 
Who  conquers  for  my  country  is  my  friend  I 
Ills  fiune  shall  add  new  glories  to  a  house, 
Where  never  maid  was  folse,  nor  knight  disloyal. 

Sir  Hub.  You  do  embalm  him,  lady,  with  your  tears  s 
They  grace  the  grave  of  glory  where  he  lies. 
He  died  the  death  of  honour. 

El.  Saidst  thou— died  ? 

Sir  Hub.  Beneath  the  towers  of  Solyma  he  fell. 

El.  Oh ! 

Sir  Hub.  Look  to  the  lady. 

{BihwiHkfaintM  in  herfaiher^t  arms. 

Raby,  (Gentle  knight,  retire — 

'Tis  an  infirmity  of  nature  in  her. 
She  ever  mourns  at  any  tale  of  blood ; 
She  will  be  well  anon— meantime,  Sir  Hubert, 
You'll  grace  our  castle  with  your  friendly  sojourn. 

Sir  Hub.  I  must  return  with  speed— health  to  the  lady ! 

lExU  HCBBKT. 

Htby.  Look  up,  Elwina.    Should  her  husband  come ! 
Yet  she  revives  not 

Enter  Dololas. 

Doug.  Ha ! — Elwina  fainting  ? 

My  lord,  I  fear  you  have  too  harshly  chid  her. 
Her  gentle  nature  could  not  brook  your  sternness. 
She  wakes,  she  stirs,  she  feels  returning  life. 
My  love !       (,He  takes  her  hand.) 

El.  O,  Percy ! 

Doug,  (starts.)  Do  my  senses  fail  me  ? 

El.  My  Percy,  'tis  Elwina  calls. 

Doug.  Hell,  hell ! 

Baby.  Retire  awhile,  my  daughter. 

El.  Douglas  here  ? 

My  father  and  my  husband ! — O,  for  pity. 

lExit  Elwina,  casting  a  took  cf  anguish  on  both. 


PERCY.  235 

Doug.  Now,  now  confess  she  well  deserves  my  ven- 
geance! 
Before  my  foce  to  call  upon  my  foe  I 

Babff.  Upon  a  foe  who  has  no  power  to  hurt  thee. 
Earl  Percy's  slain. 

Dottg.  I  live  again.    Bat  hold — 

Did  she  not  weep  ?  She  did,  and  wept  for  Percy. 
If  she  laments  him,  he's  my  rival  still, 
And  not  the  grave  can  bury  my  resentment. 
I  can  be  jealous  of  the  dead. 

Baby.  No  more. 

The  truly  brave  are  still  the  truly  gen'rous ; 
Now,  Douglas,  is  the  time  to  prove  thee  both. 
If  it  be  true  that  she  did  once  love  Percy, 
Thou  hast  no  more  to  fear,  since  Percy's  dead. 
Release  young  Harcourt,  let  him  see  Elwina, 
'Twill  serve  a  doable  purpose,  'twill  at  once 
Prove  Percys  death,  and  thy  unchang'd  affection. 
Be  gentle  to  my  child,  and  win  her  heart 
By  confidence  and  unreproaching  love. 

Dottg.  By  Heav'n,  thou  counsel'st  well :  it  shall  be  dune. 
QOy  set  him  free,  and  let  him  have  admittance 
To  my  Elwina's  presence. 

Baby,  Farewell,  Doaglas. 

Show  thoa  believ*it  her  faithful,  and  she'll  prove  so. 

iExit  IlABY. 

Dm^.  Northumberland  is  dead— that  thought  is  peace ! 
Her  heart  may  yet  be  mine ;  transporting  hope ! 
Percy  was  gentle,  ev'n  a  foe  avows  it, 
jUid  111  be  milder  than  a  summer's  breeze. 
iTes,  thoa  most  lovely,  most  ador'd  of  women  ! 
ni  trace  each  virtue,  copy  every  grace. 
Of  my  bless'd  rival,  happier  in  his  death 
To  be  thus  lov*d,  than  living  to  be  ecom'd.  ' 


ACT  III. 

ScBNB— ^  Garden  at  Baby  Caille,  with  a  Bower. 

Enter  Percy  and  Sir  Hubert. 

Sir  Bub.  O  Percy !  that  thoa  liv'st,  and  art  return'd, 
More  joys  my  soul  than  all  the  mighty  conquests 


236  PERCY. 

That  flon  beheld,  whidi  rose  on  Syrians  min. 

Per.  IVe  told  thee,  good  Sir  Habert,  by  what  wonder 
I  was  preserv'd,  though  namber^d  with  the  slain. 

Sir  Hub,  *Twa8  strange  indeed  I 

Per.  *Twa8  Heav^^  immediate  work  I 

Bat  let  me  now  indulge  a  dearer  Joy, 
Talk  of  a  richer  gift  of  mercy's  hand ; 
A  gift  so  precious  to  my  doting  heart, 
That  life  preserv'd  is  but  a  second  blessing. 

0  Hubert,  let  my  soul  indulge  its  softness  I 
The  hour,  the  spot,  is  sacred  to  Elwina. 
This  was  her  favMte  walk ;  I  well  remember, 
(For  who  forgets  tliat  loves  as  I  have  lovM  ?) 
'Twas  in  that  very  bower  she  gave  this  scarf. 
Wrought  by  the  Jiand  of  love ;  she  bound  it  on. 
And,  smiling,  cried,  Whate*er  befiill  us,  Percy, 
Be  this  the  sacred  pledge  of  feith  between  us. 

1  knelt,  and  swore,  call*d  every  power  to  witness. 
No  time  nor  circumstance  should  force  it  from  me ! 
But  vow*d  to  lose  my  life  and  this  together. 

Here  I  repeat  my  vow. 

Sir  HtUt.  Is  this  the  man 

Beneath  whose  single  arm  an  host  was  crushed  ? 
He  at  whose  name  the  Saracen  tum'd  pale  ? 
Who,  when  he  fell,  made  conqu'ring  armies  weep. 
And  mourn  a  victory  they  had  bought  so  dear  ? 
How  has  he  chang'd  the  trumpet's  martial  note. 
And  all  the  stirring  clangor  of  the  war. 
For  the  soft  melting  of  the  lover's  lute  I 
Why  are  thine  eyes  still  bent  upon  the  bower  ? 

Per.  O  Hubert,  Hubert !  to  a  soul  enamour'd 
There  is  a  sort  of  local  sympathy, 
Which,  when  we  view  tiie  scenes  of  early  passion. 
Paints  the  bright  image  of  the  object  lov'd. 
In  stronger  colours  than  remoter  scenes 
Could  ever  pfdnt  it ;  realizes  shadow ; 
Embodies  vacancy ;  lends  shape  and  being 
To  airy  fantasy ;  substance  to  thought ; 
Fiction  to  truth ;  and  breath  and  voice  to  words ; 
Dresses  the  otiject  up  in  all  its  cliarms ; 
Talks  to  it  nearer,  frames  its  answers  kinder, 
And  turns  imagination  into  vision. 

Sir  Hub.  I  should  not  be  believ'd  in  Percy's  camp. 
If  I  should  tell  them  that  their  gallant  leader. 


PERCV.  237 

The  bold  Northiimbatand,  the  British  Man, 
Renoonciiig'  war,  difsoW^d  hi  amorous  wishes, 
Loiter'd  hi  shades,  and  phi*d  in  rosy  bowers. 
To  catch  a  transient  glance  of  two  bright  eyes. 

Fer,  Enough  of  conquest,  and  enough  of  war! 
Ambitionls  doy*d— the  heart  resumes  its  rights. 
IVhen  Enghmdls  Idng  and  Englandls  good  requir'd, 
Tiiis  arm  not  idly  the  keen  fidchion  bore. 
Enoogb— Iot  vaunting  misbecomes  a  soldier. 
I  lire,  I  am  returned    am  near  Elwina  I 
Seest  thou  those  turrets  ?  Yes,  that  castie  hcrids  her. 
But  wherefore  tell  thee  this  ?  fnr  thou  hast  seen  her. 
How  looked,  what  said  she  ?    Did  she  hear  the  tale 
Of  my  imagined  death  without  emotion  f 

Shr  Hub.  Percy,  thou  hast  seen  the  musk-rose  newly 
blown 
Disekwe  its  bashful  beauties  to  the  sun ; 
When,  lol  a  chilling  storm  at  once  descends. 
Sweeps  all  its  blushing  glories  to  the  dust. 
Bows  its  fidr  head,  and  blasts  its  opening  charms. 
So  drooped  the  maid,  beneath  the  cruel  weight 
Of  my  sad  tale. 

Per,  So  tender,  and  so  true  I 

Sir  Hub,  1  left  her  fisinting  in  her  father's  arms. 
The  dying  flower  yet  hanging  on  the  tree. 
E'en  Baby  melted  at  the  news  I  brought. 
And  euTied  thee  thy  glory. 

Per.  Then  I  am  blest ! 

His  hate  subdu'd,  IVe  nothing  mme  to  fear. 

Sir  Hub,  My  embassy  despatched,  I  left  the  castle 
Nor  wpokB  to  any  of  Lord  Baby^  household. 
For  fear  the  king  should  ddde  the  tardiness 
Of  my  return.    My  joy  to  find  you  liring 
Yon  have  already  heard. 

Per,  But  where  is  Harcourt  ? 

Ere  this  he  should  have  seen  her,  told  her  all ; 
How  I  sunriy'd,  retum'd— and  how  I  love  ! 
I  tremble  at  the  near  approach  of  bliss. 
And  scarcely  can  sustahi  the  joy  which  waits  me. 

Sir  Hub.  Grant  Heaven  the  fair  one  prove  but  half  so 
true! 

Per.  O  she  is  truth  itself! 

Sir  Hub,  She  may  be  changed. 

Spite  <tf  her  tears,  her  fidnting,  and  alarms. 


238  PERCY. 

I  know  the  sex,  know  them  as  natare  made  ^em, 
Not  such  as  lovers  wish,  and  poets  feign. 

Fer.  Away !  nor  doubt  a  virtue  so  consummate. 
And  yet  I  tremble.    Why  does  terror  shake 
These  firm-strung  nerves  ?    But  'twill  be  ever  thus 
When  Heav*n  prepares  us  more  than  human  bliss, 
And  gives  us  only  human  strength  to  bear  it. 
Sir  Hub.  What  beam  of  brightness  breaks  through 
yonder  gloom  7 

Per.   Hubert she  comes !    By  all  my  hopes,  she 

comes! 
*Tis  she— tlie  blissful  vision  is  Elwbia  I 
But  ah !  what  mean  those  tears  ?    For  me  she  weeps ! 
O  transport  I— go.    I'll  listen  unobserved,-— 
And  for  a  moment  taste,  in  silent  joy. 
The  banquet  of  a  tear  which  falls  for  love. 

[Exit  Sir  Hubbkt. 
(Pbbct  goet  into  the  Bower.) 

Enter  Elwina. 

El.  Shall  I  not  weep  ?  and  have  I  then  no  cause  ? 
If  I  could  break  th'  eternal  bands  of  death. 
And  wrench  the  sceptre  from  his  iron  grasp ; 
If  I  could  bid  the  yawning  sepulchre 
Restore  to  life  its  long  committed  dust ; 
If  I  could  teach  the  slaughtering  hand  of  war. 
To  give  me  back  my  dear,  my  murder'd  Percy, 
Tlien  I  indeed  might  once  more  cease  to  weep. 

fPBRCY  comes  out  of  the  Botoer.) 

Per.  Then  cease,  for  Percy  lives. 

El.  Protect  me,  Heav'n  ! 

Per.  O  joy  unspeakable  I    My  life,  my  love  I 
End  of  ray  toils,  and  crown  of  all  my  cares ! 
Kind  as  consenting  peace,  as  conquest  bright. 
Dearer  than  arms,  and  lovelier  than  renown ! 

El.  It  is  his  voice— it  is,  it  is  my  Percy  I 
And  dost  thou  live  ? 

Per.  I  never  liv'd  till  now. 

El.  And  did  my  sighs,  and  did  my  sorrows  reach  Mxoi^  ? 
And  art  thou  come  at  last  to  dry  my  tears  ? 
How  didst  thou  'scape  the  fury  of  the  foe  ? 

Per.  Thy  gnarditm  genius  hover'd  o'er  the  field. 
And  tum'd  the  hostile  spear  from  Percy's  breast, 


PERCY.  239 

Lest  thy  foir  image  should  be  woanded  there. 
But  Hareourt  should  have  told  thee  all  my  fate. 

How  I  BurviT*d 

El.  Alas!  I  have  not  seen  liim. 

Oh !  I  have  suffer'd  much. 

Per,  Of  that  no  more ; 

For  every  minute  of  our  future  lives 
Shall  be  so  bless'd,  that  we  will  learn  to  wonder 
How  we  could  ever  think  we  were  unhappy. 
JSl  Percy — I  cannot  speak. 
Per,  Those  tears  how  eloquent ! 

I  would  not  change  this  motionless,  mute  joy. 
For  the  sweet  strains  of  angels :  I  look  down 
"With  idty  on  the  rest  of  human  kind. 
However  great  may  be  their  fame  of  happiness, 
And  think  their  niggrard  fate  has  giv'n  them  nothing, 
Not  giving  thee ;  or  granting  some  small  blessing. 
Denies  them  my  capacity  to  feel  it. 
JBl.  Alas  I  what  mean  you? 
Per,  Can  I  speak  my  meaning  ? 

"Tis  of  such  magnitude,  that  words  would  wrong  it ; 
Bat  surely  my  Elwina^s  fisithful  bosom 
Should  beat  in  kind  responses  of  delight. 
And  feel,  but  never  questtmi,  what  I  mean. 
El,  Hold,  hold,  my  heart,  thou  hast  much  more  to 

suffer! 
Per.  Let  the  slow  form  and  tedious  ceremony 
Wait  on  the  splendid  victims  of  ambition. 
Love  stays  for  none  of  these.    Thy  father*s  soften'd. 
He  will  forget  the  futal  Cheviot  chase : 
Raby  is  brave,  and  I  have  serv'd  my  country ; 
I  would  not  boast ;  it  was  for  thee  I  conquer'dL 
Then  come,  my  love  1 
SI-  O  never,  never,  never. 

Per.  Am  I  awake  ?    Is  that  Elwina's  voice  ? 
El.  Percy,  thou  most  ador'd— and  most  deceived ! 
If  ever  fortitude  sustidn'd  thy  soul. 
When  vulgar  minds  have  sunk  beneath  the  stroke. 

Let  thy  imperial  spirit  now  support  thee 

If  thou  canst  be  so  wondrous  merciful ; 
Do  not,  O  do  not  curse  me !— but  thou  wilt. 
Thou  must— for  I  have  done  a  fearful  deed, 
A  deed  of  wild  despair,  a  deed  of  horror ; 
I  am,  lam — 


240  PERCY. 

Per.  Speak,  Bay,  what  art  thou  ? 

FA.  Married. 

Per,  Oh  I 

EL  Percy,  1  think  I  begg'd  thee  not  to  corse  me ! 
Bat  now  I  do  revoke  the  fond  petition. 
Speak !  ease  thy  bursting  soul ;  reproach,  npbraid, 
O'erwhebn  me  with  thy  wrongs — 111  bear  it  aU. 

Per,  Open,  thoa  earth,  and  hide  me  firom  her  sight! 
Didst  thou  not  bid  me  corse  thee? 

Ei.  Mercy!  mercy! 

Per,  And  have  I  'scap'd  the  Saracen's  fell  sword. 
Only  to  perish  by  Elwina^s  goilt  ? 
I  would  have  bar'd  my  bosom  to  the  foe ; 
I  would  have  died,  had  1  but  known  yoo  wish'd  it. 

EL  Percy,  I  lovM  thee  most  when  most  I  wrong*d 
thee; 
Yes,  by  these  tears,  I  did. 

Per,  Married !  just  Heav'n ! 

To  whom  ?  yet  wherefore  should  I  know  ? 
It  cannot  add  fresh  horrors  to  thy  crime, 
Or  my  destruction. 

El,  Oh!  'twill  add  to  both. 

How  shall  I  tell  ?  prepare  for  something  dreadful. 
Hast  thou  not  heard  of— Douglas  ? 

Per,  Why,  'tis  well ! 

Thou  Power  Supreme !  why  waste  thy  wrath  on  me  ? 
Why  arm  omnipotence  to  crush  a  worm  ? 
I  could  have  fallen  without  this  waste  of  ruin. 
Married  to  Douglas !  By  my  wrongs,  I  like  it ; 
'TIb  perfidy  complete,  'tis  finishM  fiedsehood, 
'TIb  adding  fresh  perdition  to  the  deed ; 
'Tis  filling  up  the  measure  of  offence. 
Till  it  run  o^er  with  misery ! 

El.  Percy,  oh ! 

It  was  my  father*s  deed !  he  made  his  child 
An  instrument  of  vengeance  on  thy  head. 
He  wept,  and  tlireaten'd,  soothed  me,  and  commanded. 

Per,  And  you  complied,  most  duteously  complied ! 

El.  I  could  withstand  his  fury ;  but  his  tears. 
Ah,  they  undid  me !  Percy,  dost  thou  know 
The  cruel  tyranny  of  tenderness  ? 
Hast  thou  e'er  felt  a  £Either's  warm  embrace  ? 
Hast  thou  e'er  seen  a  father's  flowing  tears. 
And  known  that  tliou  cuuldst  wipe  those  tears  away  ? 


PERCy.  241 

If  thon  hast  felt,  and  bast  resbted  these, 

Then  tfaoa  mayst  cune  my  weakness ;  but  if  not, 

Thoa  canst  not  pity,  for  fhoa  canst  not  judge. 

Fer,  Let  me  not  hear  the  music  of  thy  voice, 
Or  1  shall  lore  thee  still :  I  shaU  foi^et 
Thy  fatal  marriage,  and  my  savage  wrongs. 

El.  Dost  thou  not  hate  me,  Percy  ? 

Fer.  Hate  thee  ?  Yes, 

As  dying  martyrs  hate  the  righteous  cause 
Of  the  bless'd  Power  for  whom  they  bleed. — I  hate  thee  ? 
(  They  look  at  each  other  in  silent  agony.  J 

Bnter  Harcourt. 

Har,  FOTgive,  my  lord,  your  faithful  knight^ 

Per,  Come,  Harcourt, 

Ckxne  and  behold  the  wretch  who  once  was  Percy. 

Har.  With  grief  IVe  leam*d  the  whole  unhappy  tale. 
Earl  Douglas,  whose  suspicion  never  sleeps — 

Per.  What,  is  the  tyrant  jealous? 

El.  Hear  him,  Percy. 

Per.  I  will  command  my  rage.    Go  on. 

Har.  Earl  Douglas 

Knew  by  my  arms  and  my  accoutrements. 
That  I  belonged  to  you ;  he  question^  muclt. 
And  much  he  menaced  me,  but  both  alike 
In  Tidn ;  he  then  arrested  and  confin'd  me. 

Per.  Arrest  my  knight  ?  The  Scot  shall  answer  it. 

El,  How  came  you  now  released  ? 

Har,  Your  noble  father 

ObtainM  my  freedom,  having  leam'd  from  Hubert 
The  news  of  Percy's  death.    The  good  old  lord. 
Hearing  the  king's  return,  has  left  the  castle 
To  yield  him  lu^age.    (  To  Percy.)     Sir,  you  had  best 

retire; 
Your  safety  is  endangered  by  your  stay. 
1  fear  should  Douglas  know — 

Per,  Should  Douglas  know  I 

Why,  what  new  magic  ^  in  the  name  of  Douglas, 
That  it  should  strike  Northumberland  with  fear  ? 
QOt  Mek  the  haughty  Scot,  and  tell  him— No— 
Condact  me  to  his  presence. 

El.  Percy,  hold ; 

Think  not  'tis  Douglas— ti«^ 

Per,  I  know  it  well— . 

51 


242  PERCY. 

Thoa  meanest  to  tell  me  His  Elwina^a  hnsbaiMl  i 
Vfhy,  that  inflames  me  to  superior  madness. 
This  happjr  husband,  this  triumi^iant  Douglasy 
Shall  not  insult  my  misery  iHth  his  bliss, 
ni  blast  the  gulden  promise  of  his  joys. 
Conduct  me  to  him— nay,  I  will  have  way— 
Come,  let  us  seek  this  husband. 

£L  Percy,  hear  me. 

When  I  was  robb'd  of  aU  my  peace  of  mind. 
My  cruel  fortune  left  me  stUl  one  blessing, 
One  solitary  blessing,  to  console  me ; 
It  was  nry  feune.^Tis  a  rich  jewel,  Percy, 
And  I  must  keep  it  spotless  and  unsoil'd : 
But  thou  wouldst  plunder  what  e^en  Douglas  spared. 
And  rob  this  single  gem  of  all  its  brightness. 

Per,  Go— thou  wast  bom  to  rule  tiie  fate  of  Percy, 
Thou  art  my  conqueror  still. 

EL  What  noise  is  that? 

(Harcourt  goeg  to  the  side  of  the  ett^e.) 

Per,  Why  art  thou  thus  alarmed  ? 

Ek  AlasI  Ifert 

The  cowardice  and  terrors  of  the  wicked. 
Without  their  sense  of  guilt 

Har.  My  lord,  'tis  Douglas. 

El.  Ry,  Percy,  and  for  ever ! 

Per,  Fly  from  Doaglas  ? 

El,  Then  stay,  barbarian,  and  at  once  destroy 
My  life  and  fame. 

Per.  Tliat  thought  is  death.    I  go. 

My  honour  to  thy  dearer  honour  yields. 

El.  Yet,  yet  thou  art  not  gone ! 

Per,  Farewell,  forewell ! 

Exit  Percy. 

El  I  dare  not  meet  the  searching  eye  of  Douglas. 
I  must  conceal  my  terrors. 

DoooLAS  €U  the  side  with  his  sxoord  draum,  Edric 

holds  him, 

Doug,  OItb  bm  way. 

Ed.  Thou  Shalt  not  enter. 

Doug,  (^struggling  with  Ed,)  If  there  were  no  bell, 
It  would  defraud  my  vengeance  of  its  edge. 
And  he  should  live. 

{^Breaks  from  Edric,  and  comes  fortcard.) 


PERCY.  243 

Cursed  chaaoe!  he  is  not  here. 

Ei.  (going.)  1  dare  not  meek  hk  fary« 

Doug.  See,  ahe  flies 

'WitiierYyinarkeffiiilt.    G<s  search  the  bonr*r ; 

(Aside  to  Edbic. 
He  shall  not  thos  esciqpe.  Madam,  return.  (Aloud.) 
Now,  honest  Douglas,  learn  of  her  to  feign.  (Aside.) 
Alone,  Elwina  ?  who  Just  parted  hence  ? 

(  With  affected  composure. 

El.   M]r  lord,  'twas  Hareonrt ;  sure  you  must  have 
met  Un. 

Doug.  O,  exquisite  dissembler  I    No  (me  eke  ? 

JR.  Mylordl 

Doug.  How  I  ei\)oy  her  criminal  confusion  I 
You  tremble^  madam. 

EL  Wherefore  should  I  tremble  ? 

By  yonr  permissioa  Haroourt  was  admitted ; 
'Twas  no  mysterious,  secret  introduction. 

Doug.   And  yet  you  seem  alarm'd.    If  Harconrt's 
presence 
Thus  agitates  each  nerve,  makes  every  pulse 
Thus  wildly  throb,  and  the  warm  tides  of  blood 
Mount  in  quick  nuhing  tumult  to  your  cheek ; 
If  friendship  can  excite  such  strong  emotions, 
VHiat  trwBon  had  a  lover^s  presence  caused  ? 

EL  Ungeneroas  man  I 

Doug,  I  feast  upon  her  terrors.       (Aside.) 

The  story  of  his  death  was  well  contrived,        (  To  her.) 
But  it  affects  not  me ;  I  have  a  wife, 
Compar'd  with  whom  cold  Dian  was  unchaste. 

(  Takes  her  hand.) 
But,  mark  me  well—though  it  concerns  not  you— 
If  there's  a  sin  more  deefdy  black  than  others, 
Distingnish'd  from  the  list  of  common  crimes, 
A  legion  in  itsdU;  and  douUy  dear 
To  the  dark  prince  of  hell,  it  is— hypocrisy 

(  T%rows  her  from  him,  and  egit.J 

EL  Yes,  I  will  bear  his  fearful  indignation  I 
Thoa  melting  heart,  be  firm  as  adamant ; 
Ye  shatter'd  nenres,  be  strung  with  manly  force. 
That  I  may  conquer  all  my  sex's  weakness. 
And  Uve  as  free  from  terror  as  from  guilt. 
Nor  shall  thk  bleeding  bosom  lodge  one  though^ 


jM  PBRCY. 

Chexuh  one  wish,  or  bartwur  one  desire  4 
That  aofels  may  not  hear,  and  Douglaa^bow. 


ACT  IV. 
ScBNB— 7%e  HeOL 


JSnter  Douglas,  his  tword  drawn  and  Moody  m  ont 
hand,  in  the  other  a  letter,    Habooubt  wounded, 

Doug.  Traitor,  no  more.    This  letter  shows  thy  office. 
Twice  hast  thou  robb'd  me  of  my  dear  rerenge. 
1  took  thee  for  thy  leader.— Thy  base  blood 
Would  stain  the  noble  temper  of  my  sword. 
But  as  the  pander  to  thy  roaster^  lust 
Thou  justly  foll*st  by  a  wrongs  husband's  hand. 

Jiar,  Thy  wife  is  innocent. 

Doug,  Take  him  away. 

Har,  Percy,  revenge  my  fall  I 

C Guards  bear  Harcoubt  in. J 

Doug.  Now  for  the  letter  1 

He  begs  once  more  to  see  her— se  ^tis  plain 
They  hare  already  met  I— but  to  the  rest — 
C Beads. J  "  In  vain  yon  wish  me  to  restore  the  scarf. 
Dear  pledge  of  love,  while  I  have  life  111  wear  it ; 
*Tis  next  my  heart ;  no  powV  shall  force  it  thence. 
Whenever  you  see  it  in  another*s  hand 
Conclude  me  dead.*'— My  curses  on  them  both  I 
How  tamely  I  peruse  my  shame !  But  thus. 
Thus  let  me  tear  the  gruilty  characters 
Which  register  my  infamy :  and  thus. 
Thus  would  I  scatter  to  tiie  winds  of  heay*n 
The  Tile  complotters  of  my  foul  dishonour. 

C  Tears  the  letter  in  the  utmost  agitation.} 

Enter  Edbic. 

Ed,  My  lord- 
Dot^.  0*n  the  utmost  fury^  not  seeing  Edbic.^   TIm 

scarf! 
Ed.  Lord  Douglas. 

Doug,  (still  not  hearing  him.)  Yes,  the  scarf! 
Percy,  I  thank  thee  for  the  glorious  thought  I 
111  cherish  it ;  'twill  sweeten  all  my  pangs. 


PERCY.  246 

And  add  a  keener  relish  to  revenge ! 

Hd.  My  lord  I 

Doug,  How,  Edric here? 

£d.  What  new  distrees  ? 

Doug,  Dost  thoa  expect  I  should  recount  mjr  shame  ? 
Dwell  on  each  drcomstance  of  my  disgrace. 
And  swell  my  infamy  into  a  tale ; 
Till  I  become  the  scorn  of  ev'ry  fool. 
And  branded  as  a  weak,  believing  hosband  ? 
Kage  will  not  let  me.— Bat— my  wife  is  false. 

EeL  Art  thou  convinced  ? 

Doug,  The  chronicles  of  hell 

Cannot  produce  a  falser.    But  what  news 
Of  her  curs'd  paramour  ? 

Sd.  He  has  escap'd. 

Doug.  Hast  thou  examin*d  ev'ry  avenue  ? 
Each  spot  ?  the  grove  ?  the  bower,  her  favorite  haun  t  ? 

Ed,  Tve  search'd  them  all. 

Doug,  He  shall  be  yet  pursued. 

Set  guards  at  evVy  gate.— Let  none  depart. 
Or  gain  admittance  here  without  my  knowledge. 

Ed.  What  can  their  purpose  be  ? 

Doug,  Is  it  not  clear  ? 

Harconrt  has  rais*d  his  arm  against  my  life. 
He  fail'd ;  the  blow  is  now  reserv*d  for  Percy ; 
Then  with  his  sword,  fresh  reeking  from  my  heart, 
Hell  revel  with  that  wanton  o'er  my  tomb ; 
Nor  will  he  bring  her  aught  she'll  hold  so  dear 
As  the  curs'd  hand  with  which  he  slew  her  husband. 
But  he  shall  die  I  I'll  drown  my  rage  in  blood  I 
Yes  I  here  I  do  devote  the  forfeit  blood 
Of  him  my  soul  abhors,  a  rich  libation 
On  thy  infernal  altar,  black  revenge  1  Exeunt, 

Scene  changes  to  the  Garden, 
Enter  Elwina. 
EL  Each  avenue  is  so  beset  with  guards, 
And  lynx-eyed  jealousy  so  broad  awake. 
He  cannot  pass  unseen.    Protect  him,  Heav*n  I 

Enter  Bibtha. 

My  Birtha,  is  he  safe  t    Has  he  escapM  ? 
Sir,   I  know  not.     I   despatch'd  young   Harcourt 
straight. 


246  PERCY. 

To  bid  him  quit  the  castle,  as  you  ordered. 
Restore  the  scarf,  and  never  see  yon  more. 
Bat  how  the  hard  ii^onctlim  was  receiv'd. 
Or  what  has  happen^  since,  Vm  yet  to  learn. 

El.  O  when  shall  I  be  eas'd  of  all  my  cares. 
And  in  the  quiet  bosom  of  the  grave 
Lay  down  this  weary  head  ?— Fm  sick  at  heart ! 
Should  Douglas  intercept  his  flight  I 

Bir.  Be  calm ; 

Douglas  this  rerj  moment  left  the  castle 
With  seeming  peace. 

I^,   .  Ah,  then  indeed  there*is  danger  1 

Birtha,  whenever  suspicion  feigns  to  sleep, 
*Tis  but  to  make  its  careless  prey  secure. 

Bir.  Should  Percy  once  again  entreat  to  see  thee, 
'Twere  best  admit  him ;  from  thy  lips  alMie 
He  will  submit  to  hear  his  final  doom 
Of  everlasting  exile. 

El.  Birtha,  no : 

If  honour  would  allow  the  wife  of  Douglas 
To  meet  his  rival,  yet  I  durst  not  do  it. 
Percy  1  too  much  this  rebel  heart  is  thine : 
Too  deeply  should  I  feel  each  pang  I  g^ve  ! 
I  cannot  hate— but  I  will  banish  thee. 
Inexorable  duty,  O  forgive 
If  I  can  do  no  more  1 

Bir.  If  he  remains. 

As  I  suspect,  within  the  castle  walls, 
'Twere  best  I  sought  him  out. 

El.  Then  teU  him,  Birtha, 

But,  oh  I  with  gentleness,  with  mercy  tell  him. 
That  we  must  never,  never  meet  again. 
The  purport  of  thy  tale  must  be  severe, 
Most  strong  and  absc^ute  the  prohibition  ; 
But  let  thy  tenderness  embalm  the  wound 
My  virtue  gives.    O  soften  his  despair ; 
But  say  we  meet  no  more. 

Enter  Percy. 

Rash  man,  he's  here ! 
(Site  attempts  to  go,  he  seizes  her  hand.) 
Per.  I  will  be  heard ;  nay,  fly  not !  I  will  speak  ; 
Lost  as  I  am,  I  will  not  be  denied 
The  mournful  consolatiou  to  complain. 


PERCY.  247 

El.  Percy,  I  charge  thee,  leave  me. 

Per.  Tyrant,  no : 

I  blush  at  my  obedience,  Unsh  to  think 
I  left  thee  here  alone,  to  brave  the  danger 
I  now  return  to  share. 

EL  That  danger's  past : 

Dooglas  was  «oon  appeased ;  he  nothing  knows. 
Then  leave  me,  I  coi\jare  thee,  nor  again 
Endanger  my  repose.    Yet,  ere  fhoa  goest, 
Restore  the  scarf. 

Per,  Unkind  Elwina,  never ; 

*n8  all  that's  left  me  of  my  buried  joys ; 
All  which  reminds  me  that  I  once  was  happy. 
My  letter  told  thee  I  would  ne^er  restore  it. 

El,  Letter  ?  what  letter  ? 

Per,  That  I  sent  by  Hareourt. 

El.  Which  I  have  ne'er  receiv'd.    Douglas  perhape— 
Wh6  knows  ? 

Sir,  Harcourt,  t'  elude  his  watchfulness, 

BCght  prudently  retire. 

El.  Grant  Heav'n,  it  prove  so ! 

(Elwina  goings  Percy  holds  her.) 

Per.  Hear  me,  Elwina,  the  most  savage  honour 
Forbids  not  that  ^mot  grace. 

El.  It  bids  me  fly  thee. 

Per,  Then  ere  thou  go'st,  if  we  indeed  must  part. 
To  soothe  the  horrors  of  eternal  exile. 
Say  but— thou  pitiest  me  ! 

El.  (toeeps.)  O  Percy— pity  thee ! 

Imperious  honour !— surely  I  may  pity  him. 
Yet,  wherefore  j^y  ?  no,  1  envy  thee ; 
For  thou  hast  still  the  liberty  to  weep ; 
In  thee  'twill  be  no  crime ;  thy  tears  are  gaiItleM> 
For  they  infringe  no  duty,  stain  no  honoo^, 
And  blot  no  vow ;  but  mine  are  criminal. 
Are  drops  of  shame  which  wash  the  cheek  of  guilt; 
And  every  tear  1  shed  dishonours  Douglas. 

Per.  I  swear  my  jealous  love  e'en  grudges  thine 
Thy  sad  pre-eminence  in  wretchedness. 

El.    Rouse,  rouse,  my  slumb'ring  virtue!     Percy, 
hear  me. 
Heaven,  when  it  gives  such  high-wrought  souk  as  thine. 
Still  gives  as  great  occasions  to  exert  them. 
If  thou  wast  form'd  so  noble,  brave,  and  gen'rooa, 


248  PERCY. 

^TwM  to  surmount  the  pM^ona  wUeh  enalayfl 
The  gross  of  human  kind.— "lis  their  low  boast 
To  yield  to  trials  thou  art  eall'd  to  conqoer. 
Criterion  of  great  souls  I    Then  think,  O  think, 
Shu,  whom  thou  once  didst  lore,  is  now  another*e. 

Per.  Go  on— and  tell  me  that  that  other*t  Doaglae. 

El,  Whate'er  his  name,  he  claims  respect  from  me  i 
His  honour's  in  my  keeping,  and  I  hold 
llie  trust  so  pure,  its  sanctity  is  hart 
E'en  by  thy  presence. 

Per.  Thoa  again  hast  conquer*d, 

Celestial  Virtue,  like  the  angel- spirit. 
Whose  flaming  sword  defended  Paradise, 
Stands  guard  on  evYy  charm.    Elwina,  yes, 
To  triumph  oyer  Douglas,  well  be  rirtuotis. 

El.  *Tis  not  enough  to  be, — we  must  appear  so : 
High  minds  disdain  the  shadow  of  offence. 
Nor  must  their  whiteness  wear  the  hue  of  guilt. 

Per,  I  shall  retract— I  dare  not  gaze  upon  thee ; 
My  feeble  virtue  staggers,  and  again 
The  fiends  of  jealousy  torment  and  haunt  me. 
They  tear  my  heart-strings. Oh ! 

El.  Percy  I  no  more ; 

But  spare  my  injur'd  honour  the  aff/unt 
To  vindicate  itself. 

Per,  But  love  I 

El,  But  glory ! 

Per.  Enough!  a  ray  of  thy  sublimer  spirit 
Has  warmM  my  dying  honour  to  a  flame ! 
One  effori;,  and  'tis  done,    llio  world  shall  say. 
When  they  shall  speak  of  my  disastrous  love, 
Percy  deserved  Elwina  though  he  lost  her. 
Fond  tears  blind  me  not  yet !  a  little  longer. 
Let  my  sad  eyes  a  little  longer  gaze. 
And  leave  their  last  beams  here. 

El.  (jtunisfrom  him.)       I  do  not  weep. 

Per,  Not  weep !  Then  why  those  eyes  avoiding  mine  ? 
And  why  that  broken  voice  ?  Those  trembling  accents  ? 
That  sigh  which  rends  my  soul  ? 

El.  No  more,  no  more 

Per.  That  pang  decides  it.    Come — 1*11  die  at  once ; 
Thou  Power  Supreme !  take  all  the  length  of  days. 
And  all  the  blessings  kept  in  store  for  me, 
And  add  to  her  account.    Yet  turn  once  more, 


PERCY.  249 

One  little  look,  one  last,  short  glimpse  of  day. 
And  then  a  long  dark  night.    Hold,  hold,  my  heart. 

0  break  not  yet,  while  I  behold  her  sweetness ; 
For  after  this  dear  tender,  mournful,  moment, 

1  shall  hare  nothing  more  to  do  with  life. 
El.  I  pny  thee  go  ? 

Per,  *Ti8  terrible  to  nature ! 

With  pangs  like  these  the  soul  and  body  part ! 
And  thus,  but  oh !  with  far  less  agony. 
The  dying  wretch  still  grasps  to  hold  his  being. 
Thus  clings  to  life,  thus  dreads  the  dark  unknown. 
Thus  struggles  to  the  last  to  keep  his  hold ; 
And  when  the  last  convulsive  groan  of  death 
Dislodges  the  sad  spirit— thus  it  stays. 
Thus  fondly  hovers  o*er  the  form  it  lov'd. 
Once,  and  no  more— farewell,  farewell ! 

£L  For  ever  I 

C  They  look  at  each  other  for  tome  time,  then  exit  Pbbo  y.> 

j4fter  a  pause, 
'Tis  past— the  conflict's  past !  retire,  my  Birtha, 
I  would  address  me  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

Bir.  May  Heav'n  restore  that  peace  thy  bosom  wants ! 

[Exit  Birtha. 

El  (kneeb.)  Look  down,  thou  awful,  heart-inspecting 
Judge, 
Look  down  with  mei^  on  thine  erring  creature. 
And  teach  my  soul  the  lowliness  it  needs ! 
That  genuine  penitence  vouchsafe  to  give. 
That  inward  purity  of  heart  and  life, 
Which  mourns  the  past  offence,  and  sihons  the  future ! 
And  if  some  sad  remains  of  human  weakness 
Should  sometimes  mingle  with  my  best  resolves, 
O  breathe  thy  spirit  on  this  wayward  heart. 
And  teach  me  to  reject  th*  intruding  sin. 
In  its  first  birth  of  ttionght ! 

(Noite  withoul.) 
What  n<nse  is  that  ? 
The  clash  of  swords !   Should  Douglas  be  retom'd  ? 

Enter  Douglas  and  VzKcr  figlUing, 

Dotig,  Yield,  villain,  yield. 

Per.  Not  till  this  good  right  arm 

Shall  fail  its  master. 
Doug.  This  to  thy  heart  tiien. 


250  PERCY. 

Per.  Defend  thy  owm. 

(  Tkey  fight.    Fbbct  duamu  Douglas.) 
Doug.  ConfoBion,  death,  and  bdl ! 

Ed.  iwUhout.)  This  way  I  heard  the  noise. 

iSnter  Edbic  and  many  Knigjii*  and  Chtardtfnm 
every  part  of  the  Stage.) 

Per,  CnrsM  treachery ! 

But  dearly  will  I  s^  my  life. 

Doug.  Seize  <m  him. 

Per.  I'm  taken  in  the  t<»ls. 
(Pbhct  is  surrounded  by  Guards^  who  take  his  svBord.) 

Doug.  In  the  carB*d  snare 

Thou  laidst  for  me,  traitor,  thyself  art  caught. 

El.  He  never  sought  thy  life. 

Doug.  Adulfress,  peace  I 

The  villain  Harconrt  too — but  he's  at  rest. 

Per.  Douglas,  I'm  in  thy  power ;  but  do  not  triumph, 
Percy*s  betray*d,  not  conquer*d.    Come,  despatch  me. 

El.  {to  Doug.)  O  do  not,  do  not  kill  him : 

Per.  Madam,  forbear ; 

For  by  the  glorious  shades  of  my  great  fathers. 
Their  godlike  spirit  is  not  so  extinct. 
That  I  should  owe  my  life  to  that  vile  Scot. 
Though  dangers  close  me  round  on  every  side. 
And  death  besets  me— I  am  Percy  still. 

Doug.  Sorceress,  111  disappoint  thee— he  shall  die ; 
Thy  minion  shall  expire  before  thy  fece ; 
Yes,  I  will  feast  my  hatred  \i'ith  your  pangs ; 
And  make  his  dying  groans  and  thy  fond  tears 
A  banquet  for  my  vengeance. 

El.  Savage  tyrant ! 

I  would  have  fallen  a  silent  sacrifice. 
So  thou  had'st  spared  my  fame :  I  never  wrong'd  thee. 

Per.  She  knew  not  of  my  coming ;  I  alone 
Have  been  to  blame — spite  of  her  interdiction, 
I  hither  came.    She's  pure  as  spotless  saints. 

El.  I  will  not  be  excused  by  Percy's  crime ; 
So  white  my  innocence,  it  does  not  ask 
The  shade  of  others'  faults  to  set  it  off; 
Nor  shall  he  need  to  sully  his  fair  fome. 
To  throw  a  brighter  lustre  round  my  virtue. 

Doug.  Yet  he  can  only  die — but  death  for  honoor  I 
Ye  powers  of  hell,  who  take  malignant  joy 


PERCY.  861 

In  human  bloodshed,  give  me  some  dire  means. 
Wild  as  my  bate,  and  desperate  as  my  wrongs ! 

Fer.  Enough  of  words.    Tlioa  knowlst  I  hate  tfaee« 
Douglas ; 
'Tis  stedfiist,  fix'd,  hereditary  hate. 
As  thine  for  me ;  our  ftithers  did  bequeath  it. 
As  part  of  our  unalioiable  birthright, 
IVhich  nought  but  death  can  end.    Come,  end  it  here. 

El,  (kneeb.)  Hold,  Douglas,  hold  I  not  for  myself  1 
kneel, 
I  do  not  plead  for  Percy,  but  for  thee ; 
Arm  not  thy  hand  against  thy  future  peace ; 
Spare  thy  brare  breast  the  tortures  of  remorse, — 
Stain  not  a  life  of  nnp<^uted  honour. 
For,  oh  I  as  surdy  as  thou  strik'st  at  Percy,  , 
Thon  wilt  for  erer  stab  the  fieune  of  Douglas. 

Per.  Finish  the  bloody  work. 

D&ug,  Then  take  thy  wish. 

Per.  Why  dost  thon  start  ? 

(Percy  bares  his  bosom  ;  Douglas  advances  to  stab  hita, 
and  discovers  the  Scarf.) 

Doug.  Her  scarf  upon  his  breast  1 

The  blasting  sight  converts  me  into  stone ; 
Withers  my  powers  like  cowardice  or  age ; 
Curdles  the  blood  within  my  shiy'ring  veins, 
And  palsies  my  bold  arm. 

Per.  (ironieaUy  to  the  Knights.)  Hear  you,  his  friends ; 
Bear  witness  to  the  glorious,  great  exploit, 
Record  it  in  the  annids  of  his  race ; 
That  Douglas—the  renowned,  the  valtani  Douglas, 
Fenc'd  round  with  guards,  and  safe  in  hk  own  castle, 
Surpris'd  a  knight  unarmed,  and  bravely  dew  him. 

Doug,  (throunng  away  his  dagger.)  *Tl8  true— I  am 
the  very  stain  of  knighthood. 
IIow  is  my  glory  dimmed  I 

El.  It  blazes  brighter ! 

Douglas  was  only  brave— he  now  is  generous  I 

Per.  This  action  has  restored  thee  to  thy  rank. 
And  makes  thee  worthy  to  contend  with  Percy. 

Doug.  Thyjoy  wfflbea8shortas*tisinsultiBg. 

( To  ELwnu.) 
And  thou,  imperious  boy,  restrain  thy  boastfaig. 
Thou  hast  sav'd  my  honour,  not  removed  my  hate; 
For  my  soul  loathes  thee  for  the  obtigation. 


252  PERCY. 

Give  him  his  sword. 

Per.  Now  thou'rt  a  noble  fue» 

A.ud  in  the  field  of  houour  I  will  meet  thee. 
As  knight  encountering  knight. 

EL  Stay,  Percy,  stay. 

Strike  at  the  wretched  cause  of  all,  strike  here ; 
Here  sheathe  thy  thirsty  sword,  but  spare  my  husband. 

Doug,  Turn,  madam,  and  address  those  vows  to  me^ 
To  sfwre  the  precious  life  of  him  you  love. 
Ev*n  now  you  triumph  in  the  death  of  Douglas ; 
Now  your  loose  fancy  kindles  at  the  thought, 
And  wildly  rioting  in  lawless  hope. 
Indulges  in  th'  adultery  of  the  mind. 
But  111  defeat  that  wish.    Guards,  bear  her  in. 
Nay,  do  not  struggle.  (  She  it  borne  m.) 

Per.  Let  our  deaths  suffice. 

And  reverence  virtue  in  that  form  enshrin'd. 

Doug.  Provoke  my  rage  no  farther.    I  have  kindled 
The  burning  torch  of  never-dying  vengeance 
At  love*s  expiring  lamp.    But  mark  me,  friends, 
If  Percy's  happier  genius  should  prevail. 
And  I  should  fall,  give  him  safe  conduct  hence ; 
Be  all  observance  paid  him.    Let  him  meet 
Th'  exacteat  courtesy  which  knighthood  owes. 

{Aside  to  Eoric.) 
Within  I*ve  something  for  thy  private  ear. 

Pel'.  Now  shall  this  mutual  fury  be  appeased ! 
These  eager  hands  shall  soon  be  drenched  in  slaughter ! 
Yes— like  two  famish'd  vultures  snuffing  blood. 
And  panting  to  destroy,  we'll  rush  to  combat : 
Yet  I've  the  deepest,  deadliest  cause  of  hate ; 
I  am  but  Percy,  thou'rt— Elwina's  husband. 


ACT  V. 

Scene — Elwina's  Apartment. 

El.  Thou  who  in  judgment  still  remember*st  mercy. 
Look  down  upon  my  woes,  preserve  my  husband. 
Preserve  my  hudband  1  Ah,  I  dare  not  ask  it ; 
My  very  prayers  may  pull  down  ruin  on  me ! 
If  Douglas  should  survive,  what  then  becomes 


PERCY.  253 

Of— him— I  dare  not  name  ?  And  if  he  conquers, 

I've  slain  my  husband.    Agonizing  state. 

When  I  can  neither  hope,  nor  think,  nor  pray. 

But  guilt  involves  me  1   Sure  to  know  the  worst 

Were  transport  to  the  torture  of  suspense. 

When  each  event  is  big  with  equal  horror. 

C  Looks  out.)  What  no  one  yet !  This  solitude  is  dreadful ! 

My  horrors  multiply  I 

Enter  Birtha. 

Thou  messenger  of  wo ! 

Bir.  Of  wo  indeed ! 

El.  How !  is  my  husband  dead  ? 

Oh  speak. 

Bir,  Your  husband  lives. 

El.  Then  farewell,  Percy  I 

He  was  the  tenderest,  truest !  Bless  him,  Heav'u, 
With  peace  eternal,  and  a  crown  of  glory ! 

Bir.  Still  are  you  wrong ;  the  combat  is  not  over. 
Stay  flowing  tears,  and  give  me  leave  to  speak. 

El.  Thou  sayst  that  Percy  and  my  husband  live ; 
Then  why  this  sorrow  ? 

Bir.  What  a  task  is  mine  ? 

El.  Thou  talk^st  as  if  I  were  a  child  in  grief. 
New  to  the  knowledge  of  calamity. 
Speak  out ;  unfold  thy  tale,  whatever  it  be ; 
For  I  am  so  familiar  with  affliction. 
It  cannot  come  in  any  shape  will  shock  me. 

Bir.  How  shi^  I  speak  ?    Thy  husband— 

El.  What  of  Douglas  ? 

Bir.  When  nil  was  ready  for  the  fatal  combat. 
He  call'd  his  chosen  knights,  then  drew  his  sword, 
And  on  it  made  them  swear  an  awful  oath, 
Confirmed  by  every  rite  religion  bids. 
That  they  would  see  performed  his  last  request, 
Be  it  whate'er  it  would. — Alas  1  they  swore. 

El.  What  did  the  dreadful  preparation  mean  ? 

Bir.  Then  to  their  hands  he  gave  a  poison'd  cup. 
Compounded  of  the  deadliest  herbs  and  drugs ; 
**  Take  this,"  saidjie,  *'it  is  a  husband's  legacy ; 
"  Percy  may  conquer — and — I  have  a  wife ! 
"  If  Douglas  falls,  Elwina  must  not  live." 

El.  Spirit  of  Herod !  why,  'twas  greatly  thought ! 
'Twas  worthy  of  the  bosom  that  conceiv'd  it  I 


254  PERCY. 

Yet  sure  the  prqject  could  not  be  his  own ; 
For  there  was  kindness— there  was  mercy  m  iL 
Yes,  Douglas  I  yes,  my  husband,  I'll  obey  theo  ; 
And  bless  thy  bloody  genius  which  devised 
The  deadly  means  to  make  obedience  pleasant 
To  reconcile  thy  vengeance  with  my  peace. 

Bir.  O  spare,  for  pity  spare  my  bleeding  heart : 
Inhuman  to  the  last.    Unnatural  I  poison  I 

El.  My  gentle  firiend,  what  is  there  in  a  name  ? 
Tlie  means  are  little,  where  the  end  is  kind. 
If  it  disturb  thee,  do  not  call  it  poison ; 
Call  it  the  sweet  oblivion  of  my  cares. 
My  balm  of  wo,  my  cordial  of  affliction. 
The  drop  of  mercy  to  my  fainting  soul. 
My  kin;i  dismission  from  a  world  of  sorrow. 
My  cup  of  bliss,  my  passport  to  the  skies. 

Bir,  Harkl  what  alarm  is  that  ? 

El.  The  combat's  over  1 

(^BivruA  goes  oui.) 
/'Elwina  $tand*  in  a  fixed  attitudet  her  hands  cUuf^.) 
Now  gradous  Heav'n,  sustain  me  in  the  trial. 
And  bow  my  spirit  to  thy  just  decrees  I 

Be-enter  Birtha. 

CElwina  looht  steadfastly  at  her  without  ipectkin^.J 

Bir.  Douglas  is  fallen. 

El.  Bring  me  the  poison. 

Bir.  Never. 

El.  Where  are  the  knights?  I  summon  you — approach? 
Draw  near,  ye  awful  ministers  of  fate, ' 
Dire  instruments  of  posthumous  revenge  I 
Come,  I  am  ready ;  but  your  tardy  justice 
Defrauds  the  vengeance  of  the  ii^jur'd  dead. 
Go,  see  the  castle  be  securely  guarded — 
Let  every  gate  be  barr'd— prevent  his  entrance. 

Bir.  Wltose  entrance  ? 

El.  His— the  murderer  of  my  husband. 

Bir.  He's  single,  we  have  hosts  of  friends. 

El.  No  matter : 

Who  knows  what  love  and  madness  may  attempt  f 
But  here  I  swear,  by  all  that  binds  the  good. 
Never  to  see  him  more. — Unhappy  Douglas ! 
O  if  thy  troubled  spirit  still  is  conscious 
Of  our  past  woes,  look  down  and  hear  me  swear. 


PERCY.  255 

That  when  the  legacy  thy  nige  bequeathe  me 
Works  at  my  heart,  and  conquers  strogf  ling  nature, 
E*en  in  that  agony  I'll  still  be  fiEuthfaL 
She  who  could  never  love,  shall  yet  obey  thee. 
Weep  thy  hard  fete,  and  die  to  prove  her  truth. 
Bir.  O  unexampled  virtue  I  (^  noite  tnthout.) 

El.  Heard  you  nothing  ? 

By  all  my  fears  th*  insulting  conqueror  comes. 

0  save  me,  shi^  me  I 

Enter  Douglas. 

HeavYi  and  earth,  my  husband  I 

Dotfg.  Yes 

To  blast  thee  with  the  sight  of  him  thou  hatest. 

Of  him  thou  hast  wrong'd ;  adultress,  'tis  thy  husband. 

EU  (kneeli.)  Blest  be  the  fountain  of  eternal  mercy. 
This  load  of  guilt  is  spar'd  me !    Douglas  lives ! 
Perhi^  both  live  !    (  To  Birtha.)  Could  I  be  sure  of 

that. 
The  poison  were  superfluous,  joy  would  kill  me. 

Doug.  Be  honest  now  for  once,  and  curse  thy  stars ; 
Curse  thy  detested  fate,  which  brings  thy  husband ; 
Thy  hated  husband,  when  thy  guilty  soul 
Revelled  in  fond  imaginary  joys 
Witti  thy  more  happy  paramour— just  then 
When  thy  luxurious  fancy  had  combined 
Adulterous  lust  with  murder— then,  just  then. 
Thus  to  reverse  the  scene  1  polluted  woman ! 
Mine  is  the  transport  now,  and  thine  the  pang. 

El.  Whence  sprung  the  false  report  that  thou  bod'et 
faUen? 

Doug.  To  give  thy  guilty  breast  a  deeper  wound, 
To  add  a  deadlier  sting  to  disappointment, 

1  rais'd  it — I  contriv'd — I  sent  it  thee. 

EL  Thou  seest  me  bold,  hoA  bold  in  conscious  virtue. 
— That  my  sad  soul  may  not  be  stain'd  with  blood* 
That  I  may  spend  my  few  short  hours  in  peace. 
And  die  in  holy  hope  of  heav'n^  forgiveness 
Relieve  the  terrors  of  my  lab*ring  breast, 
Say  I  am  clear  of  murder — say  he  Uvea, 
Say  but  that  little  word,  that  Percy  lives ; 
And  Alps  and  oceans  shall  divide  us  ever. 
As  far  as  universal  space  can  part  us. 

Doug.  Canst  thou  renounce  him  ? 


256  PERCY. 

El.  Tell  rae  tliat  he  Uvea, 

And  thou  shalt  be  the  ruler  of  my  fate. 
And  life  or  death  shall  on  thy  bidding  wait 
Yea,  thou  shalt  hide  me  in  a  convent's  gloom. 
From  cheerfol  daylight,  and  the  haunts  of  men. 
Where  sad  austerity  and  ceaseless  prayY 
Shall  share  my  uncomplaining  day  between  them. 

Doug.  O  hypocrite !  now  vengeance,  to  thy  office. 
I  had  forgot — Percy  commends  him  to  thee. 
And  by  my  hand — 

El.  Ho  w— by  th  y  hand  ? 

Dotig.  Has  sent  thee 

This  precious  pledge  of  love. 

(He  gives  her  Pbrcy's  tcoff.) 

EL  Then  Percy's  dead? 

Doug.  He  is.    O  great  revenge,  thou  now  art  mine ! 
See  how  convulsive  sorrow  rends  her  frame ! 
This,  this  is  transport !    Iigur'd  honour,  now. 
Receives  its  vast,  its  ample  retribution. 
She  sheds  no  tears,  her  gfrief  s  too  highly  wrought; 
*Tis  speechless  agony.    She  must  not  faint^ 
She  shall  not  'scape  her  portion  of  the  pain. 
No !  she  shall  feel  the  fulness  of  distress. 
And  wake  to  keen  perception  of  her  wo. 

Bir.  Monster  I  barbarian !  leave  her  to  her  sorrows. 

El.  (in  a  low  solemn  voice.)  Douglas — think  not  I  faint, 
because  tliou  seest 
The  pale  and  bloodless  cheek  of  wan  despair. 
Fail  me  not  yet,  my  spirits ;  thou  cold  heut. 
Cherish  thy  freezing  current  one  short  moment. 
And  bear  thy  mighty  load  a  little  longer. 

Doug.  Percy,  I  must  avow  it,  bravely  fought,— 
Died  as  a  hero  should ;  but,  as  he  fell. 
Hear  it,  fond  wanton !  call'd  upon  thy  name. 
And  his  last  guilty  breath  sigh'd  out — Elwina ! 
Come — give  a  loose  to  rage,  and  feed  my  soul 
With  wild  complaints  and  womanish  upbraidings. 

El.  (in  a  low  solemn  voice.)  No : 

The  sorrow's  weak  that  wastes  itself  in  words. 
Mine  is  substantial  anguish — deep,  not  loud. 
I  do  not  rave.    Resentment's  the  return 
Of  common  souls  for  common  ii^juries. 
Light  gn^ef  is  proud  of  state,  and  courts  compassion ; 
But  there's  a  dignity  in  cureless  sorrow, 


PERCY.  267 

A  sullen  grandear  which  disdains  complaint. 
Rage  is  for  little  wrongs — despair  is  dumb. 

lExeunt  Elwina  and  Birtha. 
Doug,  Why,  this  is  well !  her  sense  of  wo  is  strong  I 
The  sharp,  keen  tooth  of  gnawing  grief  devours  her, 
Feeds  on  her  heart,  and  pays  me  back  my  pangs. 
Since  I  most  perish,  'twill  be  glorious  ruin  : 
I  fall  not  singly,  but,  like  some  proud  tower, 
111  crush  surrounding  objects  in  the  wreck, 
And  make  the  devastation  wide  and  dreadful. 

Enter  Rabt. 

Rabjf,  O  whither  shall  a  wretched  father  turn  ? 
Where  fly  for  comfort  ?— Douglas,  art  thou  here  ? 
I  do  not  ask  for  comfort  at  thy  hands. 
I'd  bat  one  little  casket,  where  I  lodgM 
My  precious  hoard  of  wealth,  and,  like  an  idiot, 
I  gave  my  treasure  to  another's  keeping, 
Wlio  did  not  know  the  value  of  the  gem. 
But  threw  it,  like  a  common  thing,  away, 
And  left  the  plnnder'd  owner  quite  a  beggar. 

Doug.  What!  art  thou  come  to   see  thy  race   dis- 
honour'd, 
And  thy  bright  sun  of  glory  set  in  blood  ? 
I  would  have  spar'd  thy  virtues  and  thy  age 
The  knowledge  of  her  infamy. 

Raby.  *Tis  false. 

Had  she  been  base,  this  sword  had  drank  her  blood. 

Doug.  Ha !  dost  thou  vindicate  the  wanton  ? 

Baby.  Wanton ! 

Thou  hast  defamM  a  noble  lady^s  honour— 
My  spotless  child— in  me  behold  her  champion  : 
The  strengtli  of  Hercules  will  nerve  this  arm, 
When  lifted  in  defence  of  innocence. 
The  daughter's  virtue  for  the  father's  shield. 
Will  make  old  Raby  still  invincible.       iOffeit  to  draw.) 

Doug.  Forbear. 

Raby.  Thou  dost  disdain  my  feeble  arm. 

And  scorn  my  age. 

Doug.  There  will  be  blood  enough  ; 

Nor  need  thy  withered  veins,  old  lord,  be  drain  *d, 
To  swell  the  copious  stream. 

Raby.  Thou  wilt  not  kill  her  ? 

Doug.  Oh,  'tis  a  day  of  horror! 


£58  PERCY. 


Enter  Edric  and  Birtha. 

Ed.  Where  U  DoagfaulP 

I  come  to  save  him  from  the  deadliest  crime 
Rerenge  did  ever  meditate. 

Doug.  What  meaa*8t  thoa  I 

Ed.  This  instant  fly,  and  save  thy  goiltlees  wifiBw 

Doug.  Save  that  perfidioiu ? 

Ed,  That  much  iii^ar*d  woman. 

Sir.  UnfMtonate  indeed,  but  O  most  innocmt! 

Ed.  In  the  last  solemn  article  of  death. 
That  truth-compelling  state,  when  e'en  bad  men 
Fear  to  spe^  fidsdy,  Percy  clear*d  her  fame, 

Doug.  I  heard  him— *Twa8  the  goilty  fraud  of  love. 
The  scarf,  the  scarf  I  that  proof  of  mutual  passion 
Oiv*n  but  this  day,  to  ratify  their  crimes  I 

Sir.  What  means  my  lord  ?  this  day  f  that  &tal  scarf 
Was  given  long  since,  a  toy  of  youthful  friendship^ 
Long  ere  your  marriage,  ere  you  knew  Elwina. 

Raby.  'Tis  I  am  guilty. 

Doug.  Ha ! 

Eaby.  I,  I  alone. 

Confusion,  honour,  pride,  parental  fondness 
Distract  my  soul.    Percy  was  not  to  blame : 
He  was— the  destin'd  husband  of  Elwina ! 
He  lov'd  her— was  belov'd,— and  I  approv'd. 
The  tale  is  long. — I  chang'd  my  purpose  since. 
Forbade  their  marriage. 

Doug.  And  confirm 'd  my  misery ! 

Twice  did  they  meet  to-day — my  wife  and  Percy. 

Raby.  I  know  it. 

Doug.  Ila !  thou  knew'st  of  my  dishimour  I 

Thou  wast  a  witness,  an  approving  witness. 
At  least  a  tame  one ! 

Raby.  Percy  came,  'tis  true, 

A  constant,  tender,  but  a  guiltless  lover ! 

Doug.  I  shall  grow  mad  indeed !  a  guiltless  lover '. 
Percy,  the  guiltless  lover  of  my  wife  I 

Raby.  He  knew  not  she  was  married. 

Doug.  How  is*t  possible  ! 

Rahy.  Douglas,  'tis  true ;  both,  both  were  ignorant  - 
He,  of  her  marriage ;  she,  of  his  return. 

Bir.  But  now,  when  we  belie v'd  thee  dead,  she  vow'd 
Never  to  sec  thy  rival.    Instantly, 


PERCY.  250 

Not  in  a  start  of  momentary  passion. 
But  with  a  martyr's  dignity  and  calmness. 
She  bade  me  bring  the  poison. 

Doug.  Hadst  thou  done  it, 

Despair  had  been  my  portion  I    Fly,  good  Birtha, 
Ilnd  out  the  sufTiing  saint— describe  my  grief. 
And  paint  my  yast  extravagance  of  fondness. 

Tell  her  I  love  as  never  mortal  lov*d 

Tell  her  I  know  her  virtues,  and  adore  them ; 
Tell  her  I  come,  but  dare  not  seek  her  presence. 
Till  she  pronounce  my  pardon. 

Sir,  I  obey.  lExit  Birtha. 

Baby.  My  child  is  innocent  I  ye  choirs  of  saints. 
Catch  the  blest  sounds— my  child  is  innocent ! 

Doug.  O,  I  will  kned,  and  sue  for  her  forgiveness. 
And  thon  shalt  help  me  plead  the  cause  of  love ; 
And  thou  shalt  weep— she  cannot  sure  refuse 
A  kneeling  husband  and  a  weeping  father. 
Thy  veneraUe  cheek  is  wet  already. 

Raby.  Douglas  I  it  is  the  dew  of  grateful  joy  ! 
My  child  is  innocent !    I  now  would  die, 
Lest  fortune  should  grow  weary  of  her  kindness. 
And  grudge  me  this  short  transport. 

Doug.  '  Where,  where  is  she  ? 

My  fond  impatience  brooks  not  her  delay ; 
Quick  let  me  find  her,  hush  her  anxious  soul, 
A.nd  soothe  her  trouijled  q;>irit  into  peace. 

Enter  Birtha. 

Bir.  Ohorror,  horror,  horror! 

Dot^.  Ah !  what  mean'st  thou  ? 

Bir.  Elwina— 

Doug.  Speak— 

Bir.  Her  grief  wrought  up  to  firenzy. 

She  has,  in  her  delirium,  drank  the  poison. 

Raby.  Frenzy  and  poison ! 

Doug.  BoUi  a  husband's  gilt  I 

But  thus  I  do  her  justice. 

M  Douglas  goes  to  ttab  himtelf,  enter  Elwina  (f>>> 
traded,  her  hair  dithevelled,  Percy's  tear/  in  her 
hand. 

El,  (£oes  up  to  Douglas.)    What  blood  again!    We 
cannot  kill  him  twice  t 


260  PERCY. 

Soft,  soft— no  violence— he^s  dead  already  ;— 
I  did  it — Yes — I  drown*d  him  with  my  tears ; 
But  hide  the  crael  deed  I  I'll  scratch  him  out 
A.  shallow  grave,  and  lay  the  green  sod  on  it ; 
Ay— and  Til  bind  the  wild  briar  o*er  the  turf. 
And  plant  a  willow  there,  a  weeping  willow. — 

iShe  sits  on  the  grotsnd,) 
But  look  you  tell  not  Douglas ;  he'll  disturb  him. 
He'll  pluck  the  willow  up — and  plant  a  thorn — 
He  will  not  let  me  sit  upon  his  grave. 
And  sing  all  day,  and  weep,  and  pray  all  night. 

JRabtf.  Dost  thou  not  know  me  ? 

El.  Yes— I  do  remember 

You  had  a  harmless  lamb 

Baby.  I  had  indeed ! 

El.  From  all  the  flock  you  chose  her  out  a  mate. 
In  sooth  a  ficur  one— you  did  bid  her  love  it — 
But  while  the  shepherd  slept,  the  wolf  devour'd  it. 

Raby.  My  heart  will  break.    This  is  too  much,  too 
much. 

El.  (smiling.)  O  'twas  a  cordial  draught— I  drank  it 
aU 

Raby.  What  means  my  child? 

Doug.  The  poison — Oh  the  poison ! 

Thou  dear  wrong'd  innocence- 

El.  Off— murderer,  off] 

Do  not  defile  me  with  those  crimson  hands. 
(  Shows  the  scarf.)    This  is  his  winding  sheet — I'll  wrap 

him  in  it — 
I  wrought  it  for  my  love — there,  now  I've  drest  him. 
How  brave  he  looks!  my  father  will  forgive  him. 
He  dearly  lov'd  him  once — but  that  is  over  I 
See  where  he  comes — ^beware,  my  gallant  Percy  I 
Ah !  come  not  here,  tliis  is  the  cave  of  death. 
And  there's  the  dark,  dark  palace  of  revenge  I 
Sec,  the  pale  king  sits  on  his  blood-stain'd  throne ! 
He  points  to  me — I  come,  I  come,  I  come. 
(She  faints^  they  run  to  fieri  Douglas  takes  up  hit 
swordy  and  stabs  himself.) 

Doug.  Thus,  thus  I  follow  thee. 

Ed.  Hold  thy  rash  hand.       -<^ 

Doug.  It  is  too  late.    No  remedy  but  this 
Could  med'eine  a  disease  so  desperate. 

R(^y.  Ah  \  she  revives  ! 


PERCY.  261 

Doug,  (renting  himtelf.)    She  lives !  bear,  bear  me  to 
her! 
We  shall  be  happy  yet. 

{He  strttggiet  to  get  to  her^  but  sinkt  doum.) 
It  will  not  be— 
O  for  a  last  embrace— Alas !  I  faint — 
She  lives— Now  death  is  terrible  indeed — 
Fair  spirit,  how  I  lov'd  thee— O— Elwina  I    (Dies.) 

El,  Where  have  I  been  ?    The  damps  of  death  are  on 
me. 

Babff.  Look  ap,  my  child !  O  do  not  leave  me  thus : 
Pity  the  anguish  of  thy  aged  father. 
Hast  thou  forgotten  me  ? 

El.  You  are  my  father ; 

O  you  are  kindly  come  to  dose  my  eyes, 
And  take  the  kiss  of  death  from  my  cold  lips. 

Jtaby.  Do  we  meet  thus  ? 

El,  We  soon  shall  meet  in  peace. 

I've  but  a  faint  remembrance  of  the  past — 
But  something  tells  me— O  these  painful  struggles  I 
Raise  me  a  little— there — 

(She  sees  the  body  o/Dodglas.j 
What  sight  is  that  ? 
A  sword,  and  bloody  ?    Ah  I  and  Douglas  mnrder'd ! 

Ed,  Convinced  too  late  of  your  unequalPd  virtues, 
And  wrung  with  deep  compunction  for  your  wrongs, 
By  his  own  hand  the  wretched  Douglas  fell. 

El,  This  adds  another,  sharper  pang  to  death. 
O  thou  Eternal  I  take  him  to  thy  mercy  I 
Nor  let  this  sin  be  on  his  head  or  mine  I 

Baby.  I  have  undone  you  all— the  crime  is  mine  I 
O  thou  poor  i]\)ur'd  saint,  forgive  thy  father  I 
He  kneels  to  his  wrong'd  child. 

El.  Now  you  are  crud. 

Come  near,  my  father,  nearer— I  would  see  you. 
But  mists  and  darkness  cloud  my  fjailing  sight. 
O  death  !  suspend  thy  rights  for  one  short  moment, 
*Till  I  have  ta'en  a  father's  last  embrace— 
A  father*s  blessing.    Once— and  now  *tis  over. 
Receive  me  to  thy  mercy— gracious  Heaven. 

(She  dies.) 

Baby.  She*s  gone !  for  ever  gone  I     Cold,  dead  and 
cold. 
Am  I  a  father  ?    Fathers  love  their  children— 


202  PERCY. 

I  mnrdar  mine !    Witii  impiouB  pride  I  matehM 
The  bolt  of  vengeenoe  from  the  hand  of  HeeT^n. 
My  lool  nibmiirive  bows.    A  righteoas  Ood 
Has  made  my  crime  become  my  AastiBement : 
And  paU*d  those  miseries  oa  my  guilty  head 
I  would  have  drawn  on  others.    O  *tis  just  1 
Tb  righteous  retribotloD !— I  submit  1 


\ 


EPILOGUE. 

WRITTEN  BY  MR  GARRICK. 

SPOKBN  BT  MR  LBS  LBWBS. 


I  MUBT,  will  speak— I  hope  my  dress  and  air 

Annoance  the  man  of  fa^on,  not  the  player ; 

Though  gentlemen  are  now  forbid  the  scenes, 

Yet  have  1  rosh'd  through  heroes,  kings,  and  queens  t 

Resolved,  hi  (dty  to  this  polish'd  age. 

To  drive  thme  ballad>ha:oes  from  the  stage. 

<*  To  drive  the  deer  with  hound  and  horn, 

Earl  Percy  took  his  way : 
The  child  may  rue,  that  is  unborn, 

The  hunting  of  that  day.** 
A  pretty  basis,  truly,  for  a  modem  play ! 
What  1  shall  a  scribbling,  senseless  woman  dare 
To  your  refinements  offer  such  coarse  fare  ? 
Is  Douglas,  or  is  Percy,  fir*d  with  passion. 
Ready  for  love  <Hr  glory,  death  to  dash  on, 
Fit  company  for  modern  stUl-Ufe  men  of  fashion  ? 
Such  madness  will  our  hearts  but  slightly  grace. 
We've  no  such  frantic  nobles  now-a-days. 
Heart-strings,  like  fiddle-strings,  vibrate  no  tone. 
Unless  they*re  tuned  in  perfect  unison ; 
And  youths  of  yore,  with  ours  can  ne'er  agree — 
They're  in  too  sharp,  ours  in  too  flat  a  key. 
Could  we  believe  old  stories,  those  strange  fellows 
Married  for  love— «ould  of  their  wives  be  jealous — 
Nay,  constant  to  'em  too— and,  what  is  worse. 
The  vulgar  souls  thought  fcdthless  wives  a  curse. 
Most  wedded  pairs  had  then  one  purse,  one  mind. 
One  bed  too— so  preposterously  kind — 
From  such  barbarity  (thank  Heaven)  we*re  much  refin*d. 
Old  songs  their  happiness  at  home  record. 


264  EPILOGUE. 

From  home  they  separate  carriages  abhorr'd— 

One  horse  serv'd  both— my  lady  rode  behind  my  lord. 

*Twa8  death  alone  could  snap  their  bonds  asunder-^ 

Now  tack*d  so  slightly,  not  to  snap's  the  wonder. 

Nay,  death  itself  could  not  their  hearts  divide. 

They  mix*d  their  love  with  monumental  pride, 

For,  cut  in  stone,  they  still  lie  side  by  side. 

But  why  these  gothic  ancestors  produce  ? 

Why  scour  their  rusty  armours  ?    What's  the  use  ? 

*TwouId  not  your  nicer  opticsmuch  regale. 

To  see  us  beaux  bend  under  coats  of  mail ; 

Should  we  our  limbs  with  iron  doublets  bruise ; 

Good  Heaven  I  how  much  court-plaster  we  should  use } 

We  wear  no  armour  now—but  on  our  shoes. 

Let  not  with  barbarism  true  taste  be  blended. 

Old  vulgar  virtues  cannot  be  defended. 

Let  the  dead  rest — ^we  Uving  can*t  be  mended. 


TUB 

FATAL    FALSEHOOD: 

A  TRAGEDY,  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

AS  IT  WAS  ACTBD  IN  1779, 

AT 

THB  THBATBE  ROYAL,  COVBNT  GARDBPf. 


TO  THB 

COUNTESS  BATHURST, 

THIS  TRAGEDY  , 

It 

VERT  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED, 

A» 

A  SMALL  TRIBUTB 

TO  HER  MANY  VIRTUBS, 

AND 

AS  A  GRATEFUL  TESTIllONT 

OF  THE  FRIENDSHIP  WITH  WHICH 

SHE  HONOURS 

rfER  MOST  UBEDIENT  AND  MOST  OBUOIO  HJMBLV  SBmVAirT 

THE  AUTHOR. 


PROLOGUE. 

WRITTEN  BT  TUB  AUTHOR  OF  THK  TIAOBDX. 
■POKBN  BT  HB   BULL. 


Odb  modem  poets  now  can  scarcely  choose 

A  saltiect  worthy  of  the  Tragic  Muse ; 

For  bards  so  well  have  glean*d  th*  historic  field. 

That  scarce  one  sheaf  th*  exhausted  andents  yield ; 

Or  if,  perchance,  they  firom  the  golden  crop 

Some  grains,  with  hand  penurious,  rarely  drop ; 

Oar  author  these  consigns  to  manly  toil. 

For  classic  themes  demand  a  classic  soil. 

A  ragrant  she,  the  desert  waste  who  chose. 

Where  tmth  and  history  no  restraints  impose. 

To  her  the  wilds  of  fiction  open  lie, 

A  fiow'ry  prospect,  and  a  boundless  sky ; 

Yet  hard  the  task  to  keep  the  onward  way. 

Where  the  wide  scenery  lures  the  foot  to  stray ; 

Where  no  severer  limits  check  the  Muse 

Than  lawless  fsncy  is  dispos*d  to  dioose. 

Kor  does  she  emulate  the  loftier  strains 
Which  high  heroie  Tragedy  maintains : 
Nor  conquest  she,  nor  wars,  nor  triumphs  sings. 
Nor  with  nuh  hand  o*ertums  the  flurones  of  kings. 
No  ruin*d  empires  greet  to-night  your  eyes» 
No  nations  at  our  bidding  lUl  or  rise ; 
To  statesmen  deep,  to  politidans  grave. 
These  themes  congenial  to  their  tastes  we  leave. 
Of  crowns  and  camps,  a  Idngdom^s  weal  or  wo. 
How  few  can  j  udge,  because  how  few  can  know  I 
But  here  you  all  may  boast  the  censorls  art, 
Here  all  are  critics  who  possess  a  heart. 
And  of  the  passions  we  display  to-night, 
Bach  hearer  Judges  like  the  Stagyrite. 


2G8  PROLOOUB. 

The  leenM  of  prirate  life  oar  Mitbor  shows, 
A  simple  story  of  domestic  woes ; 
Not  animportant  is  the  glass  we  hoUU 
To  show  the  effeet  of  passions  nocoatroU'd ; 
For  if  to  govern  reaUm  bel<mg  to  few. 
Yet  aU  who  live  hare  pauiont  to  aohdoe. 
Self-eonquest  is  the  less<m  books  should  preach. 
Self-conquest  is  the  theme  the  stage  should  teach, 
yoachsafe  to  learn  fids  obrioos  duty  here. 
The  verse  though  feeble,  yet  the  meal's  clear. 
O  mark  to  night  the  unezam|ded  woes 
"Which  from  unbounded  self-indulgence  flows. 
Your  candour  <mce  endur*d  our  author^  lays  ; 
Endure  them  now— it  will  be  ample  praise. 


TBI 

FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONJE. 


Earl  OuildfonL 
Riven,  bis  mmi. 
OrUndct  a  jooag  Italian  Count. 


BertnukL 

Eaunelina. 

Julia. 


8CBMB— Avi  GCIUHfOKOli  CShKc 

ACT  I. 

Scene— ^n  Apartment  in  Guildfoid  Ceutle, 

Enter  Bbrtrand. 

Ber,  What  fools  are  serious  melancholy  villaini ! 
1  play  a  surer  game,  and  screen  my  heart 
With  easy  looks  and  undesigning  smiles ; 
And  while  my  plots  still  spring  from  sober  thought, 
My  deeds  appear  the  effect  of  wild  caprice. 
And  I  the  tiaoughtless  slave  of  giddy  chance. 
What  but  this  frankness  could  have  won  the  promise 
Of  young  Orlando,  to  confide  to  me 
That  secret  grief  whidi  preys  upon  Us  heart  ? 
*Tis  shallow,  indiscreet  hypocrisy 
To  seem  too  good :  I  am  the  earelett  Bertrand, 
The  honest,  undedgning,  plain,  blunt  man. 
The  follies  I  avow  cloak  those  I  hide. 
For  who  will  search  where  nothing  seems  c<mceal'd  f 
*Tis  rogues  of  solid,  prudent,  grave  demeanour. 
Excite  suspicion  ;  men  on  whose  dark  brow 
Discretion,  with  his  iron  hand,  has  graved 
The  deep-roark'd  characters  of  thoughtfnlness. 
Here  comes  my  uncle,  venerable  Guildford, 
Whom  I  could  honour,  were  he  not  the  sire 
Of  that  aspiring  boy,  who  fills  the  gap 
'Twixt  me  and  fortune ;— Rivers,  how  1  hate  thee  ! 


270  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 


Enter  Ouildpobik 

How  AvM  my  noble  uncle  ? 

Guild.  Honest  Bertnadl 

1  most  complain  we  hare  lo  Mldom  met : 
Where  do  yon  keep  ?  beHere  me,  we  Imre  min'd  yoa 

Ber.  O,  my  good  lord  i  yonr  pardon— ^sre  me,  tirt 
For  there  are  folliet  in  a  yoong  man*B  life, 
And  idle  thonghtlen  hoar*  which  I  should  Uuah 
To  lay  before  your  wise  and  temperate  age. 

Guild,  WelC  be  it  so— youth  has  a  privilege. 
And  I  should  be  ashamM  could  I  forget 
I  have  myself  been  young,  and  harshly  chide 
This  not  ungraceful  gaiety.    Yes,  Bertrand, 
Prudence  becomes  moroeeness,  when  it  makes 
A  rigid  inquisition  of  the  fiiult, 
Not  of  the  man,  perhaps,  but  of  his  youth. 
Foibles  that  shame  the  head  on  which  old  Time 
Has  sbower'd  his  snow,  are  then  more  pardonable, 
And  age  has  many  a  weakness  of  its  oiiim. 

Ber.  Your  gentleness,  my  lord,  and  mild  reproof. 
Correct  the  wanderings  of  misguided  youth. 
More  than  rebuke  can  shame  me  into  virtue. 

Guild.  Saw  you  my  beauteous  ward,  the  lady  Juliaf 

JBer,   She  pass'd  this  way,  and  with  her  your  fiiir 
daughter. 
Your  Emmelina. 

Guild.  Call  them  both  my  daughters  j 

For  scarce  is  Emmelina  more  beloved 
Than  Julia,  the  dear  child  of  my  adoption. 
The  hour  approaches  too,  (and,  bless  it  Heaven, 
With  thy  benignest,  kindliest  influence !) 
When  Julia  shall  indeed  become  my  daughter. 
Shall,  in  obedience  to  her  father*s  will. 
Crown  the  impatient  vows  of  my  brave  son. 
And  richly  pay  him  for  his  dangers  past. 

Ber.  Oft  have  I  wondered  how  the  gaUant  Rivers, 
Youthful  and  ardent,  doting  to  excess. 
Could  dare  the  dangers  of  uncertain  war. 
Ere  marriage  had  confirmed  his  claim  to  Julia. 

Guild.  *Tivas  the  condition  of  her  fisther's  will. 
My  brave  old  fellow-soldier,  and  my  friend  ! 
He  wished  to  see  our  ancient  bouses  jo  ned 
By  tills,  our  children's  union ;  but  the  veteran 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  ^71 

So  highly  ralued  military  inroweas, 
That  he  beqatathM  his  fortanM  and  Ma  daughter 
To  my  young  Riran*  on  these  terms  alone. 
That  he  shoold  early  gain  renown  in  arms ; 
And  if  he  firom  the  field  returned  a  conqaeror. 
That  son  which  saw  him  come  rietiirions  home 
Should  witness  their  espousals.    Yet  he  comes  not  I 
The  event  of  war  is  to  the  brave  uncertain. 
Nor  can  desert  in  arms  ensure  success. 

Ber,  Yet  fiune  speaks  loudly  of  his  early  valour. 

Guild.  E*er  since  the  Italian  Count,  the  young  Orlando^ 
My  Rivers*  bosom  friend,  has  been  my  guest, 
The  glory  of  my  son  is  all  his  theme : 
Oh  I  he  recounts  his  virtues  with  such  joy, 
Dwells  on  his  merit  with  a  ceal  so  warm. 
As  to  Us  generous  heart  pays  back-again 
The  praises  he  bestows. 

Ser.  Orlando's  noble. 

He's  of  a  tender,  brave,  and  gallant  nature. 
Of  honour  most  romantic,  witii  such  graces 
As  charm  alL womankind. 

OtMd,  And  here  comes  one. 

To  whom  the  story  of  Orlando's  pnUse 
Sounds  like  sweet  mude. 

Ber,  What,  your  charming  daughter  I 

Yes,  I  suspect  she  loves  the  Italian  Count :         (jitide,) 
lliat  must  not  be.    Mow  to  dbwanre  her  closely. 

Enter  Emueuha. 

Guild.  Come  hither,  Emmelina :  we  were  speaking 
Of  the  young  Count  Orlando.    What  think  you 
Of  this  accomplished  rtraager  ? 

Em.  ieor^futed.)  Of  Orlando? 

Sir,  as  my  father^  guest,  my  brother's  friend, 
I  do  esteem  the  Count. 

Guild.  Nay,  he  has  merit 

Might  justify  thy  friendship,  if  he  wanted 
The  claims  thou  mention'st ;  yet  I  mean  to  blame  him. 

Em.   What  has  he  done  ?    How  has  he  wrong'd  my 
frkther? 
For  you  are  just,  and  are  not  angry  lightly ; 
And  he  is  mUd,  unapt  to  give  offence. 
As  you  to  be  offended. 

Guild.  Nay,  'tis  not  much  : 


272  THB  FATAL  FAL8BUOOD. 

But  whj  doM  yoanf  Oriando  draa  my  praaeiiM? 
Why  loM  tluit  dieerfal  tad  baoomiii|r  ^Mfc 
WhSeh  lately  ehannad  os  all  P    BiT«n  will  eUde  va, 
Should  he  retnn  and  find  hie  friend  unhappy. 
He  is  not  what  he  waa.    What  sayi  my  ddld  ? 

Etn.  My  lord,  when  lint  my  brother^  friend  aniyed— 
Be  ftill,  my  heart—  ( jtsUe.) 

Ber.  She  dares  not  me  his  name. 

Her  brother's  friend !  (AtUe,) 

Em,  When  first  yoor  noUe  goest 

Came  from  that  royafe,  he  Undly  vndertoolc 
To  ease  oar  terrors  for  my  Birers*  safety. 
When  we  beUer'd  him  dead ;  he  seem*d  most  happy^ 
And  shar*d  the  general  Joy  his  preeenee  gave. 
Of  late  he  is  lees  gay;  my  teother*s  absence 
(Or  I  mistake)  disturbs  his  friend's  repose : 
Nor  is  it  strange ;  one  mind  informs  tiiem  both ; 
Each  is  the  very  soul  that  warms  the  other. 
And  both  are  wretched  or  are  bless'd  together. 

Eer.  Why  trembles  my  fair  Gourin  f 

Em,  can  I  think 

That  my  loT*d  brother's  life  has  been  in  danger. 
Nor  feel  a  strong  emotion  ? 

Ber.  (ironically.)  Generous  {Aty  ! 

But  when  that  danger  has  so  long  been  past, 
You  should  forget  your  terrors. 

Em.  I  shall  never ; 

For  when  I  think  that  danger  sprung  from  friendship ; 
That  Rivers,  to  preserve  another's  life, 
Incurr'd  this  peril,  still  my  wonder  rises. 

Ser.  And  why  another's  life  ?    Why  not  Orlando'b  ? 
Such  caution  more  betrays  than  honest  freedom. 

Guild.    He's  still  the  same,  the  gibing,  thoughtless 
Bertrand, 
Severe  of  speech,  but  innocent  of  malice. 

[Exit  Guildford  :  Emmelina  going, 

Ber.  Stay,  my  fair  cousin  1  still  with  adverse  eyes 
Am  I  beheld  ?    Had  I  Oriando's  form, 
I  mean,  were  I  like  him  your  brother's  friend^ 
Then  would  your  looks  be  turned  thus  coldly  on  me? 

Em.  But  that  1  know  your  levity  means  nothing. 
And  that  your  heart  accords  not  with  your  tongue. 
This  would  offend  me. 

Ber.  Come,  confess  the  truth. 


i 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  273 

That  thh  gay  Florentine,  this  Tuscan  rover. 
Has  won  yoar  easy  heart,  and  given  you  his : 
I  know  the  whole ;  I'm  of  his  secret  coondl ; 
He  has  confessed — 

Em,  Ha  I  what  has  he  codfessM  ? 

Ber.  That  you  are  wondroos  fair :  nay,  nothing  fiirther : 
How  di8app<rintment  fires  her  angry  cheek  I   ( jiside.) 
Yourself  have  told  the  rest,  your  looks  avow  it, 
Yoar  eyes  are  honest,  nor  conceal  the  secret. 

Em,  Know,  sir,  that  virtue  no  concealment  needs : 
So  far  from  dreading,  she  solicits  notice. 
And  wishes  every  secret  thought  she  harbours. 
Bare  to  the  eye  of  men,  as  *tis  to  Heaven. 

Ber.  Yet  mark  me  well :  trust  not  Orlando's  truth ; 
The  citron  groves  have  heard  his  amorous  vows 
Breath'd  out  to  many  a  beauteous  maid  of  Florence ; 
Bred  in  those  softer  climes,  his  roving  heart 
Ne*er  learnM  to  think  fidelity  a  virtue ; 
He  laughs  at  tales  of  British  constancy. 
But  see,  Orlando  comes— he  seeks  you  here. 
With  eyes  bent  downwards,  folded  arms,  pale  cheeks. 
Disordered  looks,  and  negligent  attire. 
And  all  the  careless  equipage  of  love. 
He  bends  this  way.    Why  does  the  mounting  blood 
Thus  crimson  your  fair  cheek  ?    He  does  not  see  us ; 
111  venture  to  disturb  his  meditations. 
And  instantly  return.  [Exit  Berth  and. 

Em.  No  more ;  but  leave  me. 

He's  talkative  but  harmless,  rude  but  honest ; 
Fuller  of  mirth  than  mischief.    See  they  meet-~ 
This  way  they  come ;  why  am  I  thus  alarm'd? 
What  is't  to  me  that  here  Orlando  comes  ? 
Oh  for  a  little  portion  of  that  art 
Ungenerous  men  ascribe  to  our  whole  sex  I 
A  little  artifice  were  prudence  now : 
But  I  have  none ;  my  poor  unpractbM  heart 
Is  so  unknowing  of  cUssimulation, 
So  littie  skill'd  to  seem  the  thing  it  is  not 
That  if  my  lips  are  mute,  my  looks  betray  me. 

Ee-enter  Bbrtrand  with  Orlando. 

Ber.  Now  to  alarm  her  heart,  and  search  out  his. 

(Asiile.j 
Or.  We  crave  your  pardon,  beauteous  Emmelina, 

N  'i 


274  THE  FATAL  FALSBHOODl 

If  mddy  we  fantrude  upon  your  ttoogliU  s 
Tboaghta  pore  m  infantt*  drauBt  or  Mifek*  witbM, 
And  gentle  as  the  breeat  from  wlddi  ttiiy  qvinff* 
Em,  Be  still,  my  lieart,  nor  let  liim  bm  thy 

We  are  much  bound  to  thank  yoo,  eonda  Bertnmd, 
That  sfaice  your  late  retom,  tiie  Count  Oriando 
Appears  once  more  among  ns.    Say,  my  krd, 
"Why  have  you  shnnn'd  your  friends*  society  f 
"Was  it  well  done  ?    My  father  bade  me  chide  yon } 
1  am  not  made  for  chiding,  bat  he  bade  me ; 
He  says,  no  more  yoa  rise  at  early  dawn 
With  him  to  chase  the  boar :  I  pleaded  for  yoa ; 
Told  him  *twas  savage  sport. 

Or.  What  was  his  answer? 

Em.  He  said  !twas  sport  for  heroes,  and  made  heroes; 
That  banting  was  the  very  school  of  war, 
I'aught  oar  brave  yoath  to  shine  in  nobler  fields. 
Preserved  *em  firom  the  rast  of  dull  inaction, 
Train'd  *em  fmr  arms,  and  fitted  them  for  congest. 

Or.  O,  my  fsir  advocate  I  scarce  can  I  grieve 
To  have  done  wroi^,  since  my  offence  has  gained 
So  sweet  a  pleader. 

Ber.  {aside.)  So,  I  like  this  well ; 

Full  of  respect,  but  cold. 

Em.  My  lord,  your  pardon ; 

My  father  waits  my  coming ;  I  attend  him.  [Exit. 

Ber.  In  truth,  my  lord,  you're  a  right  happy  man ; 
Her  parting  look  proclaims  that  you  are  blest; 
The  crimson  bludies  on  her  cheek  displayed 
A  gentle  strife  *twixt  modesty  and  love  : 
Discretion  strove  to  dash  the  rising  joy, 
But  conquering  love  prevailed  and  told  the  tale. 
My  lord,  you  answer  not. 

Or.  What  shall  I  say  f 

Oh,  couldst  then  read  my  heart  I 

Ber.  The  hour  is  come 

When  my  impatient  friendship  claims  that  trust 
Which  I  so  oft  have  press'd,  and  you  have  promis'd. 

Or.  I  cannot  tell  thee :  ^tis  a  tale  of  guilt ; 
How  shall  I  speak  ?  my  resolution  sickens ; 
All  virtuous  men  will  lAiun  me,  thou  wilt  scorn  me. 
And  fly  the  foul  contagion  of  my  crime. 

Ber.  My  bosom  u  uotsteel'd  with  that  harsh  prudenc* 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  275 

iVhich  would  reimMieh  thy  failings :  tell  me  aU; 

The  proudest  heart  lores  to  repose  its  feults 

Upon  a  breast  that  has  itself  a  tincture 

Of  human  weakness:  I  have  frailties  too, 

Wailties  that  teach  me  how  to  pity  thine. 

What !  silent  still  ?  Thou  k>T*st  my  beauteous  cousin  t 

Have  X  not  guess'd  ? 

Or.  I  own  that  she  has  charms 

Might  warm  a  froxen  stoic  into  love. 
Tempt  hermits  back  again  to  that  bad  world 
They  had  renounced,  and  make  religious  men 
Forgetful  of  their  holy  vows  to  Heaven  t 
Yes,  Bertrand— come,  I'll  tell  thee  all  my  weakness ; 
Thou  hast  a  tender  sympathicing  heart— 
Thou  art  not  rigid  to  a  frientl^s  defects. 
That  heavenly  form  I  view  with  eyes  as  cold 
As  marble  images  of  lifeless  saints ; 
I  see,  and  know  the  workmanship  divine ; 
My  judgment  owns  hei  exquisite  perfections, 
But  my  rebellions  heart  denies  her  claim. 

B«r.  What  do  I  hear !  you  love  her  not ! 

Or.  Oh  I  Bertrand  I 

Vat  {rtty  do  not  hate  me ;  but  thou  roust, 
For  am  I  not  at  variance  with  myself? 
Yet  shall  I  wrong  her  gentie  trusting  nature. 
And  spurn  the  heart  I  laboured  to  obtain  ? 
She  lov(M  me,  Bertrand ;  oh !  too  sure  she  loves  me : 
Loves  me  ivith  tenderest,  truest,  chastest  passion ; 
Loves  me,  oh  barbYous  iiiite  1  as  I  love— Julia. 

Ber,  Heard  I  aright?    Did  yon  not  speak  of  Julia  ? 
Julia,  the  lovely  ward  of  my  good  undo  ? 
Julia  I  the  mistress  of  your  friend,  of  Rivers  ? 

Or.  Go  on,  go  on,  and  urge  me  with  my  guilt ; 
Display  my  crime  in  all  its  native  blackness  \ 
TeU  me  some  legend  of  infernal  fidsehood. 
Tell  me  some  dreadful  tale  of  peijur'd  friends^ 
Of  trust  betray'd,  of  innocence  deceiv'd : 
Place  the  dire  chronicle  before  my  eyes ; 
Inflame  the  horror,  aggravate  the  gtUlt : 
That  I  may  see  the  evils  which  await  me. 
Nor  pull  such  fatal  mischief  on  my  head. 
As  with  my  ruin  must  involve  the  fiite 
Of  all  I  love  on  earth. 

Bm:  Just  as  I  wish.    iAnd$, 


S7d  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Or.  Thoa  know'ft  I  left  my  natire  Italy, 
Dinteted  hiChor  by  tha  noble  RiTan, 
To  eaaa  his  lintbar*e  fBan»  who  tho«q(ht  ha  hSk 
In  that  engaifamant  whare  wa  both  ware  woanda4 
W»  was  a  glorioas  woond,  gahu'd  in  tha  eaoaa 
Of  genYous  friandship :  for  aa  hostila  spear, 
Aim'd  at  my  breast,  Rivers  in  his  reeriv*4 
SavM  my  devoted  Ufe,  and  won  my  sooL 

£er.  So  far  I  knew ;  bat  what  of  Emmelina? 

Or,  Whether  her  gantla  beauties  first  allar*d  ma^ 
Or  whether  peaceful  scenes  and  rural  shades. 
Or  l^nre,  <x  the  want  of  other  otjects. 
Or  solitude  apt  to  engender  love, 
EngagM  my  soul,  I  know  not ;  but  I  lov*d  her. 
We  were  together  always,  till  the  habit 
Grew  into  something  like  necessity. 
When  Emmelina  left  me  I  was  sad. 
Nor  knew  a  joy  till  Emmelina  came ; 
Her  soft  sodety  amus'd  my  mind, 
Fill'd  up  my  vacant  heart,  and  touch'd  my  soul : 
'Twas  gratitude,  *twas  friendship,  'twas  esteem, 
*Twas  reason,  'twas  persuasion,— nay,  *twas  love. 

Ser,  But  where  was  Julia  ? 

Or.  Oh !  too  soon  she  came  * 

For  when  I  saw  that  wondrous  form  of  beauty, 
I  stood  entranced,  like  some  astronomer. 
Who,  as  he  views  the  bright  expanse  <^  heaven, 
Unds  a  new  star.    I  gazM,  and  was  undone; 
Oaz'd,  and  forgot  the  tender  Emmelina, 
6az*d,  and  forgot  the  genVoos,  trusting  Rivers, 
Forgot  my  faith,  my  friendship,  and  my  honour. 

Ber.  Does  Julia  know  your  love  ? 

Or.  Forbid  it.  Heaven ! 

What !  think'st  thou  I  am  so  far  gone  in  guilt 
As  boldly  to  avow  it  ?    Bertrand,  no ; 
For  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  spadous  earth, 
I  would  not  wrong  my  friend,  or  damn  my  honour. 

Ber.  Trust  me,  you  think  too  hardly  of  yourself. 

Or.  Think  I  have  lodg'd  a  secret  in  thy  breast 
On  which  my  peace,  my  fame,  my  all  depends ; 
Long  have  I  struggled  with  the  fatal  truth. 
And  scarce  have  dar'd  to  breathe  it  to  myself: 
For,  oh !  too  surely  the  first  downward  step, 
The  treacherous  path  that  leads  to  guilty  deeds, 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  277 

Is  to  make  rin  familiar  to  the  thoughts.  [  Exit. 

Ber,  Am  I  awake  ?    No :  Yis  delusion  all ! 
My  wildest  wishes  never  soar'd  to  this ; 
Fortune  anticipates  my  plot :  he  loves  her.    - 
Lores  Just  whom  I  would  hare  him  lore— loves  Julia ! 
Orlando,  yes,  I'll  play  thee  at  my  will ; 
Poor  puppet  I  thou  hast  trusted  to  my  hand 
The  strings  by  wliich  111  move  thee  to  thy  ruin. 
And  make  thee  too  the  instrument  of  veng^eance. 
Of  glorious  vengeance  on  the  man  I  hate.  {Exit, 


ACT  U. 

Enter  Julia  and  Emmblina. 

JuUa,  How  many  cares  perplex  the  maid  who  loves  t 
Cares,  which  the  vacant  heart  can  never  know. 
You  fondly  tremble  for  a  brother's  life ; 
Orlando  mourns  the  absence  of  a  friend, 
Chiildford  is  anxious  for  a  son's  renown ; 
In  my  poor  heart  your  various  terrors  meet. 
With  added  fean  and  fonder  apprehensions : 
They  all  unite  in  me,  I  feel  for  all. 
His  life,  his  fame,  his  absence,  and  his  love ; 
For  he  may  live  to  see  his  native  home, 
And  he  may  live  to  bless  a  sister^s  hopes. 
May  live  to  gratify  impatient  friendship. 
May  live  to  erown  a  iiither's  house  witii  honour. 
May  live  to  glory,  yet  be  dead  to  love. 

Sm,  Forbear  these  fears ;  they  wound  my  brothcr^li 
honour : 
Julia  !  a  brave  man  must  be  ever  faitliful; 
Cowards  alone  dare  venture  to  be  false ; 
Cowards  alone  dare  injure  trusting  virtue. 
And  with  bold  perjuries  affront  high  Heaven. 

Julia.  I  know  his  faith,  and  venerate  his  virtues  ( 
I  know  his  heart  is  tender  as  'tis  brave. 
That  all  his  father's  worth,  his  sister's  softness. 
Meet  in  his  generous  breast — and  yet  I  fear — 
Whoever  lov'd  like  me,  and  did  not  fear  ? 


273  THB  FATAL  FALSKHOOD. 


Enter  Goildford. 

Guild.  Where  are  my  frtoidt,  my  dangliter  whire  k 
Julia? 
How  diidl  I  speak  the  fohiew  of  my  heart? 
My  BOD,  my  Riven,  will  1^  day  return. 

Ewi.  My  dearest  brother  I 

Julia,  Ha!  my  Rivera  eomea I 

Propitions  Heaven! 

Sm,  And  yet  my  Jnlia  tremblea. 

Julia.  Have  I  not  caose  ?  my  Rivers  comes  1  but  how  ? 
1  dread  to  aslc,  and  yet  I  die  to  hear. 
My  lord—you  know  the  terms — 

OuHd,  He  comes  a  conqaerM*  I 

He  comes  as  Qoildford^  son  should  ever  come ! 
The  battle's  o'er,  the  English  arms  successfiil. 
And  Rivers,  like  an  English  warrior,  hastes 
To  lay  his  laurels  at  the  feet  of  beauty.  [  EriL 

JuUa,  Myjoy  oppresses  me! 

Em,  And  see,  Orlando  I 

Hnw  will  the  welcome  news  transport  his  soul. 
And  raise  his  drooping  heart !  with  caution  tell  him. 
Lest  the  o'erwhelming  rapture  be  too  mucli 
For  his  dejected  mind. 

Enter  Orlando  and  Bbrtrand. 

Julia.  My  Lord  Orlando, 

'Wherefore  that  troubled  air  ?  no  more  you  dwell 
On  your  once  darling  theme ;  you  speak  no  more 
The  praises  of  your  Rivers ;  is  he  chang'd  ? 
Is  he  not  still  the  gallant  friend  you  lov'd. 
As  virtuous  and  as  valiant  ? 

Or.  Still  the  same ; 

He  must  be  ever  virtuous,  ever  valiant. 

Em.  If  Rivers  is  the  same,  then  must  I  think 
Orlando  greatly  changM ;  you  speak  not  of  him. 
Nor  long  for  his  return,  as  you  were  wont. 
How  did  you  use  to  spend  the  live-long  day. 
In  telling  some  new  wonders  of  your  friend. 
Till  night  broke  in  upon  th'  unfinish'd  tale ; 
And  when  twas  oVr,  you  would  begin  again. 
And  we  again  would  listen  with  delight. 
With  fresh  delight,  as  if  we  had  not  heard  ft 
Does  Rivers  less  deserve,  or  you  less  love  ? 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  279 

Or,  Hare  I  not  lor'd  him  ?  was  my  friendship  cold? 
When  any  praised  his  g^mies  in  the  field, 
My  raptnr*d  heart  has  bounded  at  the  tale  ! 
Hetiiottght  I  grew  illostrioas  from  his  glory. 
And  rich  from  his  renown;  to  hear  him  pnds'd. 
More  proad  than  if  I  had  achiey'd  hie  deeds, 
And  reap'd  myself  the  harvest  of  his  fiune. 
How  hare  1  trembled  for  a  life  so  dear, 
When  his  too  ardent  sool,  despising  caution. 
Has  plung'd  him  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  war. 
As  if  in  lore  with  danger. 

JuUa.  Valiant  Rivers ! 

How  does  thy  greatness  justify  my  love  1 

JBer,  He*s  distant  far,  so  I  may  safely  praise  him. 

I  dalm  some  merit  in  my  love  of  Rivers, 
Sinoe  I  admire  the  virtues  that  eclipse  me ; 
With  pleasure  I  survey  those  dazzHng  heights 
My  gay,  inactive  temper  cannot  reach. 

Em,  Spoke  like  my  honest  cousin.    Then,  Orlando^ 
Sinoe  such  the  love  you  bear  your  noble  friend. 
How  w&l  your  heart  sustain  the  mighty  joy 
The  news  I  tell  will  give  you  ?    Yes,  Orlando, 
Restrain  the  transports  of  your  grateful  friendship, 
And  hear,  with  moderation,  hear  me  tell  you 
That  Rivers  will  return — 

Or,  How?  when? 

Em.  This  day. 

Or,  Imposriblel 

Ber,  Then  all  my  sdiemes  are  air.    (Mtde.) 

Em.  To-day  I  shall  embrace  my  valiant  brother ' 

JuUa.  Yon  droop,  my  lord :  did  yon  not  hear  her  right? 
She  told  you  that  your  Riven  would  return. 
Would  come  to  crown  your  friendship  and  our  hopes. 

Or.  He  is  most  welcome !    Is  he  not  my  friend  ? 
You  say  my  Rivers  comes.    Thy  arm,  good  Bertrand. 

Ber.  Joy  to  us  all ;  joy  to  the  count  Orlando ! 
Weak  man,  take  care.  {Jsida  to  Ori^ndo.) 

Em.        ,  My  lord  I  you  are  not  well. 

Ber.  Suiprise  and  joy  oppress  him ;  I  myself 
Partake  his  transports.    Rouse,  my  lord,  for  shame. 

Em.  How  is  it  with  you  now  ? 

Or.  Quite  well— tis  past. 

Ber.  The  wonder's  past,  and  nought  but  joy  remains. 


280  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 


Enter  Qoildfobd  amd  Ritbbi. 

GuUd.  He'i  eome  i  he's  hen  I  I  hare  endneM  my 
warrior ; 
Now  take  m«,  HeavX  I  lut^e  Uv^d  Umg  eooogli. 

JuUa.  My  lord,  my  RirerB  1 

Jtte.  *Tia  my  Julia'b  ulf  1 

My  life ! 

JtMa.  My  hero !    Do  I  then  behold  thee  ? 

J?io.  Oh,  my  fall  heart !  expect  not  worde,  my  Julia! 

Em,  Rivers  I 

Bio.  My  litter!  what  an  hour  it  this ! 
My  own  Orlando  too  I 

Or.  My  noble  friend  ! 

Rw.  This  is  rach  prodigality  of  bliss, 
I  scarce  can  think  it  real.    Honest  Bestrand, 
Your  hand ;  your*s,  my  Orlando^  yoar*s,  my  fistber; 
And  as  a  hand,  I  hare  a  heart  for  all ; 
Love  has  eidargM  it,  from  excess  of  love 
I  am  become  more  capable  of  friendship. 
My  dearest  Julia  I 

Guild.  She  is  tiiine,  my  son. 

Thou  hast  desery'd  her  nobly ;  thou  hast  won  her, 
Fulflird  the  terms— 

Riv.  Therefore  1  dare  not  ask  her , 

I  would  not  claim  my  Julia  as  a  debt. 
But  take  her  as  a  gift ;  and,  oh  I  I  swear 
It  is  the  dearest,  richest,  choicest  gift. 
The  bounty  of  indulgent  Heaven  could  grant. 

(GuiLDFORD/Mfu  their  hands.) 

Julia.  Spare  roe,  my  lord. — As  yet  I  scarce  have  seen 
you. 
Confusion  stops  my  tongue — ^yet  I  will  own 
If  there  be  truth  or  faith  in  woman's  vows, 
Then  you  have  still  been  present  to  this  heart. 
And  not  a  thought  has  wander'd  from  its  duty. 

[Exeunt  Julia  and  Ehmelina. 

Eiv.  (looking  after  Julia,)  Oh,  generous  Julia ! 

Or.  (aside  to  Ber.)  Mark  how  much  she  loves  him  ! 

Ber.  (aside  to  Or. J  Mere  words,  which  the  fond  sex 
have  always  ready. 

Biv.  Forgive  me,  good  Orlando,  best  of  friends  I 
How  my  soul  joys  to  meet  thee  on  this  shore  ? 
Thus  to  embrace  thee  in  my  much-lov*d  England ! 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  281 

Guild*  England  t  the  kmd  of  worth,  the  soil  of  heroes, 
Vfhem  great  Elisabeth  the  sceptre  swtkjn. 
O'er  s  free,  glorious,  rich,  and  happy  people  I 
Philosophy,  not  cloisterM  op  in  sdiools. 
The  specolative  dream  of  idle  monks, 
Attir'd  in  «ttic  robe,  here  roams  at  large ; 
"Wisdom  is  wealth,  and  science  is  renown. 
Here  sacred  laws  protect  the  meanest  sal^ect, 
The  bread  that  toU  procures  fair  freedom  sweetens. 
And  every  peasant  eats  his  homely  meal, 
Content  and  free,  lord  of  his  small  domi^n. 

Biv.  Past  are  those  gothic  days,  and,  thanks  to  Heav'n, 
They  are  fw  ever  past,  when  English  subjects 
Were  Ixnn  the  vassals  of  some  tyrant  lord ! 
"When  free-soul*d  men  were  basely  handed  down 
To  the  next  heir,  transmitted  with  their  lands, 
The  shameful  legacy  from  sire  to  son  I 

OuHd,  But  while  thy  generous  soul,  my  noble  bo/. 
Justly  abhors  oppression,  yet  revere 
The  plain  stem  virtues  of  our  rough  forefathers : 

0  never  may  the  gallant  sons  of  England 
Lose  their  plain,  manly,  native  character. 
F<Mrego  the  glorious  charter  nature  gave  'em. 
Beyond  what  kings  can  give,  or  laws  bestow. 
Their  candoor,  courage,  constancy,  and  truth ! 

[EjKunt  GoiLDFORD  and  Rivers. 
Or.  Stay,  Bertrand,  stay— Oh,  pity  my  distraction ! 
This  heart  was  never  made  to  hide  its  feelings ; 

1  had  near  betray'd  mysdf. 

Ber.  I  trembled  for  yon ; 

Remember  that  the  eye  of  love  is  piercing. 
And  Emmelina  mark'd  yon. 

Or.  *Tis  too  much 

My  artless  nature  cannot  bear  disguise. 
Think  what  I  felt  when  unsuspecting  Rivers 
Fress'd  me  with  gen'rous  rapture  to  his  bosom, 
Profess'd  an  honest  Joy,  and  colFd  me  friend ! 
I  felt  myself  a  traitor :  yet  I  swear. 
Yes,  by  that  Power  who  sees  the  thoughts  of  men, 
I  swear,  I  love  the  gallant  Rivers  more 
Than  light  or  life !  I  love,  but  yet  I  fear  him : 
I  shrunk  before  the  lustre  of  his  virtue — 
I  felt  as  I  had  wrong'd  him — felt  abashed. 
I  cannot  bear  thi«  conflict  in  my  soul. 


2B%  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD- 

And  tlMrefora  have  retolvM— 

Ber.  On  what  f 

Or.  To  fly. 

Ber.  To  fly  from  JaUs  f 

Or.  Yet,  to  fl  j  from  all. 

From  every  thing  I  love ;  to  fly  from  Riven, 
Firom  Emmelina,  from  mytelf,  from  thee : 
Trom  Julia  ?  no--that  were  impoeiible. 
For  I  shall  bear  het  image  in  my  loal ; 
It  it  a  part  of  me,  the  deareet  part : 
So  closely  interwoven  with  my  being, 
I1iat  I  can  never  lose  the  dear  remembrance. 
Till  I  am  robb'd  of  life  and  her  together. 

Ber.  *Tis  cowardice  to  fly. 

Or.  *Tl8  death  to  stay. 

Ber.  Where  would  yon  go?  How  lost  in  thought  lie 
stands!    {Aside.) 
A  vulgar  villain  now  would  use  persuarion. 
And  by  his  very  eamestnese  betray 
The  thing  he  meant  to  hide ;  111  coolly  wait, 
1111  the  occasion  shows  me  how  to  act. 
Then  turn  it  to  ray  purpose.    Ho  I  Orlando ! 
Where  would  you  go  t 

Or.  To  solitude,  to  hopeless  banbhrnent ! 

Yes,  I  will  shroud  my  youth  in  those  dark  cells 
Where  disappointment  steals  devotion^s  name. 
To  cheat  the  wretched  votary  into  ruin ; 
There  will  I  live  in  love  wiUi  misery ; 
Ne'er  shall  the  sight  of  mirth  proftme  my  grief. 
The  sound  of  joy  shall  never  charm  my  ear. 
Nor  music  reach  it,  save  when  the  slow  bell 
Wakes  the  dull  brotherhood  to  lifeless  prayer 
Then,  when  the  slow-retreating  worid  recedes. 
When  warm  desires  are  cold,  and  passion  dead. 
And  all  things  but  my  Julia  are  forgotten. 
One  thought  of  her  sliall  fire  my  languid  soul. 
Chase  the  faint  orison,  and  feed  despair. 

Ber.  What  I  with  monastic,  laxy  drones  retire. 
And  diant  cold  hymns  with  holy  hjrpocrites  ? 
First  perish  all  the  sex !  forbid  it,  manhood ! 
Where  is  your  nobler  self?  for  shame,  Oriando; 
Renounce  this  superstitious,  whining  weakness, 
Or  I  shall  blush  to  think  I  calPd  you  friend. 

Or.  What  can  I  do? 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  283 

Ber.  (flSter  a  paiue.)  Beg  thell  defer  thn  marriage 
But  for  one  single  day  j  do  this,  and  leave 
The  rest  to  me :  she  shall  be  thine. 

Or.  Uovir  sayst  thou  ? 

What,  wrong  her  virtue  ? 

Ber.  StOlthiscantofvhrtuel 

This  pomp  of  words,  this  phrase  without  a  meaning  1 
I  grant  that  honour*k  sometbing,  manly  honour ; 
I'd  fight,  I'd  bum,  I'd  bleed,  Td  die  for  honour ; 
But  what's  this  virtue  ? 

Or,  Ask  you  what  it  is? 

Why,  *tis  what  libertines  themselves  adore ; 
*Tis  that  which  wakens  love  and  kindles  rapture. 
Beyond  the  rosy  lip  or  starry  eye. 
Virtue !  'tis  that  which  gives  a  secret  force 
To  common  charms ;  but  to  true  loveliness 
Lends  ctdouring  celestial.    Such  its  power, 
That  she  who  ministers  to  guilty  plMsure«, 
Assumes  its  semblance  when  she  most  would  please. 
Virtue  I  tis  that  ethereal  enei^ 
Which  gives  to  body  spirit,  soul  to  beauty.  [Ex-'t. 

Ber.  Curse  on  his  principles  1  Yet  I  shall  shake  them ; 
Yes,  I  will  bend  his  spirit  to  my  will. 
Now,  while  'tis  warm  with  passion,  and  will  take 
Whatever  mould  my  formii]^  hand  will  give  it. 
*Tis  worthy  of  my  genius  1   Then  I  love 
This  Emmelina :  true  she  loves  not  me, 
But,  should  young  Rivers  die,  his  fiither'k  laads 
Would  then  be  mine--4s  Rivers,  thm,  immortal  ? 
Come — Guildford'b  lands,  and  hk  proud  daugfater'b  hand. 
Are  worth  some  thought.    Aid  me,  ye  apnn  to  genius  1 
Love,  mischief,  poverty,  revenge,  snd  envy  1 

IBxU  BirraANP. 

Enter  Emmblina  and  R1WR9  talking. 

Em.  Yet  do  not  blame  Oriando,  good  my  brother ; 

He*d  still  the  same,  that  brave  frank  heart  you  lov'd  i 

Only  his  temper's  chang'd,  he  is  grown  sad ; 

But  that's  DO  fault,  I  only  am  to  blame ; 

Fond  foolish  heart,  to  give  itself  away 

To  one  who  gave  me  nothing  in  return  t 
Biv.  How's  tliis  ?  my  father  said  Orlando  lov'd  thee 
Em.  Indeed  I  thought  so ;  he  was  kinder  once ; 

Nay,  still  he  loves,  or  my  poor  heart  deceives  me. 


SH4  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Jttv.  IflMbMwroof'dtiMe!  yet  IkiurarheeoiildMt; 
His  fsUant  moI  Is  all  mada  op  of  rfrtuM, 
And  I  would  rattier  dooM  m  jeelf  thMi  him. 
Yet  tell  me  all  the  atery  o#  joor  lores. 
And  let  a  brottier^  fondnem  soothe  thy  earas. 
)   ^m.  When  to  this  casde  first  Orlando  eame^ 
<>  A  wdeome  goest  to  aU,  to  me  most  wekome ; 
Yes,  spite  of  maiden  shame  and  homing  Uashee, 
Let  me  ctmfiBss  he  was  most  welcome  to  me! 
At  first  my  foolish  heart  so  modi  deceir'd  mob 
I  thought  I  loT'd  him  for  my  brottier*s  sake ; 
Bat  when  I  doedy  seardi*d  tliJs  bosom  traitor, 
I  foond,  alasl  I  loT*d  him  for  Us  own. 

Aio.  Blush  not  to  own  it ;  twas  a  wdl-plae*d  flame! 
I  glory  in  the  merit  of  my  friend. 
And  lore  my  rister  more  for  loriag  him. 

Sm.  He  talked  of  yoo ;  I  Usten'd  with  delight. 
And  fimded  twas  the  sal]|}ect  only  diarm*d  me ; 
Bat  when  Orlando  diose  another  theme, 
Forgive  me,  lUyffls,  but  I  listened  still 
With  undiminiah*d  joy— he  talk*d  of  love, 
Nor  was  that  theme  less  grateAil  than  the  fcHrmer. 
I  seemed  the  very  idol  of  his  soul  t 
Rivers,  he  said,  would  thank  me  for  the  friendship 
I  bore  to  his  Orlando ;  I  believ'd  hiin. 
Julia  was  absent  ttien— but  what  of  Julia  ? 

Riv.  Ay,  what  of  her  indeed  ?  why  nam^d  you  JuUaf 
You  could  not  surely  think  ?  no,  that  were  wild. 
Why  did  you  mention  Julia  ? 

Em.  (conftuedly.)  Nay,  twas  nothing, 

'Twas  accident,  nor  had  my  words  a  meaning ; 
If  I  did  name  her— 'twas  to  note  the  time- 
To  mark  the  period  of  Orlando^s  coldness^ 
The  circumstance  was  casual,  and  but  meant 
To  date  the  change ;  it  aim*d  at  nothing  farther. 

Riv.  (agitatedj  *Tis  very  liko-HDO  more — I^  satis- 
fied— 
You  talk  as  I  had  doubts :  what  doubts  have  I  ? 
Why  do  you  labour  to  destroy  suspidons 
Which  never  had  a  birth  ?    Is  she  not  mine  ? 
Mine  by  the  fondest  ties  of  dear  affection  ? — 
But  did  Orlando  change  at  her  return  ? 
Did  he  grow  cold  7    It  could  not  be  for  that ; 
You  may  mistake.    And  vet  you  said  'twas  then: 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  2:^5 

Was  it  precisely  then  ?    T  only  ask 

For  Uie  fond  lore  I  bear  my  dearest  sister. 

Em,  'Twas  as  I  said. 

ib'o.  (recovering  himtejf.)  He  loves  thee,  Bmmelina : 
These  starts  of  passions,  this  nnqoiet  temper 
Betray  how  moch  he  loves  thee :  yea,  my  sister. 
He  fears  to  lose  thee,  fears  his  fiither*s  will 
May  dash  Us  rising  hopes,  nor  give  thee  to  him. 

Rm,  Oh,  flatterer  I  thus  to  soothe  my  easy  nature 
With  tales  of  possible,  unlikely  bliss ! 
Because  it  may  be  true,  my  credulous  heart 
Whispers  it  is,  and  fondly  loves  to  cherish 
The  feeble  glimmering  of  a  sickly  hope. 

Biv,  This  precious  moment,  worth  a  tedious  age 
Of  vulgar  time,  I've  stol'n  from  love  and  Julia ; 
She  waits  my  coming,  and  a  longer  stay 
Were  treason  to  her  beauty  and  my  love. 
Doubts  vanish,  fears  recede,  and  fondness  triumphs. 

[Exeunt, 


ACT  III. 
ScBNB— ^  Garden, 


Em,  Why  do  my  feet  unbidden  seek  this  grove? 
Why  do  I  trace  his  steps  ?   I  thought  him  here ; 
This  is  his  hour  of  walldng,  and  tiiese  sh^^ 
IBs  daily  haunt :  <rft  have  they  heard  Us  vows : 
Ah  1  fstal  vows,  wUeh  stole  my  peace  away  I 
But  now  he  shuns  my  pres«ice :  yet  who  knows 
He  may  not  be  ungrateful,  but  unhappy  1 
Yes,  he  will  come  to  dear  his  past  offences* 
WiUi  such  prevailing  eloquence  wHI  plead. 
So  mourn  his  former  fonlts,  so  Uame  Us  coldness, 
And  by  ten  thousand  graceful  ways  repair  tbem. 
That  I  shall  think  I  never  was  offended. 
He  comes,  and  every  donbt*s  at  once  diqieU'd : 
*Twas  ftmcy  all ;  he  never  meant  to  wrong  me. 

Enter  Orlando. 

Or,  Whyatthishour  of  universal  joy, 
When  every  heart  beats  high  with  grateful  nqpture 


8S6  TnE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

And  pleuare  danoea  her  endumting  round  ; 

0  tell  ma  why,  at  this  Mia|>ieioiu  hoar, 
Yoa  qpit  the  Joyfcd  circle  o#  yonr  frimdt ; 
Rob  lodal  pleasure  of  its  iweeteet  eharm. 
And  leare  a  toM  e*en  in  the  hapfdest  heartib 
An  aching  roid  which  only  yoa  can  fill  ? 
Why  do  yon  seek  these  Bufireqnented  shades  ? 
Why  court  these  gloomy  haunts  unfit  for  beauty ; 
But  made  for  meditati<m  and  misfbrtane? 

Sm.  I  might  retort  the  charge,  my  lord  Orhmdol 

1  tn^ht  inquire  how  the  loY*d  firiend  tit  Bbrmn, 
Whom  he  has  held  deq[Kroaited  hi  his  heart 
Beyond  a  brotherti  deamees,  savM  his  lilvb 
And  cherifih*d  it  when  aar*d  beyond  his  own  t— 
I  might  inquire,  why  when  this  Biyers  cornea, 
After  long  tedious  months  of  esq^eotation. 
Alive,  yictorious,  and  as  firm  in  friendship 

As  fondness  could  hare  wished,  or  fimey  liBlgB'd ; 
I  might  inquire  why  thus  Orlando  shuns  him-- 
Why  thus  he  courts  this  melanchdy  gloom. 
As  if  he  were  at  varianee  with  deU^t^ 
And  BcomM  to  mingle  in  the  gmeral  Joy  ? 

Or.  Oh^myfairmonitressl   I  have  desenr'd 
Yonr  gentle  censure.    Henceforth  I'll  be  gay. 

Em.  Julia  complains  too  of  yon. 

Or.  Ah!  does  Julia? 

If  Julia  chides  me,  I  have  errM  indeed : 
For  harshness  is  a  stranger  to  her  nature. 
But  why  does  she  complain  ?  O  tell  me  wherefore  ? 
That  I  may  soofi  repair  the  unwiUiQg  crime^ 
And  prove  my  heart  at  least  ne'w  meant  to  wra^  her. 

JSm.  Why  so  alarm*d  ? 

Or.  Alarm*d  I 

JSm.  Indeed,  yma  seemM  so. 

Or.  Sure  yon  mistake.    Alarm'd  I  oh  no^  I  was  not ; 
There  was  no  cause — I  could  not  be  alarm*d 
Up<m  so  slight  a  ground.    Something  you  said. 
But  what  I  know  not,  of  your  friend. 

Em.  OfJuUaf 

Or.  That  Julia  was  displeas'd— was  it  not  so? 
*TwaB  that,  or  something  like  it. 

Em.  She  complains 

That  you  avoid  her. 

Or.  How  I  that  I  avoid  her  7 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  «87 

Did  JuUa  ny  so  f  ah  I  yoa  had  forgot— 
It  could  not  be. 

Em.  Why  are  you  terrified  ? 

Or,  No. 

Not  t«rrified— I  am  not— but  were  those 
Her  rery  words  f  yoa  might  mistake  her  menning  i 
Did  JuUa  say  Orlando  shonn'd  her  presence  ? 
Oh !  did  she,  could  she  say  so? 

J?m.  If  she  did, 

IVhy  this  disorder  ?  there^  no  cause. 

Or.  No  cause  ? 

Oh !  there's  a  cause  of  dearer  worth  than  empire  1 
Quick  let  me  fly.  and  find  the  fair  npbraider ; 
Ten  her  she  wrongs  roe,  tell  her  I  would  die 
Bather  than  meet  her  anger. 

(  Emmilina  JitinU.y 
Ah,  she  fisints  I 
What  hare  I  said  ?  curse  my  imprudent  tongue  I 
Look  up,  sweet  innocence !  my  Emmelina  - 
My  genile  ftlend,  awake  I  look  up,  feir  creature  I 
*Tis  your  Orlando  calls. 

Em,  Orlando^  Yoioe  I 

Methougfat  be  talked  of  loye— nay,  do  not  mock  me ; 
My  heart  is  but  a  weak,  a  rery  weak  onel 
I  am  not  wellr>|>erhaps  I*ye  been  to  blame. 
Spare  my  distress ;  the  error  has  been  mine. 

iEaU  BimiLTifA. 

Or.  So  then,  all'b  over;  I've  betrayed  my  secret. 
And  stuck  a  p<rfson*d  dagger  to  her  heart; 
Her  innocent  heart.    Why,  what  a  wretdi  am  1 1 
Ruin  approachei   shell  I  tamely  meet  it, 
And  dally  with  dettruetion  till  it  blast  me? 
No,  I  wiU  fly  thee,  Jnliiw  fly  for  ever. 
Ah,  fly  I  what  then  beeomee  of  BmmeUna? 
Shall  I  abandon  htrf  it  must  be  so ; 
Better  escape  with  this  poor  wreck  ofhonoor. 
Than  hazard  all  by  staying.    Rivers  here? 

Enter  Rivers. 

Riv.  The  same.    My  other  self!  my  own  Orlando  I 
I  came  to  seek  thee ;  'twas  in  thy  kind  bosom. 
My  suflering  soul  reposed  its  secret  eares^ 
When  doubts  and  difllcultiea  stood  before  me : 
And  now  now  when  my  prosperous  fortune  shines 


288  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 


And  gUdt  the  imiUiiff  boar  with  ber  brlgM 

Shmll  1  become  a  nifgard  of  m  j  blias. 

Defraud  thee  ofthy  portiMi  of  my  Joyi, 

And  rob  thee  of  fby  wdl-eam'd  clidm  to  share  UMst 

Or.  That  I  bare  ever  loT'd  thee,  witneM  HeaTeal 
That  I  bare  thoogbt  thy  MendaUp  the  bert  btomfaw 
That  markM  the  fortone  of  my  happier  dayi, 
I  here  attest  the  sorereifn  Jadf^e  of  hearts ! 
Then  think,  O  think  what  ^ngoish  I  endim^ 
When  I  declare,  in  bittemeaa  of  qpirit, 
That  we  most  part 

Siv,  What  does  Oriando  mean  ? 

Or,  That  I  most  l^tre  thee,  mrers ;  must  nnowKe 
Thy  loT'd  society. 

Riv,  Thou  hast  been  iii)ar*d ; 

Thy  merit  has  been  slighted :  sure  my  fiither. 
Who  loiew  how  dear  I  held  thee,  woidd  not  wrong  tiiee. 

Or,  He  is  all  goodness ;  no— tiiere  is  a  cauae— 
Seek  not  to  know  it. 

Riv.  Now,  by  holy  friendship^ 

I  swear  thou  sbalt  not  leave  me ;  what,  just  now. 
When  I  have  safely  pass'd  so  many  perUs* 
EscapM  so  many  deaths,  retam*d  once  more 
To  the  kind  arms  of  long  desiring  fiiendsU^ ; 
Just  now,  when  I  expected  such  a  welcome. 
As  happy  souls  in  paradise  bestow 
Upon  a  new  inhabitant,  who  comes 
To  taste  Uieir  blessedness,  you  coldly  tell  me 
You  will  depart :  it  must  not  be,  Orlando. 

Or.  It  must,  it  roust. 

Riv,  Ah,  must  I  then  tell  me  wherefore  f 

Or.  I  would  not  dim  thy  dawn  of  happiness, 
Nor  shade  the  brighter  beams  of  thy  good  fortane 
With  the  dark  sullen  cloud  that  hangs  o*er  mine. 

Riv,  Is  this  the  heart  of  him  I  call*d  my  friend, 
Full  of  the  graceful  weakness  of  affection  t 
How  have  I  known  it  bend  at  my  request ! 
How  lose  the  power  of  obstinate  resistance. 
Because  his  friend  entreated  I    This  Orlando ! 
How  is  he  changed ! 

Or,  Alas,  how  changM  indeed  T 

How  dead  to  erery  relish  of  delight ! 
How  chang*d  in  all  but  in  his  love  for  thee  I 
Yet  think  not  that  my  nature  Is  grown  harder. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  289 

That  I  have  lost  that  dactile,  yielding  heart ; 
Riven,  I  hare  not— oh !  'tis  still  too  soft ; 
E'en  now  it  melts,  it  Ueeds  in  tenderness- 
Farewell  1    I  dare  not  tmst  myself— forewell ! 

JUo.  Then  thou  resoly'st  to  go  ? 

Or.  This  very  day  ? 

Biv.  What  do  I  hear  t   To-day !  It  most  not  be. 
This  is  the  day  that  makes  my  Jnlia  mine. 

Or.  Wed  her  to-day  ? 

Biv.  This  day  unites  me  to  her ; 

Then  stay  at  least  tQl  thou  behold'st  her  mine. 

Or.  Impossible  1  another  day  were  min. 

Biv.  Thai  let  me  fly  to  Jolia,  and  coqjtire  her 
To  bless  me  with  her  hand  this  hour— this  moment. 

Or.  Oh !  no,  no,  no ! 

Biv.  I  will ;  in  snch  a  cause 

Sorely  she  wiU  forego  the  rigid  forms 
Of  cold  decorom ;  then,  my  best  Orlando ! 
I  shall  receive  my  Jolia  from  thy  hand ; 
Tlie  blesdng  will  be  doubled  1    I  shall  owe 
The  precious  gift  of  love  to  sacred  friendship ! 

Or.  Canst  thou  bear  this,  my  heart  ? 

Biv.  Then,  my  Orlando, 

Since  thy  unkind  reserve  denies  my  heart 
Its  partnership  in  this  thy  hoard  of  sorrows, 
I  will  not  press  to  know  it ;  thou  shalt  go 
Soon  as  the  holy  priest  has  made  us  one : 
For,  oh  I  *twill  soothe  thee  in  the  hour  of  parting. 
To  know  I'm  in  possession  of  my  love. 
To  think  I'kn  blest  with  Julia,  to  reflect 
Thou  gav'kt  her  to  my  arms,  my  Inide  I  my  wife ! 

Or.  Ah  I  my  brain  turns ! 

Biv.  'Tis  as  I  thought ;  111  Iry  Mm. 

CJride.j 
Now  answer  me,  Orlando,  and  with  truth ; 
Hide  nothing  from  thy  friend— dost  thou  not  love? 

Or.  Ha !  how  1  I  am  betray'd!  he  reads  my  heart. 

Biv.  Hast  thou,  with  all  that  tenderness  of  soul. 

From  love's  infection  kept  thy  yielding  heart  ? 

Say,  couldst  thou  bask  in  all  the  blaze  of  beauty. 

And  never  feel  its  warmth  f Impossible  1 

Oh  I  I  shall  probe  thy  soul,  till  thou  confess 

The  conqu*ring  fair  one*s  name— but  why  confess  ? 

Come,  come,  1  Icnow  full  well— 

o 


290  TUB  FATAL  FaLSKHOOD. 

Or,  Ha !  doit  tboa  know  ? 

And  knowing,  dott  tium  niffer  me  to  live  f 
And  dost  thou  know  mj  guilt,  and  eaU  ma  ftiand? 
Ho  mocka  but  to  destroy  me  1 

Miv.  Come,  no  more ; 

Love  Is  a  prood,  an  arUtrary  god. 
And  will  not  ehoose  as  rigid  flsthers  Ud  \ 
I  know  that  thine  has  deatin'd  for  thy  brida 
A  Tuscan  maid ;  but  hearts  disdain  all  force. 

Or,  How's  this  ?  what^  dost  thou  justify  my  passion 

Siv.  Applaud  it— glory  in  it-will  assist  it. 
She  Is  so  foir,  so  worthy  to  be  loved. 
That  I  should  be  thy  rival,  were  not  sfaa 
My  sister. 

Or.  How  I 

Miv.  She  is  another  Julia. 

Or.  I  stood  upon  a  fearful  inveipiee— 
I'm  giddy  stUl--oh,  yea  I  I  understand  thee — 
Thy  beauteous  sister  1  what  a  wretch  I>e  been  I 
Oh,  Rivers  1  too  much  softness  has  undone  me. 
Yet  I  will  never  wrong  the  maid  I  love. 
Nor  inijare  thee ;  first  let  Orlando  perish  I 

Riv.  Be  more  ex^idt. 

Or.  For  the  present  spare  me. 

Think  not  too  hardly  of  me,  noble  Rivers  1 
I  am  a  man,  and  full  of  human  frailties ; 
Bat  hate  like  hell  the  crime  which  tempts  me  ran. 
When  I  am  ready  to  depart  1*11  see  thee. 
Clear  all  my  long  accounts  of  love  and  honour. 
Remove  thy  doubts,  embrace  thee,  and  expire. 

lEjtU  Orlando. 

Manet  Rivers. 

Rio.  It  must  be  so— to  what  excess  he  loves  her  I 
Yet  wherefore  not  demand  her  ?  for  his  birth 
May  dobn  alliance  with  the  proudest  fortune. 
Sure  there's  some  hidden  cause— perhaps— «h,  no ! 
Turn  from  that  thought,  my  soul !  'twas  vile  suspAeion ; 
And  I  could  hato  the  heart  which  but  conociv'd  it 
'Tis  true  their  faiths  are  different— then  his  father. 
Austere  and  rigid,  dooms  him  to  another. 
That  must  not  be— these  bars  shall  be  remov'd ; 
111  serve  him  with  my  life,  nor  taste  of  bBsa 
Till  I  have  sought  to  bless  the  friend  I  love.  [  BxH. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  291 


Be-enter  Orlando. 
Or.  Wed  h«r  to-day?  wed  her  perhaps  this  hour  ? 
Hasten  the  rites  for  «m  f  /  give  her  to  him  ? 
/  stand  a  tame  spectator  of  their  bliss  ? 
i  live  a  patient  witness  of  their  joy  ? 
First  let  this  dagger  drink  my  heut^  warm  blood. 
(  Take*  a  dagger  from  hi*  bosom,  then  sees  Julia.) 
The  sorceress  comes  I  oh,  thcre^s  a  charm  about  her 
WMdk  holds  my  hand,  aiMl  makes  me  wish  to  live. 
I  shndder  at  her  sight !  open,  thou  earth, 
And  save  me  from  the  p«ril  of  her  charms  I 

CJPuts  up  the  dagger,) 

Enter  Julia. 

JuKa.  Methooght  I  heard  the  cry  of  one  in  pain  ; 
FVom  hence  it  came ;  all,  me  I  my  Iwd  Orlando  I 
What  means  that  sigh  ?  that  agonixhog  voice  f 
Those  groans  which  rend  your  heart  i  those  frantie 

looks? 
Indeed  I^  terrified.    What  would  you  do  ? 

Or.  (furtmuHy.)  Die! 

JvUa.  Talk  you  of  death  ?  renounce  the£»tal  Uiought{ 
Live  for  my  sake,  Orlando. 

Or,  For  tiiy  sake  ? 

That  were  indeed  a  cause  to  live  for  ages, 
Would  nature  but  extend  the  narrow  limits 
Of  human  life  so  far. 

Julia.  And  for  the  sake 

Of  Rivers ;  live  for  both  j  he  sends  me  here 
To  beg  you  would  delay  your  purposed  parting ; 
His  happiness,  he  swears,  if  you  are  absent, 
Will  be  but  half  complete. 

Or.  Is  it  to-night? 

This  marriage,  Julia,  did  you  say  to-night  ? 

Jtdia.  It  is,  and  yet  you  leave  us. 

Or.  No ni  stay. 

Since  you  command,  stay  and  expire  before  yon. 

Julia,  What  mean  you  ? 

Or.  That  111  perish  at  the  feet 

Of Rivers. 

JuUa,  TeU  your  sorrows  to  my  lord ; 

Up(m  his  faithful  breast  repose  the  weight 
lluit  presses  you  to  earth. 


292  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Or.  TeU  him  f  TeU  Riren  ? 

Is  he  not  yonn  ?    Does  not  the  priest  now  wait 
To  make  you  one  ?    Then  do  not  mo<dc  ma  thos ; 
What  leisure  can  a  happy  Mdefroom  find 
To  thinlc  upon  so  lost  a  wretch  as  I  am  ? 
You  hate  me,  Julia. 

JuUa,  Hate  yon !  how  you  wrong  me  I 

Live  to  partalce  our  Joy. 

Or.  Hope  yon  for  joy  ? 

Julia,  Hare  I  not  cause  ?   Am  I  not  loT*d  by  Rirenf 
lUvers,  the  best,  the  bravest  of  his  sex  I 
Whose  valour  fobled  heroes  ne*er  surpassed. 
Whose  virtues  teach  the  young  and  charm  the  old ; 
Whose  graces  are  the  wonder  of  our  sex. 
And  envy  of  his  own. 

Or,  Enough!  enough  1 

O  spare  this  prodigality  of  praise. 
But  Julia,  if  you  would  not  here  behold  me, 
Stretch'd  at  your  feet  a  lifeless  bloody  corpee. 
Promise  what  I  shall  now  request. 

JtUia,  What  is  it? 

Or.  That  tiD  to-morrow's  sun,  I  ask  no  longer. 
You  will  defer  this  marriage. 

Julia.  Ah!  defer  it! 

Impossible  $  what  would  my  Rivers  think? 

Or.  No  matter  what :  'tis  for  his  sake  I  ask  it : 
His  peace,  his  hapi^ness,  perhaps  his  life 
Depends  on  what  I  ask. 

JuUa.  His  life !  the  life  of  Rivers  I 

Some  dreadful  thought  seems  lab'ring  in  your  breast ; 
Explain  this  horrid  mystery. 

Or.  I  dare  not. 

If  you  comply,  before  to-morrow's  dawn. 
All  will  be  well,  the  danger  past ;  Uien  finish 
These— happy  nuptials ;  but  if  you  refuse. 
Tremble  for  him  you  love ;  the  altar's  self 
Will  be  no  safeguard  from  a  madman^s  rage. 

JuUa.  What  rage  ?  what  madman  ?  what  remorse- 
less villain  ? 
Orlando — will  not  you  protect  your  friend? 
Think  how  he  loves  you — he  would  die  for  you-* 
Then  save  him,  on  my  knees  I  beg  you  save  him — 

(Kneelt.) 
Oh !  guard  my  Rivers  from  this  bloody  foe. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  293 

Or.  Dearer  than  life  I  love  him— ask  no  more. 
But  promise  in  the  awful  fuse  of  Heaven, 
To  do  what  I  request— and  promise  forUier, 
Not  to  disclose  the  cause. 

JuUa,  Oh  save  him !  save  him ! 

Or.  *Tis  to  in^senre  him  that  I  ask  it :  promise. 
Or  see  me  fall  before  you. 

CHe  dravM  the  dagger^  the  ttiU  kneeUng.J 

JuUa.  '  I  do  promise. 

Hide,  hide  that  deadly  weapon— I  do  promise.    (Ritet.j 
How  wild  you  look  I  you  tremble  more  than  L 
ni  call  my  Rivers  hither. 

Or.  Not  for  worlds. 

If  yon  have  mercy  in  your  nature,  Julia, 
Retire.    Oh  leave  me  quickly  to  mjfself ; 
Do  not  expose  me  to  the  strong  temptation 
Which  now  assaults  me. — Yet  you  are  not  gone. 

Juiia.  Be  more  composed ;  I  leave  you  with  regret. 
CAm  the  goet  out.)  "Hia  noble  mind  is  shaken  from  its 

seat? 
Vfh9i  may  these  transports  mean?  Heav'n  guard  my 
Rivers  I 

jtt  JoLiA  goet  outf  enter  Bbrtsand  ;  he  tpeakt  behind, 

Ber.  Why,  this  is  well ;  this  has  a  face ;  she  weeps. 
He  seems  disorder'd. — Now  to  learn  the  cause, 
-And  then  make  use  of  what  I  hear  by  chance ; 
As  of  a  thing  I  knew.    (He  littent.) 

Or.  (after  a  penue.)    And  is  she  gone  ? 
Her  parting  words  shot  fire  into  my  soul ; 
Did  she  not  say  she  left  me  with  r^ret? 
Her  look  was  tender,  and  the  starting  tear 
FUIM  her  bright  eye ;  she  left  me  with  regret- 
She  own*d  it  too. 

Ber.  »Twill  do. 

(  Comet  forward.)    What  have  you  done  f 
The  charming  Julia  is  dissolv'd  in  wo, 
Her  radiant  eyes  are  quench'd  in  floods  of  tears ; 
For  you  they  fall ;  her  blushes  have  confess^  it^ 

Or.  For  me  ?  what  sayst  thou  ?    Julia  weep  for  me  t 
Yet  she  is  gentle,  and  she  would  have  wept 
For  thee ;  for  any  who  but  seemM  unhappy. 

Ber.  Ungrateful! 

Or,  How  ? 


294  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Ber,  Notbybflrtean,  Ijii4g«^ 

But  by  her  wordi  not  OMaiit  for  me  to  heftr. 

Or.  What  did  ■henj?    What  didtt  thou  hear,  good 
Bertraxui? 
Speak— l*m  on  fire. 

Ber,  It  k  not  safe  to  tell  you. 

Farewell !  I  would  not  ii^jore  Rirero. 

O'-.  Stay, 

Or  tell  me  alU  or  I  renounce  Uiy  friendship. 

Ber,  lliat  threat  onlockt  my  tongue ;  I  must  not  lose 
thee. 
Sweet  Julia  wept,  daspM  her  ftdr  hands,  and  cried. 
Why  was  I  left  a  legacy  to  Rirers, 
Robb'd  of  the  power  of  clu^ce  ?    Seeing  me  she  started, 
Would  have  reoaU*d  her  words,  blush'd,  and  retired. 

Or,  No  more ;  thou  shalt  not  tempt  me  to  my  rufai  r 
Deny  what  thou  hast  said,  deny  it  quickly. 
Ere  I  am  quite  undone ;  for,  oh  1  1  feel 
Retreating  virtue  toudies  its  last  post^ 
And  my  lost  soul  now  veiges  on  destruction. 
Bertraad !  she  promis*d  to  defer  the  maitlage. 

Ber,  Then  my  poinds  gainM ;  that  will  make  Riven 
Jealous.    {Atide.) 
She  loves  you. 

Or,  No;  and  evm  if  she  did 

I  have  no  hope. 

Ber.  You  are  too  scrupulous. 

Be  bold,  and  be  successful ;  sure  of  this. 
There  is  no  crime  a  woman  sooner  pardons 
Than  that  of  which  her  beauty  is  the  cause. 

Or.  Shall  I  defraud  my  friend  ?  he  Ued  to  gain  her! 
What !  rob  the  dear  preserver  <rf  my  life 
Of  all  that  makes  the  happiness  of  his  ? 
And  yet  her  beauty  might  excuse  a  falsehood ; 
Nay,  almost  sanctify  a  peijury. 
Perdition^s  in  that  thought—twas  bom  in  hell. 
My  soul  is  up  in  arms,  my  reason's  lost, 
And  love,  and  rage,  and  jealousy,  and  honour. 
Pull  my  divided  hoEurt,  and  tear  my  soul.  \,Exit. 

Manet  Bbrtrand. 

Rave  on,  and  beat  thy  wings ;  poor  bird !  thou'rt  Km*d, 
Aud  vain  MdU  be  thy  struggles  to  get  loose. 
How  much  your  very  honest  men  lack  prudence  I 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  296 


Though  all  the  nobler  virtaea  fill  one  scatke. 
Yet  place  but  indiacretion  in  tiic  other. 
In  worldly  business,  and  the  ways  of  mmn, 
That  single  folly  weighs  the  balance  down. 
While  all  th*  ascending  rirtues  Idck  the  beam. 
Here's  this  Orlando  now,  of  rarest  parts, 
Honest  heroic,  generous,  frank,  and  kind. 
As  inexperience  of  the  world  can  make  him  • 
Yet  shall  this  single  weakness,  this  impnidenee. 
Poll  down  unheard-of  plagues  upon  his  head* 
And  snare  his  heedless  soul  beyond  redemption 
While  dull  unfeeling  hearts,  and  froaen  ipfaits, 
Sordidly  safe,  secure  because  nntempted. 
Look  up,  and  wonder  at  the  generous  crime 
They  wuited  wit  to  frame,  and  souk  to  dare., 

jrir 


ACT  IV. 
SciNB— ^n  A^poftment. 


Em.  How  many  ways  there  are  of  being  wretched ! 
The  avenues  to  happiness  how  few  1 
When  will  this  busy,  fluttering  heart  be  still  ? 
When  will  it  cease  to  feel  and  beat  no  more  ? 
E'en  now  it  shudders  with  a  dire  presage 
Of  something  terrible  it  fears  to  know. 
EntVing,  I  saw  my  venerable  fathor 
In  earnest  conference  with  the  Count  Orlandi» } 
Shame  and  confusion  fill'd  Otlando^i  eye^ 
While  stem  resentment  fir*d  my  fitthso^s  cheek. 
And  look,  he  comes,  with  terrmr  on  his  brow ! 
But,  O !  be  sees  me,  sees  his  child ;  and  now 
The  terror  of  his  look  is  lest  in  love, 
lu  fond,  paternal  love. 

Enter  Guildfobd. 

Guild,  Come  to  my  arms, 

And  there  conceal  that  penetrating  eye. 
Lest  it  should  read  what  I  would  hide  for  ever. 
Would  hide  from  all,  but  most  would  hide  Arom  the»— 
Illy  father's  grief,  his  shame,  his  rage,  his  tears. 

Em.  Tears !  heaven  andearth !  see  if  he  does  not  weep  t 


296  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

OuiU,  He  who  hM  drawn  this  sorrow  ftom  By  efei 
SbaXL  pay  me  beck  egain  in  tears  of  Uood. 
*Tis  for  thy  take  I  weepi. 

Sm.  Ah,  weqp  for  me ! 

Hear,  Heaven,  and  judge ;  hear,  Hearen,  and  poniih  me  1 
If  any  crime  of  mine 

Guild,  ThoaartaUinnoeenee; 

Jost  what  a  par«iit^  fondett  wish  woold  Cmme  } 
No  fiuilt  of  thine  e'er  itainM  thy  fMlierlB  eheelc ; 
For  if  I  blaah*d,  it  wat  to  hear  thy  Tirtoei, 
And  think  that  thou  watt  mine :  and  if  I  wept. 
It  was  from  joy  and  gratitude  to  Hearen, 
That  made  me  fisther  of  a  child  like  thee. 
Orlando 

Efn,  What  of  him  ? 

Guild.  I  cannot  tdl  thee: 

An  honest  shame,  a  Tirtaons  pride  foridds. 

Bm,  Oh, speak! 

Guild.  Canst  thou  not  guess,  and  spare  thy  ftther? 

Em.  *Tis  possible  I  can— and  yet  I  will  not : 
Tell  roe  the  worst  while  I  hare  sense  to  hear. 
Thou  wilt  not  speak— nay,  never  turn  away ; 
Dost  thou  not  know  that  fear  is  worse  tium  grief  f 
There  may  be  bounds  to  grief,  fear  knows  no  bounds ; 
In  grief  we  know  the  worst  of  what  we  feel. 
But  who  can  tell  the  end  of  what  we  fear  ? 
Grief  mourns  some  sorrow  palpable  and  known, 
But  fear  runs  wild  with  horrible  coi^ccture. 

Guild.   Then  hear  the  WOTSt,  and  arm  thy  soul  to 
bear  it. 
My  child !— he  has— Orlando  has  refus*d  thee. 

Em.  {ajter  a  long  patue.)  ^Tis  well — *tis  very  welt— 
^8  as  it  should  be. 

Guild.  Oh,  there's  an  eloquence  in  that  mute  wo 
Which  mocks  all  language.    Speak,  relieve  thy  heart. 
Thy  bursting  heart ;  Uiy  fother  cannot  bear  it. 
Am  1  a  man  ?  no  more  of  this,  fond  eyes ! 
I  am  grown  weaker  than  a  chidden  infiant. 
While  not  a  sigh  escapes  to  tell  thy  pain. 

Em.  See,  I  am  calm ;  I  do  not  shed  a  tear; 
The  warrior  weeps,  the  womui  is  a  hero ! 

Guild,  (embreices  her.)  My  glorious  chUd !  now  thou 
art  mine  indeed  I 
Forgive  me  if  I  thought  thee  fond  and  weak. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  297 

I  hare  •  Roman  matron  f<Mr  my  danghter. 

And  not  a  feeble  girl.    And  yet  I  fear. 

For,  oh  I  I  know  thy  tendemeas  of  ■ool, 

I  fear  this  tilent  anguish  bat  portends 

Some  dread  conTobScm  soon  to  borst  in  hinrors. 

Sm.  I  wiU  not  shame  thy  blood ;  and  yet,  my  fiiUier, 
Methinks  thy  daughter  should  not  be  refused  I 
Refused!  It  is  a  harsh,  ungrateful  sound ; 
Thou  shouldst  hare  found  a  softer  term  ot  scorn. 
And  hare  I  then  been  held  so  cheap?    Refus'd  ? 
Been  treated  like  the  light  ones  oi  my  sex, 
Hdd  up  to  sale  ?  been  offer*d,  and  refused? 

ChiUd,   Long  hare  I  known  thy  lore ;  I  thought  it 
mutual; 
I  met  him— talked  of  marriage^ 

Sm,  Ah!  no  more: 

I  am  riijected ;— does  not  that  suflSce  ? 
Excuse  my  pride  the  mortifsring  tale ; 
Spare  me  particulars  of  how  and  when, 
And  do  not  parcel  out  thy  daughter's  shame. 
No  flowers  of  rhetoric  can  change  the  foct. 
No  arts  of  speech  can  varnish  o'er  my  shame ; 
Orlando  has  refused  me. 

Guild.  Villain!  Tillain! 

He  shall  repent  this  outrage. 

£111.  Think  no  more  ont : 

ril  teach  thee  how  to  bear  it ;  111  grow  proud. 
As  gentle  spirits  still  are  apt  to  do 
When  cruel  slight  or  kQUng  scorn  assaHs  them. 
Come,  virgin  dignity,  come,  female  pride. 
Come,  wounded  modesty,  come,  slighted  lore. 
Come,  conscious  worth,  come  too,  O  black  despair  { 
Support  me,  arm  me,  fill  me  with  my  wrongs! 
Sustain  this  feeble  sjririt  I    Yes,  my  Csther, 
But  for  thy  share  in  this  sad  tale  of  shame, 
I  think  I  could  hare  borne  it. 

Gtuld.  Thou  hast  a  brother  t 

He  shall  assert  thy  cause. 

Em.  First  strike  me  dead : 

No,  in  the  wild  distraction  of  my  siririt. 
In  this  dread  conflict  of  my  breakiog  heart. 
Hear  my  fond  pleading—sare  me  from  that  curse  1 
Thus  I  acQure  thee  by  the  dearest  ties  (kneels) 
Which  link  society ;  by  the  sweet  names 

o2 


21)8  TttK  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Of  parent  and  of  ehlM  I  byaUtlMjayt 
TheM  tender  chafaabaT*  yleMed.  I  a^Jore  tbea 
Breathe  not  tUs  fUai  iMret  to  my  teothOT ; 
Let  him  not  know  Us  ihter  was  reftiaed ! 

0  spare  me  that  eoasammate^  perfect  mtail 
ConoeiTe  the  mighty  wo— I  cannot  speak : 
And  tremble  to  become  a  driMkiss  ftiher. 

iSgit  BlIMILINA. 

Guad,  What  ait  tbon,  Ufa?  thou  lying  Taoity! 
Thon  promiser,  who  nerer  meanest  to  pay  I 
This  beating  storm  will  crash  my  feeble  ag« ! 
Yet  let  me  not  complidn ;  I  bare  a  son. 
Just  sofih  a  son  as  Heaven  in  mercy  glres, 
When  it  would  bless  supremely ;  he  is  happy ; 
His  ardent  viishes  will  this  day  be  erown*d  j 
He  weds  the  maid  he  lores ;  in  him,  at  least, 
My  soul  will  yet  taste  comfort. — See,  he's  here ; 
He  seems  disordered. 

Enter  Rivsat  (furf  sating  QuiLDroftD.; 

Biv.  Tes,  I  Ibndly  thought 

Not  all  the  tales  which  malice  might  deTise, 
Not  all  the  leagues  combined  hell  might  form 
Could  sliake  her  steady  soul. 

OuUd.  What  means  my  son  ? 

Where  is  thy  bride? 

Biv.  O  name  her  not ! 

'   Guild.  Not  name  her? 

Biv.  No,  if  possiUe,  not  think  of  her ; 

Would  I  could  help  it  I— JuUa  I  oh  my  Julia ! 
Curse  my  fond  tongue !  I  said  I  would  not  name  her ; 

1  did  not  think  to  do  it,  but  my  heart 
Is  fiill  of  her  idea ;  her  lovM  image 

So  fills  my  soul,  it  shuts  out  other  thoughts ; 
My  lips  resolving  not  to  frame  the  sound. 
Dwell  on  her  name,  and  all  my  talk  is  Julia ! 

Guild.  *Tis  as  it  should  be  \  ere  the  midnight  bell 
Sound  in  thy  raptured  ear,  this  charming  JuUa 
Will  be  thy  wife. 


Biv. 

No. 

Guild. 

How? 

Biv. 

She  has  refused. 

Guild, 

Sayst  thou  ? 

Biv. 

She  has. 

THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  299 

€tuild.  Why,  wlio  would  be  a  father . 
Who  that  coold  guess  th4<  wretchedness  it  brings. 
But  would  entreat  of  Hearen  to  write  him  childleis  ^ 

IU9,  'Twas  but  a  little  hour  ntfo  we  parted. 
As  happy  lorers  should ;  bat  when  again 
I  sooght  her  presence,  with  impatient  hasten 
TcAd  her  the  priest,  the  altar,  all  was  ready ; 
She  blushed,  she  wept,  and  rowed  it  could  not  ee, 
That  reasons  of  importance  to  our  peace 
Forbade  the  nuptial  rites  to  be  performed 
Before  to-morrow. 

Guild,  She  consents  tonnorrow ! 

She  but  defers  the  marriage,  not  declines  it 

Biv.  Mere  subterfuge  I  mere  female  artifice  I 
What  reason  should  forUd  our  instant  union  ? 
Wherefore  to-morrow  ?  wherefore  not  to-night  t 
What  difference  could  a  few  short  hours  have  nukie  ? 
Or  if  they  could,  why  not  avow  the  cause  ? 

OuUd.  I  hare  grown  old  in  camps,  hare  lired  in  courts  j 
The  toUs  of  bright  ambition  hare  I  known, 
Woo*d  greatness  and  enjoyM  it,  till  disgust 
FoUow'd  possession ;  still  I  fondly  l€K>k*d 
Through  the  lislse  perspective  for  distant  Joy, 
Hop*d  for  the  hour  of  h<mourable  ease, 
When,  safe  from  an  the  storms  and  wrecks  of  fate. 
My  shatter'd  bark  at  rest,  I  might  eqjoy 
An  old  man's  blessings,  liberty  and  leisure. 
Domestic  happiness  and  smiling  peace. 
The  hour  of  age  indeed  is  come  I  I  feel  it ; 
Feel  it  in  all  its  sorrows,  pains,  and  cares ; 
But  where,  oh  whore's  th*  untested  peace  it  premis'd  ? 

[Exit  OuiLoroap. 
Biff.  I  would  not  deeper  wound  my  Csther's  peace ; 
But  hide  the  secret  cause  of  my  resentment. 
Till  all  be  known ;  and  yet  I  know  too  much. 
It  must  be  so— his  grief,  his  sudden  parting  t 
Fool  that  I  was,  not  to  perceive  at  once^ 
But  friendship  blinded  me,  and  love  betrayed. 
Bertrand  was  right,  he  told  me  she  was  changed. 
And  would,  on  some  pretence,  delay  the  marriage ; 
I  hop'd  twas  malice  all. — Yonnder  she  comes. 
Dissolved  in  tears ;  I  cannot  see  them  fell. 
And  be  a  man ;  I  will  not,  dare  not  meet  her ; 
Her  blandidhments  would  soothe  me  to  falae  peace. 


800  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

And  if  iheMked  it,  1  should  pardon  aU.  [BmU 

Enter  Julia. 

JuUm.  Stsy,  RiTen  I  stay,  barbarian !  hoar  mo  ipMk! 
Rotom,  inhnman !— test  boIoT*d  I  rotom : 
Oh  I  I  wiU  toU  fhoo  all,  rottoro  thy  poaeo, 
Knoel  at  thy  foot,  and  soo  for  thy  forgiyonoM. 
Ho  hoars  mo  not    alas  I  ho  wUl  not  hoar. 
Broak,  thou  poor  hoart,  sinoo  BiTors  is  onkind. 

Bnier  Orlando. 

Or,  Julia  in  toars ! 

JvUa,  Alasi  yon  haro  undone  me ! 

Behold  the  wretched  victim  of  her  promise ! 
1 111^^  at  your  request,  the  ftttal  suit 
Which  has  destroy'd  my  peace ;  Rirers  suspects  me^ 
And  I  am  wretched ! 

Or.  Better  *tis  to  weep 

A  temporary  ill,  than  weep  for  ever ; 
That  anguish  must  bo  mine. 

JuUa,  Ha!  weep  for  over! 

Can  they  know  wretchedness,  who  know  not  love? 

Or.  Not  love  I  ok  cruel  friendship  I  tyrant  honour ! 

JtUia,  Friendship  I  alas,  how  cold  art  thou  to  love ! 

Or,  Too  well  I  know  it ;  both  alike  destroy  me, 
I  am  the  slave  of  both,  and  more  than  either. 
The  slave  of  honour. 

JtiUa.                      If  you  then  have  felt 
The  bitter  agonies 

Or.  Talk  you  of  agonies  ? 

You  who  are  lov*d  agidn !    No  1  they  are  mine ; 
Mine  are  the  agonies  of  hopeless  passion  ; 
Yes,  I  do  love — 1  doat,  I  die  for  love ! 

(faU$  at  her  feet.)  Julia  \ 

Julia.  How  ? 

Or,  Nay,  never  start— I  know  I  am  a  villain  I 
I  know  thy  hand  is  destined  to  another. 
That  other  too  my  friend,  that  friend  the  man 
To  whom  I  owe  my  life !    Yes,  I  adore  thee ; 
Spite  of  the  black  ingratitude,  adore  thee ; 
I  doat  upon  my  friend,  and  yet  betray  him ; 
Tm  bound  to  Emmelina,  yet  forsake  her } 
I  honour  virtue,  while  I  follow  guilt ; 
I  love  the  noble  Rivers  more  than  life. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOa  301 

But  Julia  more  than  honour. 

JvUa,  Hold!  astonishment 

Has  seal'd  my  lips ;  whence  sprung  this  monstrous  dar- 
ing? 

Or.  (rites J  FVom  despair. 

Jutia.  What  can  yon  hope  from  me  ? 

Or.  Hope!  nothing. 

I  would  not  aught  receire,  aught  hope  but  death. 
Think'st  thou  I  need  reproach  ?  think'st  thou  I  need 
To  be  reminded  tliat  my  lore's  a  crime  f 
That  erery  mortal  tie  forbids  my  passion  ? 
But  though  I  know  that  Hearen  has  plagues  in  store. 
Yet  mark— I  do  not,  will  not,  cant  repent ; 
I  do  not  eren  wish  to  lore  thee  less ; 
I  glory  in  my  crime :  pernicious  beauty  I 
Come,  triumph  in  thy  power,  complete  my  woes ; 
Insult  me  with  the  praises  of  my  rival. 
The  man  on  earth — whom  most  I  ought  to  love ! 

JuUa.  I  leave  thee  to  remorse,  and  to  that  penitence 
Thy  crime  demands  (going.) 

Or.  A  moment  stay. 

Julia.  I  dare  not. 

Or.  Hear  all  my  rival's  worth,  and  all  my  guilt 
The  unsuspecting  Rivers  sent  me  to  thee. 
To  plead  his  cause ;  I  basely  broke  my  trust, 
And,  like  a  villain,  pleaded  for  myself. 

Jtdia.  Did  he  ?  Did  Rivers  ?  Then  he  loves  me  still— 
Quick  let  me  seek  him  out. 

Or.  {takes  out  the  dagger.^  first  take  this  dagger ; 
Had  you  not  forced  it  from  my  hand  to-day, 
I  had  not  liv*d  to  know  tills  guilty  moment : 
Take  it,  present  it  to  the  ha^y  Rivers, 
Tell  him  to  plunge  it  in  a  traitor's  heart. 
Tell  him  his  friend,  Orlando,  is  that  traitor. 
Tell  him  Orlando  forg'd  the  guilty  tale. 
Tell  him  Orlando  was  the  only  foe 
Who  at  the  altar  would  have  murder'd  Rivers, 
And  then  have  died  himself. 

JtOux.  Farewell— repent— think  better. 

Exit  Julia. 
(As  she  goes  out,  he  still  looks  after  her,) 

Enter  Rivbrs. 
Riv.  Turn,  villain,  turn  I 


.'J<»?  THE  FATAL  FALSBIIOOD. 

Or,  H»!  RiTMrtlMre? 

Hh.  Yat,  RiTcn. 

Or.  0«pe  wide,  tlMm  M&aHj  mrth,  for  evor  hide  mel 
KiM,  Alps,  ye  cmshinff  moaoteins,  bury  me  1 

Itiv.  Nay,  torn,  look  oa  me. 

Or.  Riren !  oh,  I  cannot, 

I  dare  not,  I  hare  wrong *d  thee. 

Riv.  Doubly  wroog'd  me ; 

Thy  eompUeated  crimei  cry  out  for  vengeance. 

Or.  Take  it 

Biv,  Bat  I  would  take  it  a«  a  man. 

Draw.  (Biviae  lirwiw.) 

Or.  Not  for  a  thooaand  worlde, 

Biv.  Not  fight  ? 

Why,  thou*rt  a  coward  too  as  wdl  as  villain : 
I  shall  despise  as  wdl  as  hate  thee. 

Or.  Do; 

Yet  wrong  me  not,  for  if  I  am  a  coward 
*Tis  but  to  thee :  there  does  not  breathe  the  man, 
Thyself  excepted,  who  durst  call  me  so, 
And  lire }  but,  oh  I  *tis  sure  to  Heaven  and  thee, 
I  am  the  veriest  coward  guilt  e'er  made. 
Now,  as  thou  art  a  man,  revenge  thyself ; 
Strike ! 

Biv.  No,  not  stab  thee  like  a  base  assassin. 
But  meet  thee  as  a  foe. 

Or.  Think  of  my  wrongs. 

Biv.  1  feel  them  here. 

Or.  Think  of  my  treachery. 

Riv.  Oh,  wherefore  wast  thou  false  ?  how  have  I  lov'd 
theel 

Or.  Of  tliat  no  mtore  :  think  of  thy  father*s  grief. 
Of  Emmeliua's  wrongs^ 

Biv.  Provoke  me  not. 

Or.  Of  Julia— 

Biv.  Ha  I  I  shall  forget  my  honour, 

And  do  a  brutal  violence  upon  thee, 
Would  tarnish  my  fair  fame.    Villain  and  coward ! 
Traitor  I  will  nothing  rouae  thee  ? 

Or.  (dravnng.)  Swelling  heart ! 

Yet  this  1  have  deserv'd,  all  this,  and  more. 

A$  they  prepare  to  fights  enter  Emmblina  htutily. 
Em.  Lend  mo  your  swiftness,  lightnings — 'tis  too  late. 


THE  Fatal  falsehood.         303 

806  they're  engafed— 4di  no— they  live,  both  live  ! 
IMd,  cruel  men  I 

Biv.  Unlucky  1  *tii  my  dster. 

Em,  Ye  men  of  Uood  I  if  yet  yon  have  not  loct 
AQ  lenae  of  homan  Idndness,  love,  or  pity ; 
If  ever  you  were  dear  to  tme  anotiier ; 
If  ever  you  desire  or  look  f<v  merey. 
When,  in  the  wild  extremity  ot  angnith. 
Yon  supplicate  that  Judge  who  has  declared 
That  vei^feanee  Is  his  own— oh,  hear  me  now ; 
Hear  a  fond  wretch,  whom  misery  has  made  bold ; 
Spare,  spare  each  other^s  life— spare  your  own  soob. 

Or,  (to  RiTKRS.)  Thou  shonldst  have  struck  at  once ! 
O  tardy  hand! 

An.  Does  death  want  engines  ?  is  his  power  eurtail'd  ? 
Has  fdl  disease  forgotten  to  destroy  f 
Are  there  not  pestilence  and  spotted  plagoes, 
Devouring  ddnges,  consuming  fires, 
Bartliquakes,  volcanoes,  hurricanes,  and  lamine, 
That  man  must  perish  by  the  hand  of  man  ? 
Nay,  to  complete  the  horror,  friend  by  friend  ? 

Rh,  What  I  shall  I  then  endure  this  outrage  tamely  ? 

Em,  No. — If  you  covet  death ;  if  you're  in  hve 
With  slaughter  and  destruction— does  not  war 
Invite  you  to  her  banner  ?    Far  and  wide 
Her  dire  dominion  reaches.— There  seek  death. 
There  fisll  without  a  crime.    There,  where  no  hate, 
No  Individual  rage,  no  ^ivate  wrong. 
Arms  man  against  his  brother. — ^Not  as  here^ 
Where  both  are  often  murderert  in  the  act  / 
In  the  fiml  purfOMO    always. 

Riv.  Is  honour  nothing  ? 

Em,  Honour  1    O  yes,  1  know  him.    *Tis  a  phantom ; 
A  shadowy  figure  wanting  bulk  and  life  ; 
Who  having  nothing  solid  in  himself, 
WriHM  his  thin  form  in  Virtue's  plundered  robe. 
And  steals  her  title.    Honour !  'tis  the  fiend 
Who  feeds  on  orphans'  tears  and  widows*  groans, 
And  slakes  his  impious  thirst  in  larothers'  blood. 
Honour !  why,  tis  the  primal  law  oi  hell  I 
The  grand  device  to  people  the  dark  realms 
With  noble  spirits,  who,  but  for  thb  curst  honour. 
Had  been  at  peace  on  earth,  or  bless'd  in  heaven. 
With  th\i  faUe  honour,  Cliristians  have  no  commorve. 


304  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Religion  dinrowi,  and  tmth  Hkovnu  H. 

Or,  (lArotM  atmy  Aw  sword.)    An  anfel  •pMkt,  and 
angds  daim  obedienee. 

Miv.  (to  Oblando.)    This  is  the  heart  thon  hart 
wroog'd. 

Em.  (eome$  up  to  Omhumo.)  I  pity  thee; 

Calamity  has  taogfat  me  how  to  pity : 
Before  I  Imew  diitrtss,  my  heart  was  hard ; 
Bat  now  it  melts  at  erery  touch  of  wo ; 
And  whdesome  soifarings  bring  it  bade  to  rirtne. 
Biyers,  lie  once  was  good  and  jnst  like  thee : 
Who  shall  be  prood,  and  think  he  stands  secore, 
If  thy  Orlando's  fktlse? 

Riv.  rrhink  of  Ms  crime. 

Sm.  Oh,  tUnk  of  his  temptation !  think  ^twas  Julia; 
Thy  heart  could  not  redst  her ;  how  should  Aw  f 
It  is  the  yery  errcn:  of  Ms  firiend^p. 
Tour  sools  were  firam'd  so  very  much  alike, 
He  coald  not  choose  bat  to  loye  whom  Riyers  loyU 

Or.  Thinks  thoa  there  is  in  death  a  pang  like  this  f 
Strike,  my  braye  friend  I  be  sadden  and  be  silent. 
Death,  which  is  terrible  to  happy  men. 
To  me  will  be  a  blessing :  I  haye  lost 
All  that  could  make  life  dear ;  Fye  lost  my  fnend ; 
rye  stabb'd  the  peace  of  mind  of  that  fair  creature, 
I  haye  snnriy'd  my  honour :  tMs  is  dying  1 
The  mournful  fondness  of  officious  loye 
VflU.  plant  no  thorns  upon  my  dying  pillow ; 
No  precious  tears  embalm  my  memory. 
But  curses  follow  it. 

Em.  See,  Riyers  melts ; 

He  pities  thee. 

Or.  1*11  spare  thy  noble  heart 

The  pain  of  punishing ;  Orlando*8  self 
Reyenges  both. 

(  Goes  to  stab  himself  with  the  dagger.) 

Em,  Barbarian!  kill  me  first. 

Riv.  {snatching  the  dt^ger.)   Thoushalt  not  die!   I 
swear  1  loye  thee  still : 
That  secret  sympathy  which  long  has  bound  as, 
Pleads  for  thy  life  with  sweet  but  strong  entreaty. 
Thou  Shalt  repair  the  wrongs  of  that  dear  saint. 
And  be  again  my  friend. 

Or,  Oh,  hear  me, 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  305 

Sm,  No. 

I  cannot  stoop  to  lire  on  charity. 
And  what  bat  charity  is  love  compellM  ? 
IVe  been  a  weak,  a  fond,  believing  woman. 
And  credalons  beyond  my  sex's  softness : 
Bnt  with  the  wetness,  Vxe  the  pride  of  woman. 
I  loved  with  virtae,  but  I  fondly  loved ; 
That  passion  fixed  my  fitte,  determined  all. 
And  marked  at  once  the  colour  of  my  life. 
Hearts  that  love  well,  love  long,  they  love  bat  once. 
My  peace  then  hast  destroyed,  my  honour's  mine ; 
She  who  aspired  to  gain'  Orlando's  heart, 
Shall  never  owe  Oriando's  hand  to  pity. 

lExU  Emmblina. 

Or.  (after  a  pause.)  And  I  still  live  I 

Jtte.  Farewell  I  shoold  1  stay  longer 

I  might  forget  my  vow. 

Or.  Yet  hear  me,  Rivers. 

[Exit  Rivers,  Orlando ybUmctng. 

Enter  Bbrtrand  on  the  other  side, 

Ber.  How's  this  ?  my  fortane  fails  me,  both  alive ! 
I  thought  by  stirring  Rivers  to  this  quarrel. 
There  was  at  least  an  equal  chance  against  him. 
I  work  invisibly,  and,  like  the  tempter. 
My  agency  is  seen  in  its  effects. 
Well,  honest  Bertrand  I  now  for  Julia's  letter. 

C  Takes  out  a  letter.)    This  fond  epistle  of  a  love-sick 
maid, 
I've  sworn  to  give,  but  did  not  swear  to  whom. 
**  Give  it  my  love,**  said  she,  **  my  dearest  lord  r* 
Rivers  she  meant  i  there's  no  address    that's  lucky. 
Then  where's  the  harm  ?    Orlando  is  a  lord. 
As  well  as  Rivers,  loves  her  too  as  well. 
(Breaks  open  the  letter.)  I  must  admire  your  style— your 
pardon,  fair  one. 

{Buns  over  it.)    I  tread  in  air--methinks  I  brush  the 
stars. 
And  spurn  the  subject  world  which  rolls  beneath  nie«— 
There's  not  a  word  but  fits  Orlando's  case 
As  well  as  Rivers'  ;~tender  to  excess- 
No  name— twill  do ;  his  faith  in  me  is  boundless ; 
Then,  as  the  brave  are  still,  he's  unsuspecting. 
And  credulous  beyond  a  woman's  wei^ess. 


S06  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

(  Oomg  out  he  fpies  the  dagger,)  Orlando's  dagger !  to! 

'tis  greatly  thoaght* 
This  may  do  oobla  senrioe ;  racli  a  thmoM  1 
My  geuius  catches  fire  !  the  bright  idea 
Is  formed  at  once,  and  fit  for  instant  action. 

lExit. 


ACT  V. 
ScBiCB— 2%0  Oarden, 


Ser,  'Twas  here  we  were  to  meet;  where  doesjie 
stay? 
This  compound  of  strange  contradicting  parts. 
Too  flexible  for  virtue,  yet  too  virtooua 
To  make  a  flourishing,  successful  villain. 
Conscience !  be  still,  preach  not  remorse  to  me ; 
Remorse  is  for  the  luckless  failing  villain. 
He  who  succeeds  repents  not ;  penitence 
Is  but  another  name  for  ill  success. 
Was  Nero  penitent  when  Rome  was  burnt  ? 
No ;  but  had  Nero  been  a  petty  villain. 
Subject  to  laws  and  liable  to  fear, 
Nero  perchance  had  been  a  penitent. 
He  comes.— This  paper  makes  him  all  my  own. 

Enter  Orlando. 

Or.  At  length  this  wretched,  tempest-beaten  bark 
Seems  to  have  found  its  haven :  Vm  resolved ; 
My  wavering  principles  are  fixed  to  honour ; 
My  virtue  gathers  force,  my  mind  grows  strong, 
I  feel  an  honest  confidence  within, 
A  precious  earnest  of  returning  peace. 

£er.  Who  feels  secure,  stands  on  the  verge  of  rain. 

{Aeide,} 
Trust  me,  it  joys  my  heart  to  see  you  thus : 
What  have  I  not  attempted  for  your  sake  1 
My  love  for  you  has  warped  my  honest  nature^ 
And  friendship  has  infringed  on  higher  duties. 

Or.  It  was  a  generous  fault. 

Ser.  Yet  'twas  a  fault 

Oh  fur  a  flinty  heart  that  knows  no  weakness. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  307 

Bat  iiiOT«a  riglit  onward,  onsedac'd  by  ftiendshipp 
And  all  the  weak  affections  I 

Or,  Hear  me,  Bertnuid ! 

This  is  my  last  farewell ;  absence  alone 
Can  prop  my  8ta^g*ring  yirtue. 

Ber,  You're  resolved : 

Then  Julia's  favours  come  too  late : 

Or.  What  favours? 

Ber,  Nay,  nothing' :  I  renounce  these  weak  affections ; 
They  have  misled  us  both.    I  too  repent, 
And  will  return  the  letter  back  to  Julia. 

Or.  Letter  1  what  letter  ?    Julia  write  to  me  ? 
I  will  n..t  see  it.    What  would  Riven  say  ? 
Bertrand !  he  sav^d  my  life ;— I  x^ill  not  see  it. 

Ber.  I  do  not  mean  you  should :  nay,  I  refos'd 
To  bring  it  you. 

Or.  Refus'd  to  bring  the  letter  ? 

Ber.  Yes,  I  refus'd  at  first. 

Or.  Then  thou  hast  brought  it  ? 

My  faithful  Bertrand  I— come. 

Ber,  *Twere  best  not  see  it. 

Or.  Not  see  it  1  how  I  not  read  my  Julia's  letter ! 
An  empire  should  not  bribe  me  to  forbear. 
Come,  r<ome. 

Ber.  Alas,  how  frail  is  human  virtoe  I 

My  resolution  melts,  and  though  I  mean  not 
To  trust  you  with  the  letter,  I  must  teU  yoa 
With  what  a  thousand,  thousand  charms  she  gave  it. 
'*  Take  this,"  said  she,  '*  and  as  Orlando  reads  it. 
Attend  to  every  accent  of  Us  viHee ; 
Watch  every  little  motion  of  bis  eye ; 
Mark  if  it  sparkles  when  he  talks  of  Julia; 
If  when  he  speaks,  poor  Julia  be  the  theme  ; 
If  when  he  sighs,  his  bosom  heave  for  Julia : 
Note  every  trifling  act,  each  little  look. 
For,  oh  1  of  what  importance  is  the  least 
To  those  who  love  like  me  !'* 

Or.  Delidoos  poison ! 

0  how  it  taints  my  soul !  give  me  the  letter. 

(Bertrand  offers  ity  Orlando  refuKS.) 
Ha !  whereas  the  virtue  which  but  now  I.boaated  ? 
'Tis  lost,  'tis  gone— conflicting  passions  tear  me. 

1  am  again  a  villain.    Give  it — no ; 

A  spark  of  honour  strikes  upon  my  soul. 


306  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Take  back  the  letter ;  take  it  back,  good  B^rtnmi, 
Spite  of  myself  compel  me  to  be  just : 
1  will  not  read  it. 

Ber,  How  your  firiend  will  thank  yoo  I 

Another  day  makes  Julia  his  for  erer. 
Even  now  the  great  parilion  is  prepar'd ; 
There  will  the  nuptial  rites  be  solemnised. 
Julia  already  dressed  in  Inridal  robes, 
like  some  fair  victim 

Or.  O  no  more,  no  morsk 

What  can  she  write  to  me  ? 

Ber,  Some  prudent  counssL 

Or,  Then  wherefore  fear  to  read  it  f  Come,  111  Ten- 
ture; 
What  wondrous  harm  can  one  poor  letter  do  ? 
The  letter— quick— 4he  letter. 

Ber,  IMnce  you  force  me. 

{QivetU,) 

Or.  Be  firm,  ye  shivering  nerves  I  It  is  her  hand, 
(/2ea<2f.)  "  To  spare  my  blushes,  Bertrand  brings  yea 

this. 
How  have  you  wrongM  me  I  you  believed  me  false ; 
'Twas  my  compassion  for  your  friend  deceiv'd  you. 
Meet  me  at  midnight  in  the  great  pavilion ; 
But  shun  till  then  my  presence  ;  from  that  hour 
My  future  life  is  yours ;  your  once-lov*d  friend 
I  pity  and  esteem ;  but  you  alone 
Possess  the  heart  of  Julia." 

This  to  me ! 
I  dream,  I  rave,  *tis  all  Elysium  round  me. 
And  thou,  my  better  angel !  this  to  me  I 

Ber,  I'm  dumb ;  oh  Julia !  what  a  fall  is  thine ! 

Or.  What,  is  it  such  a  crime  to  love  ?  away 

Thy  moral  comes  too  late ;  thou  shouldst  have  urg*d 
Thy  scruple  sooner,  or  not  urgM  at  all ; 
Thon  shouldst— alas  t  I  know  not  what  I  say- 
But  this  I  know,  the  charming  Julia  loves  me. 
Appoints  a  meeting  at  the  dead  of  night  I 
She  loves !  the  rest  is  all  beneath  my  care. 

Ber,  Be  circumspect ;  the  hour  is  Just  at  hand  \ 
Since  all  is  ready  for  your  purposed  parting. 
See  your  attendants  be  dispos'd  aright, 
Near  the  pavilion  gate. 

Or.  Why  so  ? 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  309 

Ber,  'Tu  plain 

JaUft  most  be  the  partner  of  your  flight : 
*T1s  what  she  means,  yon  most  not  mind  her  straggles ; 
A  Httle  gentle  Tiolence  perhiHM, 
To  make  her  yield  to  what  she  had  resolr'd. 
And  save  her  pride ;  shell  thank  yon  for  it  after. 

Or,  Take  her  by  force  ?    I  like  not  that,  O  Bertrand, 
There  is  a  mutmons  spirit  in  my  blood. 
That  wars  against  my  conscience.    Tell  my  Julia 
I  will  not  fail  to  meet  her. 

Ber,  I  obey. 

Be  near  the  garden ;  I  shall  soon  return. 

[Bgit  Bebtrand. 

Or,  This  giant  sin,  whose  bulk  so  lately  scared  me, 
Shrinks  to  a  common  size ;  I  now  embrace 
What  1  but  lately  fearM  to  look  upon. 
Why,  what  a  progress  have  I  made  in  guilt  I 
Where  is  the  hideous  form  it  lately  wore  ? 
It  grows  femiliar  to  me ;  I  can  think. 
Contrive,  and  calmly  meditate  on  mischief. 
Talk  temperately  of  sin,  and  cherish  crimes 
I  lately  so  abhorred,  that  had  they  once 
But  glanced  upon  the  sur&ce  of  my  fancy 
I  had  been  terrified.    Oh  wajrward  conscience  I 
Too  tender  for  repose,  too  sear'd  for  penitence ! 

[B»U  Orlando. 
Seen«  changes  to  another  part  of  the  Garden — A  grand 
FamUon—  The  Moon  tihimng. 

Enter  Rivrrs  In  a  meloncAo^  attitude, 

Rh.  Ye  lovely  scenes  of  iong-remember*d  bliss  t 
fk^nes  which  I  hopM  were  Csted  to  bestow 
Still  dearer  blessings  on  a  beauteous  bride  t 
Tliou  gay  pavilion,  which  art  dress'd  so  fidr 
To  witness  my  espousals,  why,  ah,  why 
Art  thou  adomM  in  vain  ?    Yet  still  I  court  thee, 
For  Julia  lov'd  thee  once ;— dear  foithless  Julia  I 
Yet  is  she  false  ?    Orlando  swore  she  was  not : 
It  may  be  so,  yet  she  avoids  my  presence, 
Keeps  close  from  every  eye,  but  most  from  mine. 

Enter  Orlando. 

Or,   Ah!    Rivers  here?   would  I  hod  shuim'd  hit 

walks! 


310  THB  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

How  ihall  I  meet  the  man  I  mean  to  wrong? 

iltv.  Why  does  Orlando  thus  expose  his  healtii 
To  this  cold  air? 

Or.  I  ask  the  same  of  Biven  f 

JUv.  Because  this  solitude,  tUs  silent  hour 
Feeds  melancholy  thoughts,  and  soothes  my  soul. 
My  Julia  will  not  see  roe. 

Or,  How  ? 

Riv,  She  denies  ne 

Admittance  to  her  presence. 

Or.  (oiide.)  Then  I*m  lost, 

ConfirmM  a  yillain,  now  *tb  plain  she  loves  me. 

Bin.  She  will  not  pardon  me  one  single  fsult 
Of  jealous  lore,  though  thou  hadst  Glear*d  up  all. 

Or.  Wait  till  to-morrow,  all  will  then  be  known. 

Riv.  Wait  tiU  to-morrow  I   Look  at  that  pa?iUoB ; 
All  was  prepar*d ;  yes,  I  dare  tdl  tiiee  all, 
For  thou  art  honest  now. 

Or.  Catide.J  That  wounds  too  deeply. 

Riv.  Soon  as  the  midnight  bell  gare  the  glad  summon^ 
This  dear  pavilion  had  behdd  her  mine. 

Or.  All  will  be  well  to-morrow.  (Atide.)  If  I  stay 
I  shall  betray  the  whole. — Qood  night,  my  Rivers. 

Riv.  Good  night ;  go  yon  to  rest ;  I  still  shall  walk. 

[Rat  ORLANDOi 

Yes,  I  will  trace  her  haunts ;  my  too  fond  heart. 

Like  a  poor  bird  that^  haunted  from  its  nest. 

Dares  not  return,  and  knows  not  where  to  fix  ; 

Still  it  delights  to  hover  round  the  spot 

Which  lately  held  its  treasure ;  eyes  it  still. 

And  with  heart-breaking  tenderness  surveys 

The  scene  of  joys  which  never  may  return.  [  Exit. 

Scene  changes  to  another  part  of  tha  garden. 

Re-enter  Orlando. 

Or.  Did  he  say  rest  ?  talk'd  he  of  rest  to  mo  ? 
Can  rest  and  guilt  associate  ?  but  no  matter, 
I  cannot  now  go  back  \  then  such  a  prixe. 
Such  voluntary  love,  so  fisir,  so  yielding. 
Would  make  archangels  forfeit  their  allegiance ! 
I  dare  not  think ;  reflection  leads  to  madness. 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  311 


Enter  Bbetband. 

Bertraod !  I  wu  not  made  for  this  dark  work ; 
If y  bMrt  raeoila— {NMMT  BivmrB  1 

Ser.  What  of  Rivers? 

Or.  Tve  se«n  him. 

Ber,  Where? 

Or,  Before  the  great  pavilion. 

Ber.    (aside.)   That^  lucky,  saret  me  trouble ;  were 
heabenit, 
BtU  of  my  aefaeme  had  fiul*d. 

Or.  He*8  most  unhappy ; 

He  wiihM  me  rest,  spoke  kindly  to  me,  Bertrand ; 
How,  how  can  I  betray  him  ? 

Ser,  He  deceires  you ; 

He*8  on  the  watdi,  dse  wherefore  now  abroad 
At  tide  late  hovff  ?  beware  of  treadiery. 

Or.  I  am  myself  the  traitor. 

Ser.  Come,  no  more ! 

The  time  draws  near,  you  know  the  cypress  walk, 
'Tbdark. 

Or,  The  fitter  for  dark  deeds  like  mine. 

Ser,  I  have  prepar'd  your  men ;  when  the  bell  strikes 
Go  into  the  pavilion ;  there  youll  find 
The  blushing  maid,  who  with  fhint  screams  perhaps 
Wm  Mgn  resentment.    But  you  want  a  sword. 

Or.    A  sw<nd ! — I'll  murder  no  one~>why  a  sword  ? 

Ber,  *Tis  prudent  to  be  armM ;  no  words,  take  mine ; 
There  may  be  danger,  Julia  may  be  lost, 
This  night  secures  <a  loses  ber  for  ever. 
The  cypress  walk— spare  none  who  look  like  spies. 

Or,   (looking  at  the  nooriLJ  How  deeply  is  that  soul 
involvM  in  guilt. 
Who  dares  not  hold  communion  with  its  thoughts* 
Nor  ask  its^  what  it  designs  to  do  1 
But  dallies  blindly  with  the  genVal  sin. 
Of  unexamin'd,  undefined  perdition ! 

iSxit  OaLAMDOb 

Ser.  Thus  far  propitious  fortune  fills  my  sails. 
Yet  still  I  doubt  his  mOkiness  of  soul; 
My  next  exploit  must  be  to  find  out  Rivers, 
And,  as  from  JuUa,  give  htan  a  feign'd  message, 
To  join  her  here  at  the  pavilion  gate ; 
There  shall  Orlando's  well-arm'd  servants  meet  hira. 


31t  TBB  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 


Enter  {>mLM3no  9m  ih0  9iker  tide. 


Or,  Dn«r  thy  dna  evtiia  nmmi,  oh,  aigift!  bteek 

iMpirer  mA  eooeMler  or  fBol  crtaMB ! 

Thott  wisard  Biglit !  who  eoqjor'it  op  dark  tfaongMi, 

And  Bok'irt  hte  bold,  who  eke  wovild  itert  at  ff^ 

Beneath  thy  Tea  the  TillBiii  dares  to  act 

What  in  broad  day  he  wooU  not  dare  to  think. 

Oh,  night !  thoa  Ud^  the  dafger'i  point  froBB  men, 

Bot  eamt  thoa  Kreen  the  aaMMrin  fimn  Ume^? 

Shut  out  the  eye  of  Hear^  ?  extiii9ai*h  conertence? 

Orlieal  the  woandsofhmunir?   Oli,  no,  no,  no ! 

Yonder  the  goe»— 4he  guilty,  charming  Julia ! 

My  genius  drires  me  on— Jcdia,  I  come.  [JImu  iff, 

ScaiTB—  The  PamUcn. 

An  arched  door,  through  which  Julia  and  her  maid  come 
forward  on  the  stage. 

Julia.  Jmt  here?  not  come?  loolc  out,  my  faithAil 
Anna. 
There  was  a  time— oh,  time  for  erer  dear  1 
When  Rirers  wonld  not  make  liis  Julia  wait. 
Perliaps  he  blames  me,  thinks  the  appointment  bold. 
Too  daring,  too  unlike  his  bashful  Julia ; 
But  *twas  the  only  means  my  faithful  lore 
DevisM  to  sare  him  from  Oriando's  rashness. 
I  hare  kept  close,  refused  to  see  my  Rivers ; 
Now  all  is  still,  and  I  hare  ventured  forth. 
With  this  kind  maid,  and  virtue  for  my  guard. 
Come,  we'll  go  in,  he  cannot  sure  be  long. 

C  They  go  into  the  pavilion.) 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  313 


Enter  Oelamdo,  hi$  word  dravm  and  bloody ^  hi$  hair 

ditheoelled. 

Or.  What  have  I  done  Ni  dood  that  earns  damnation ! 
Where  shall  I  fly  ?  ah !  the  pavilion  door  1 
*Tis  open— it  Invites  me  to  flresh  guilt ; 
111  not  go  in— let  that  follen  angel  wait, 
And  curse  her  stars  as  I  do. 
C  The  midnight  beU  strike*.)    Hark !  the  bell ! 
Demons  of  darkness,  what  a  peal  is  that ! 
Again  1  *twill  wake  the  dead — I  cannot  bear  it  I 
*1!18  terrible  as  the  last  trumpet's  sound ! 
That  was  the  marriage  signal !    Powers  of  hell, 
What  blessings  have  I  blasted  I    Rivers !   Julia  ? 

(Julia  comes  out. 
Julia.  My  Rivers  calls ;  I  come,  I  come.— Orlando  \ 
Or,  Yes, 

Thou  beautiful  deceiver !  'tis  tliat  wretch. 
Julia.  That  peijur'd  friend. 
Or.  That  devil ! 

JuUa.  I'm  betray'd. 

Why  art  thou  here  ? 

Or.  Tliou  canst  make  ruin  lovely, 

Or  I  would  ask,  why  didst  thou  bring  me  here  ? 
Julia.  I  bring  thee  here  ? 
Or.  Yes,  thou,  .bright  falsehood  I  thou. 

Julia.  No,  by  my  hopes  of  heaven  ?  where  is  my 
Rivers  ? 
Some  crime  is  meant. 

Or.  (catches  her  hand.)  Julia  I  the  crime  is  done. 
Dost  thou  not  shudder  ?  art  thou  not  aroas*d  ? 
Art  thou  not  cold  and  blasted  with  my  touch  ? 
Is  not  thy  blood  congeal'd  ?  does  no  black  horror 
Fill  thy  presaging  soul  ?  look  at  these  hands ; 
Julia !  they're  stain'd  with  blood ;  blood,  Julkt,  blood  I 
Nay,  look  upon  them. 
Julia.  Ah !  I  dare  not    Blood ! 

Or.  Yea,  thou  dear  false  one,  with  the  noblest  blood 
Tliat  ever  stain'd  a  dark  assassin's  hand. 
Had  not  thy  letter  with  tho  guilty  message 
To  meet  thee  hero  this  hour,  blinded  my  honour, 
And  wrought  my  passion  into  burning  frenzy. 
Whole  worlds  should  not  have  bribed  mo. 
JuUa.  Letter  and  messngo  ? 


314  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

I  sAnt  thee  none. 
Or.  Then  Bertrand  haa  betrayed  me! 

And  I  have  done  a  deed  beyond  all  reach, 

All  hq[>e  of  mercy— I  have  marder'd  Rivers. 
Julia.  Oh  I  (ihefaUt  into  her  tnaid'M  curma.j 

Or.  O  rich  reward  which  love  prepares  for  murder  1 

Thus  hell  repays  its  instruments  1 

Enter  Guildford  wlh  servants. 

Guild.  Where  is  he? 

Where  is  this  midnight  murderer  ?  this  assassin  ? 
This  is  the  place  Oriando's  servant  nam*d. 

Or.  The  storm  comes  on.    *TiB  Guildford,  good  old 
manl 
Behold  the  wretch  accurst  of  Heaven  and  thee. 

Ouild.  Accurst  of  both  indeed.    How,  Julia  fainting) 

Or,  She's  pure  as  holy  truth ;  she  was  deceiv'd. 
And  so  was  I. 

Guild,  Who  tempted  thee  to  this  ? 

Or.  Love,  hell,  and  Bertrand. 

Julia,  (recovering.)    Give  me  back  ray  Rivers ; 
I  will  not  live  without  him.    Oh,  my  father  I 

Guild.  Father  I   I'm  none ;  I  am  no  more  a  fatlier ; 
I  have  no  child ;  my  son  is  basely  murder'd 
Aud  my  sweet  daughter,  at  the  fotal  news. 
Is  quite  bereft  of  reason. 

Or,  Seize  me,  bind  me : 

If  death's  too  great  a  mercy,  let  me  live : 
Drag  me  to  some  damp  dungeon's  horrid  gloom. 
Deep  as  the  centre,  dark  as  my  offences ; 
Come,  do  your  office,  take  my  sword :  oh,  Bertrand, 
Yet,  ere  I  perish,  could  it  reach  thy  heart ! 

(  They  seize  Oslando  i 

Julia.  I  will  not  long  survive  thee,  <*,  my  Rivers  5 

Enter  Rivbrs  with  the  dagger, 

Rio.  Who  calls  on  Rivers  with  a  voice  so  sad. 
So  full  of  sweetness  ? 
^^Hd,  Ah,  my  sen  1 

•'w^Mf  •Tishe,*tisher 

Julia  and  Rivers  run  into  each  othei'^s  arms.    Orlando 
breaks  from  the  guards,  and  falls  on  his  knees. 
Or.  He  Uves,  he  lives !  the  godUke  Rivers  lives  I 


THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD.  316 

Hear  it,  ye  host  of  heaven !  witness,  ye  saints  ! 
KeeordiDg  angels,  tell  it  in  yoor  songs ; 
Breathe  it,  celestial  spirits,  to  your  lutes, 
That  Rivers  lives! 

Julia.  Explain  this  wondrous  happiness  ? 

Biv.     *Twa8  Bertrand  whom  Orlando  killed;   tli 
traitor 
Has  with  his  dying  breath  confessed  the  wholo. 

Or.  Grood  sword,  I  thank  thee ! 

Biv.  In  the  tangled  masEO 

Orlando  missM  the  path  he  was  to  take. 
And  pass'd  through  that  where  Bertrand  lay  conceal'd 
To  watch  th'  event :  Orlando  thought  *twas  me, 
And  that  I  play'd  him  false  :  the  walk  was  dark. 
In  Bertrand*s  bloody  hand  I  found  this  dagger, 
V^th  whteh  he  meant  to  take  my  life ;  but  how 
Were  you  alarmed  ? 

Guild,  One  of  Orlando's  men. 

Whom  wealtJi  could  never  bribe  to  join  in  murder— 

Or,  Murder  1  I  bribe  to  murder  ? 

Biv.  No }  *twas  Bertrand 

Brib'd  them  to  that  curst  deed :  he  lov'd  my  sister. 

Or.  Exquisite  villain  1 

Guild.  Fly  to  Emmelina, 

If  any  epvrk  of  reason  yet  remain, 
Tell  her  the  joyful  news.    Alas,  she*s  hero  1 
Wildly  she  flies  1    Ah,  my  distracted  child ! 

Enter  Euublina  distracted. 

Em.   Off,  off  I    I  will  have  way  I  ye  shall  not  hold 
me: 
I  come  to  seek  my  lord ;  is  he  not  here  ? 
Tell  me,  ye  virgins,  have  ye  seen  my  love. 
Or  know  you  where  his  flocks  repose  at  noon? 
My  love  is  comely— sure  you  must  have  seen  him ; 
*Tis  the  great  promisor !  who  vows  and  swears ; 
The  peijnr*d  youth !  who  deals  in  oaths  and  breaks  them. 
In  truth  he  might  deceive  a  wiser  maid. 
I  lov*d  him  once ;  he  then  was  innocent ; 
He  was  no  murderer  then,  indeed  he  was  not; 
Be  had  not  kill'd  my  brother. 

Riv.  Nor  lias  now  ; 

Tliy  brother  lives. 

Em.  I  kuow  it — yes,  he  livoa 


316  THE  FATAL  FALSEHOOD. 

Among  the  chenil»im.    MurdVera  too  will  live  ; 

But  where  ?    ril  tell  you  where— dowu,  down,  down, 

down. 
How  deep  it  is  I  *tis  fathomless — ^"tia  dark  ! 
No— there's  a  pale  blue  flame — ah,  poor  Orlando ! 

Guild,  My  heart  will  burst. 

Or.  Fierce  mine,  and  that  will  ease  it. 

£m.  (comes  up  to  her  father.)  I  knew  a  maid  who 
lov'd— but  she  was  mad — 
Fond,  foolish  girl !    Thank  Heav'n,  I  am  not  mad ; 
Yet  the  afflicting  angel  has  been  with  me ; 
But  do  not  tell  my  father,  he  would  grieve ; 
Sweet,  good  old  man— perhi^[)s  he'd  weep  to  hear  it : 
I  never  saw  my  father  weep  but  once ; 
1*11  tell  you  when  it  was.    I  ^d  not  weep ; 
*Twas  when— but  soft,  my  brother  must  not  know  it, 
Twas  when  his  poor  fond  daughter  was  refused. 

GrwiM.  Who  can  bear  this  ? 

Or,  I  will  not  live  to  bear  it. 

Em.  (comet  up  to  Orlando.)  Take  comfort,  thou  poor 
wretch!  I^  not  appear 
Agunst  thee,  nor  shall  Rivers ;  but  blood  must. 
Blood  will  appear;  there's  no  concealing  blood. 
What's  that  ?  my  brother's  ghost — it  vanishes ; 

(Catches  hold  qf  Rivers.) 
Stay,  take  me  with  thee,  take  me  to  the  skies ; 
I  have  thee  fast ;  thou  shalt  not  go  without  me. 
But  hold— may  we  not  take  the  murd'rer  with  us  ? 
That  look  says— No.    Why  then  111  not  go  with  thee. 
Yet  hold  me  fast— tis  dark— I'm  lost— I'm  gone  (Dm.) 

Or.  One  crime  makes  many  needful ;  this  day's  sin 
Blots  out  a  life  of  virtue.    Good  old  man ! 
My  bosom  bleeds  for  thee ;  tliy  child  is  dead. 
And  I  the  cause.    'Tis  but  a  poor  atonement ; 
But  I  can  make  no  other.  (  Stabs  himself.) 

Biv.  What  hast  thou  done  ? 

Or.  F^U'd  up  the  measure  of  my  sins.    Oil,  mercy  ! 
Eternal  goodness,  pardon  this  last  guilt ! 
Rivers,  thy  hand ! — farewell !  foi^ve  me.  Heaven  I 
Yet  is  it  not  an  act  which  bars  forgiveness. 
And  shuts  the  door  of  grace  for  ever  ? — Oh !        (D*e$,) 

(TJie  curtain  falls  to  sqft  mitsic) 


EPILOGUE. 

WRITTEN  BY  R.  B.  SHERIDAN,  ESQ. 

SPOKEN  BY  MR  LBB  LEWES. 


Unhand  me,  gentlemen,  by  Heaven,  I  say, 
1*11  make  a  ghost  of  him  who  bars  my  way. 

IBehind  tKe  Sctmes, 

Forth  let  me  come — A  Poetaster  true. 
As  lean  as  Envy,  and  as  baneful  too ; 
On  the  dull  audience  let  me  vent  my  rage. 
Or  drive  these  female  scribblers  from  the  stage. 
For  scene  or  history,  we've  none  but  these. 
The  law  of  liberty  and  wit  they  seize ; 
In  tragic — comic — pastoral— they  dare  to  ploase. 
Each  puny  bard  must  surely  burst  with  spite, 
To  find  that  women  with  such  fame  can  writo. 
But,  oh,  your  partial  favour  is  the  cause, 
Which  feeds  their  follies  with  such  full  applause. 
Yet  still  our  tribe  shall  seek  to  blast  their  fame. 
And  ridicule  each  fUr  pretender^s  aim ; 
Where  the  dull  duties  of  domestic  life 
Wage  with  the  muse*s  toils  eternal  strife. 

What  motiey  cares  Gorilla^  mind  perplex. 
While  maids  and  metaphors  conspire  to  vex  1 
In  studious  dishabille  behold  her  sit, 
A  letter'd  gossip,  and  a  housewife  wit. 
At  once  invoking,  though  for  different  views. 
Her  gods,  her  cook,  her  milliner,  and  muse. 
Round  her  strewed  room  a  frippery  chaos  lies, 
A  chequprM  wreck  of  notable  and  wise ; 
Bills,  books,  caps,  couplets,  combs,  a  varied  ma.-)*. 
Oppress  the  toilet,  and  obscure  the  glass ; 
Unfinish'd  here  an  epigram  is  laid, 
And  there  a  inantna- maker's  bill  unpaid  : 


31S  EPILOGUE. 

Here  new-born  plaT>  foretaste  the  town*8  applause. 

There,  dormant  patterns  pine  for  f atore  gauze ; 

A  mond  eosay  now  is  all  her  care, 

A  satire  next,  and  thai  a  bill  of  fare  : 

A  scene  she  now  prpfeets,  and  now  a  dish. 

Here's  art  the  first— and  here— remove  with  fish. 

Now  while  tiiis  eye  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolls. 

That,  soberly  casts  ap  a  bill  for  coals ; 

Black  pins  and  daggers  fa  one  leaf  she  sticks. 

And  tnrs,  and  thread,  and  baUs,  and  thimbles  mix. 

Sappho,  tis  true,  long  rersM  in  epic  song, 
For  years  esteonVI  all  hoosehold  studies  Mrrong- ; 
When  <Ure  mishap,  tiumgh  nether  shame  nor  sin, 
Sai^iho  hemUt  and  not  her  muse,  lies  in. 
The  Tirgin  Nine  in  terror  fly  the  bower. 
And  matron  Jono  daims  despotic  power ; 
Soon  gothic  hags  the  dassic  lale  o'ertom, 
A  candIe-oq>  Boppiants  the  sacred  urn; 
Nor  books  nor  implements  escape  their  rage. 
They  spike  the  inkstand,  and  they  rend  the  page ; 
Poems  and  plays  one  bazbarooa  fiste  partake, 
Orid  and  Plantns  suffer  at  the  stake, 
Aad  Aristotle^s  only  saVd— to  wrap  plomb-cakc. 

Yet,  shall  a  woman  tempt  the  tragic  scene  ? 
And  dare — but  hold — I  must  repress  my  spleen  ; 
I  see  your  hearts  are  pledgM  to  her  aj^lause. 
While  Shakspeare^s  spirit  seons  to  aid  her  cause ; 
Well  i^eas'd  to  aid — since  o'er  his  sacred  bier 
A  female  hand  did  ample  trophies  roar. 
And  gaye  the  greenest  laurel  that  la  worshipp'd  there. 


POEMS. 


SIR  ELDRED  OF  THE  BOWER; 

A  LEGENDARY  TALE. 
IN  TWO  PARTS. 


Of  them  who.  wrapt  in  •arth  to  cold, 
No  man  the  ■miling  day  shall  viaw, 

Shoaid  many  a  tender  ule  be  told, 
For  miny  a_ tender  tbooght  is  dna 


L^jfUtmt. 


PART  I. 

O  nottra  Vita,  eVa  si  belU  in  vi«s! 
Com'  perde  agevolmente  in  nn  momento, 
Qnel,  ch'en  molt'  anni  a  grand  pena  ■'acqnista  ! 

/■cfrorM. 

There  was  a  young  and  valiant  knight. 

Sir  Eldred  was  his  name. 
And  never  did  a  worthier  wight 

The  rank  of  knighthood  daim. 

Where  gliding  Tay,  her  streams  sends  forth 

To  feed  the  neighbouring  wood» 
The  ancient  glory  of  the  north. 

Sir  Eldred's  castle  stood. 

The  knight  was  rich  as  knight  might  be 

In  patrimonial  wealth ; 
And  rich  in  nature's  gifts  was  he. 

In  youth,  and  strength,  and  health. 

Hp  did  not  think,  as  some  have  thought, 

Whom  honour  never  crown'd, 
The  fame  a  father  dearly  bought. 

Could  make  the  son  renown'd. 

p2 


922  SIR  BLDRED 

He  better  thooglit,  a  noMe  nre. 
Who  gallant  deeds  had  done. 

To  deeds  of  hardihood  ihoald  fire 
A  brare  and  gaUant  son. 

The  foirest  ancestry  on  earth 
Without  desert  is  poor : 

And  ererj  deed  of  farmer  worth 
Is  bat  a  daiffl  for  man. 


Sta'  Bdred*8  heart  was  erer  land, 

AliTe  to  (rity^s  call ; 
A  crowd  of  Tirtoes  graced  his  mind. 

He  lored,  and  felt  Cor  aO. 

When  merit  raised  the  sufferer's  nam«*. 
He  showered  his  bounty  then ; 

And  those  who  coold  not  prove  that  claim 
He  soccoar'd  still  as  men. 

But  sacred  tmth  the  muse  compels, 

His  errors  to  impart ; 
And  yet  the  mnse  reluctant  tells 
.   The  foolt  of  Eidred's  heart 

Thoogh  mUd  and  soft  as  infant  lore 

His  fond  affections  melt ; 
Though  all  that  kindest  spirits  provo 

Sir  £ldred  keenly  felt : 

Yet  if  the  passions  storm'd  his  soul. 

By  jealousy  led  on  ; 
The  fierce  resentment  scom'd  control. 

And  bore  his  virtues  down. 

Not  Thole's  waves  so  wildly  break. 
To  drown  the  northern  sliore ; 

Not  Etna's  entrails  fiercer  shake, 
Or  Scythians  tempests  roar. 

As  when  in  summer's  sweetest  dny, 

To  fan  the  fragrant  morn, 
The  sighing  breezes  softly  stray 

O'er  fields  of  ripeu'd  corn. 


OF  THE  BOWER.  323 

Sudden  the  lightning's  blast  descends, 

Deforms  the  ravaged  fit>Id8 ; 
At  once  the  various  ruin  blends, 

And  all  resistless  yields. 

But  when,  to  clear  his  stormy  breast, 

The  sun  of  reason  shone. 
And  ebbing  passions  sunk  to  rest. 

And  show'd  what  rage  had  done ; 

O  then  what  anguish  he  betrayed ! 

His  shame  how  deep,  how  truo ! 
He  view'd  the  waste  his  rage  had  m.ide. 

And  shndder'd  at  the  view 

The  meek*eyed  dawn,  in  saffron  robe. 

Proclaimed  the  opening  day, 
Up  rose  the  sun  to  gild  the  globe. 

And  hail  the  new-born  May ; 

The  birds  their  vernal  notes  repeat. 

And  glad  the  thickening  grove. 
And  featherM  partners  fondly  grcot 

With  many  a  song  of  love : 

When  pious  Eldred  early  rose 

The  Lord  of  all  to  hail : 
Who  life  with  all  its  gifts  bestows. 

Whose  mercies  never  foil  t 

That  done— he  left  his  woodland  glade, 

And  joumey*d  fiar  away ; 
Ho  loved  to  court  the  distant  shade. 

And  through  the  lone  vale  stray. 

Within  the  bosom  of  a  wood. 

By  circling  hills  embraced, 
A  little,  modest  mansion  stood. 

Built  by  the  hand  of  taste  : 

While  many  a  prouder  castle  fell. 

This  safely  did  endure  ; 
The  honso  where  guardian  virtues  dwell 

Is  sacred  and  secure. 


394  SIR  ELDRED 

Of  eglantine  an  humble  fence 

Around  the  mansion  stood, 
Wldch  servM  at  once  to  charm  the  sense, 

And  screen  an  infant  wood. 

The  wood  rec«iYed  an  added  grace, 

As  pleased  it  bent  to  look. 
And  viewM  its  ever  verdant  face 

Reflected  in  a  brook 

The  smallness  of  the  stream  did  well 
The  master^  fortunes  show ; 

But  little  streams  may  serve  to  tell 
The  source  from  which  they  flow. 

This  mansion  ownM  ui  aged  knight. 

And  such  a  man  was  he. 
As  Heaven  just  shows  to  human  sights 

To  tell  what  man  should  be. 

His  youth  in  many  a  well-fought  field. 
Was  train'd  betimes  to  war ; 

His  bosom,  like  a  well-worn  shield* 
Was  graced  with  many  a  scar. 

The  vigour  of  a  green  old  age 
His  reverend  form  did  bear ; 

And  yet,  alas !  the  warrior-sage 
Had  drained  the  dregs  of  care. 

And  sorrow  more  than  age  can  break. 
And  wound  its  hapless  prey, 

'Twas  sorrow  furrowM  his  firm  cheek. 
And  tum'd  his  bright  locks  gray. 

One  darling  daughter  sooth'd  his  caret* 
A  young  and  beauteous  dame, 

Sole  comfort  of  his  failing  years, 
And  Birtha  was  her  name. 

Her  heart  a  little  sacred  shrine, 
Where  all  the  virtues  meet. 

Anil  holy  hope  and  faith  divine 
Had  claimed  it  for  their  seat. 


"» 


OF  THE  BOWEK.  325 

She  lov^d  to  rmse  her  fragrant  bower 

Of  wild  and  rustic  taste, 
And  there  she  screen'd  each  fav'rite  flower 

From  eyery  ruder  blast. 

And  not  a  shrub  or  plant  was  there 

But  did  some  moral  yield. 
For  wisdom,  by  a  father's  care, 

Was  found  in  eyery  field. 

The  trees,  whose  foliage  fell  away 

And  with  the  summer  died, 
lie  thought  an  image  of  decay 

Might  lecture  human  pride. 

'While  fair  perennial  greens  that  stood. 

And  braved  the  wintry  blast, 
As  types  of  the  fair  mind  he  yiew'd 

Which  shall  for  ever  last. 

He  taught  her  that  the  gaudiest  flowerb 

Were  seldom  fragrant  found, 
But,  wasted  soon  their  little  powei-s, 

Dropt  useless  on  the  ground : 

While  the  sweet-scented  rose  shall  l)ist, 

And  still  retain  its  power. 
When  life's  imperfect  day  is  past. 

And  beauty's  shorter  hour. 

And  here  the  virgin  lov'd  to  lead 

Her  inoffensive  day. 
And  here  she  oft  retir'd  to  read. 

And  oft  retir'd  to  pray. 

Embower'd,  she  graced  the  woodland  shades 

From  courts  and  cities  far, 
The  pride  of  Caledonian  maids 

The  peerless  northern  star. 

As  shines  that  bright  and  ludd  star. 

The  glory  of  the  night 
When,  beaming  through  the  doudluss  air, 

She  sheds  her  silver  light. 


326  SIR  ELDRED 

So  Birtha  shone  1    Bat,  when  she  spoko 
The  muse  herself  was  heard, 

As  on  the  rarish'd  air  she  broke, 
And  thus  her  prayer  preferr'd  : 

"  O  bless  thy  Birtha,  Power  Supreme, 

**  In  whom  I  live  and  more, 
**  And  bless  me  most  by  blessing  him. 

**  Whom  more  than  life  I  love/' 

She  starts  to  hear  a  stranger's  voice, 

And,  with  a  modest  grace. 
She  lifts  her  meek  eye  in  surprise, 

And  sees  a  stranger's  face  : 

The  stranger  lost  in  transport  stood. 

Bereft  of  voice  and  power. 
While  she  with  equal  wonder  viewed 

Sir  Eldred  of  the  Bower. 

The  virgin  blush  which  spreads  her  cheek 

With  nature's  purest  dye. 
And  all  those  dazzling  beams  which  break 

Like  morning  from  her  eye. 

He  view'd  them  all,  and  as  he  vicw'd. 

Drank  deeply  of  delight  ; 
And  still  his  raptur'd  eye  pursued, 

And  feasted  on  the  sight. 

With  silent  wonder  long  tliey  gaz'd. 

And  neither  silence  broke ; 
At  length  the  sraother'd  passion  blaz  tl, 

Euamour'd  Eldred  spoke : 

"  O  sacred  virtue,  heav'nly  power! 

"  Thy  wondrous  force  I  feel : 
"  I  gaze,  I  tremble,  I  adore, 

"  Yet  die  my  love  to  tell. 

"  My  scorn  has  oft  the  dart  re|>eU'd 
*♦  Wliich  guileful  beauty  threw ; 

"  But  goodness  heard,  and  grace  beheld, 
"  Must  every  heart  subiUio." 


OF  THE  BOWER.  327 

Quick  on  the  ground  her  eyes  were  cast. 

And  now  as  quickly  rais'd : — 
Just  then  her  fother  haply  past. 

On  whom  she  trembling  gax'd. 

Good  Ardolph*8  eye  hit  Birtha  meets 

With  glances  of  delight ; 
And  thus  with  courteous  speech  he  greets 

The  young  and  graceful  knight : 

'*  O  gallant  youth,  whoe'er  thou  art, 

'*  Right  welcome  to  this  place ! 
**  There's  something  rises  at  my  heart 

•*  Which  says  I've  seen  that  face." 

<*  Thou  generous  knight,*'  the  youth  rcjoin'd, 

**  Though  little  known  to  fame, 
**  I  trust  I  bear  a  grateful  mind—* 

**  Sir  Eldred  is  my  name.*\ 

Sir  Eldred?"  Ardolph  loud  exclaimed, 

Renown'd  for  worth  and  power  ? 
For  yalour  and  for  virtue  fam'd, 
•*  Sir  Eldred  of  the  Bower  ? 

*  Now  make  me  grateful,  righteous  Heaven, 

"  As  thou  art  good  to  me, 
'*  Since  to  my  aged  eyes  'tis  given 

"  Sir  Eldred's  son  to  see !" 

Tlion  Ardolph  caught  him  by  the  hand, 

A^d  gaz'd  upon  his  face. 
And  to  his  aged  bosom  strained. 

With  many  a  kind  embrace. 

Again  he  view'd  him  o'er  and  o^er. 

And  doubted  still  the  truth, 
A  nil  ask'd  what  he  had  ask'd  before, 

Then  thus  addrest  the  youth : 

*•  Come  now  beneatli  my  roof,  I  pray, 

*'  Some  needful  rest  to  take, 
"  And  with  us  many  a  cheerful  day 

"  Tby  friendly  sojourn  make." 


328         SIR  ELDRBD  OF  THE  BOWER. 

He  enter'd  at  the  gate  straightway 

Sume  needlul  rest  to  take  ; 
And  with  them  many  a  cheerful  day 

Did  friendly  sojoom  make. 


SIR  ELDRED  OF  THE  BOWER. 


PART  II. 


Oncb— in  a  social  summer's  walk. 

The  gaudy  day  was  fled ; 
They  cheated  thne  with  cheerful  talk, 

"When  thus  Sir  Ardolph  said : 

**  Thy  father  was  the  firmest  firiend 

••  That  e'er  my  being  blest ; 
•*  And  ev'ry  virtue  Heaven  could  send, 

**  Fast  bound  him  to  my  breast. 

**  Together  did  we  learn  to  bear 
**  The  casque  and  ample  shield ; 

**  Together  leam'd  in  many  a  war 
**  The  deathful  spear  to  wield. 

<*  To  make  our  union  still  more  dear, 
**  We  both  were  doom'd  to  prove, 

*'  What  is  most  sweet  and  most  severe 
*'  In  heart-dissolving  love. 

**  The  daughter  of  a  n^ghbouring  knight 
*'  Did  tMf  fond  heart  engage ; 

**  And  ne*er  did  Heav'n  the  virtues  write 
**  Upon  a  fairer  page. 

'*  Hi*  bosom  felt  an  equal  wound, 
"  Nor  sigh'd  we  long  in  vain ; 

**  One  summer's  sun  beheld  us  bound 
"  In  Hymen's  holy  chain. 

•*  Thou  wast  Sir  Eldred's  only  child, 

•*  Thy  father's  darling  joy  j 
On  me  a  lovely  daughter  smii'd, 

'  On  me  a  blooming  boy. 


330  SIR  ELDRED 

"  lint  man  lias  woes,  has  doads  of  caro, 

••  That  dim  his  star  of  life— 
*'  My  arms  receiyM  the  little  pair, 

"  The  earth's  cold  breast  my  wife. 

"  Forgave,  thou  gentte  knight,  forgive, 

**  Fond  foolish  tears  will  flow ; 
"  One  day  like  mine  thy  heart  may  heave, 

"  And  mourns  its  lot  of  wo. 

"  But  grant,  kind  Heaven  1  thou  noV>r  mayst  know 

"  The  pangs  I  now  impart  { 
"  Nor  ever  feel  the  parting  blow 

*'  That  rives  a  husband^s  heart. 

"  Beside  the  blooming  banks  of  Tay, 

*'  My  angel's  ashes  sleep ; 
"  And  wherefore  should  her  Ardol|^  stay, 

"  Except  to  watch  and  weep  ? 

"  I  bore  my  beauteous  babes  away, 

"  With  many  a  gushing  tear ; 
"  I  left  the  blooming  banks  of  Tay, 

"  And  brought  my  darlings  here.      * 

'*  I  watch'd  my  little  household  cares, 
"  And  form'd  their  growing  youth  ; 

"  And  fondly  train'd  their  infant  years 
"  To  piety  and  truth." 

"  Thy  blooming  Birtha  here  I  see," 

Sir  Eldred  straight  rcyoiuM  ; 
"  But  why  thy  son  is  not  with  thee, 

"  Resolve  my  doubting  mind/' 

When  Birtha  did  the  question  hear, 

Slie  sigli'd,  but  could  not  speak  ; 
And  many  a  soft  and  silent  tear 

Stray'd  down  her  damask  cheek. 

Then  pass'd  o'er  good  Sir  Ardolph's  face, 

A  cast  of  deadly  palo ; 
But  soon  coropos'd,  with  manly  grace. 

He  thus  rcncw'd  his  tole  : 


OF  THE  BOWER.  331 

**  For  Urn  my  heart  too  mnch  has  bled ; 

"  For  him,  my  darUng  son, 
*•  Has  sorrow  prest  my  hoary  head : 

**  Bat  Heav'n's  high  will  be  done  I 

**  Scarce  eighteen  winters  had  rerolv*d, 

"  To  crown  the  circling  year, 
**  Before  my  valiant  boy  resolved 

**  The  warrior's  lance  to  bear. 

*'  Too  high  I  priz'd  my  natire  land, 

"  Too  dear  his  fame  I  held, 
"  T*  oppose  a  parent's  stem  command, 

"And  keep  him  from  the  field. 

"  He  left  me— left  his  sister  too, 

**  Yet  tears  bedew'd  his  f^tce — 
"  What  could  a  feeble  old  man  do  ? 

"  He  burst  from  my  embrace. 

"  O,  thirst  of  glory,  fatal  flame ! 

**  O,  laurels  dearly  bought! 
"  Yet  sweet  is  death,  when  cam'd  with  fume, 

"  So  yirtuous  Edwy  thought. 

"  Full  manfully  the  brare  boy  strove, 

"  Though  pressing  ranks  oppose ; 
"  But  weak  the  strongest  arm  must  prove 

'*  Against  an  host  of  foes. 

'*  A  deadly  wound  my  son  receives, 

"  A  spear  assails  his  side  t 
"  Grief  does  not  k{U--lor  Ardolph  lives 

"  To  tell  that  Bdwy  died. 

"  His  long-lov'd  mother  died  again 

"  In  Edwy*s  parting  groan ; 
•'  I  wept  for  her,  yet  wept  in  vain — 

*'  I  wept  for  both  in  one. 

"  I  would  have  died— I  sought  to  die, 
"  But  Heaven  restrained  the  thought, 

**  And  to  my  passion-clouded  eye 
"  My  helpless  Birtha  brought. 


^32  8IR  BLDRBD 

**  When,  lo  1  amy*d  in  robes  of  light, 

**  A  nyraph  celestial  came, 
**  She  clear'd  the  mists  that  dinun*d  my  sights 

**  Beligion  was  her  name. 

**  She  prov'd  the  diastisement  dirine, 

"  And  bade  me  kiss  the  rod ; 
**  She  taoght  this  rebel  heart  of  mice 

*«  Submission  to  its  God. 

"  Religion  taoght  me  to  sustain 

**  What  nature  bade  me  feel ; 
**  And  piety  relievM  the  pain 

**  Which  time  can  never  heaL" 

He  ceas'd— with  sorrow  and  delight 

llie  tale  Sir  Eldred  hears ; 
Then  weeping  cries — **  Thou  noble  kni^hty 

"  For  thanks  accept  my  tears. 

"  O  Ardolph,  might  I  dare  aspire 

*'  To  claim  so  bright  a  boon  I 
**  Gtood  old  Sir  Eldred  was  my  sire-r- 

*'  And  thou  hast  lost  a  son. 

'*  And  though  I  want  a  worthier  plea, 

*'  To  urge  so  dear  a  cause ; 
*'  Yet,  let  me  to  thy  bosom  be 

"  What  once  thy  Edwy  was. 

**  My  trembling  tongue  its  aid  denies ; 

"  For  thou  mayst  disapprove : 
"  Then  read  it  in  my  ardent  eyes, 

"  Oh  1  read  the  tale  of  love. 

"  Thy  beauteous  Birtha !" — "  Gracious  Power 

"  How  could  I  e'er  repine," 
Cries  Ardolph,  "  since  I  see  this  hour  ? 

•<  Yes— Birtha  shall  be  thine/* 

A  little  transient  gleam  of  red 

Shot  ftiintly  o*er  her  face, 
And  ov'ry  trembling  feature  eprviul 

With  sweet  disordered  grai'Q. 


OF  THE  BOWER.  338 

The  tender  father  kindly  smiled 

With  fulness  of  content ; 
And  fondly  eyed  his  darling  child. 

Who,  bashful,  blush'd  consent. 

O  then  to  paint  the  vast  dcli^^ht 

lliat  fiird  Sir  Eldred's  heart. 
To  tell  the  transports  of  the  knight 

Would  mock  the  muse's  art. 

But  evVy  kind  and  gracious  soul, 

Where  gentle  passions  dwell, 
Will  better  far  conceive  the  whole, 

Than  any  muse  cau  tell. 

The  more  the  knight  his  Birtha  knew. 

The  more  he  priz'd  the  maid ; 
Some  worth  each  day  produced  to  v'ew. 

Some  grace  each  hour  bctrayM. 

The  virgin  too  was  fond  to  charra 

The  dear  accomplish 'd  youth ; 
His  single  breast  she  strove  to  warm. 

And  crown'd,  with  love,  his  trutlu 

Unlike  the  dames  of  modem  days* 

Who  general  homage  claim  ; 
Who  court  the  universal  gazet 

And  pant  for  public  tame. 

Then  beauty  but  on  merit  smiled. 

Nor  were  her  chaste  smiles  soldt 
No  venal  father  gave  his  child 

For  grandeur  or  for  gold* 

The  ardour  of  young  Eldred^s  flame 

But  ill  rould  brook  delay. 
And  oft  he  press'd  the  maid  to  name 

A  speedy  nuptial  day. 

The  fond  impatience  of  his  breast 

*Twas  all  in  vain  to  hide, 
But  she  his  eager  suit  reprost 

With  modest  maiden  pride. 


334  SIR  BLDRED 

When  oft  Sir  Rldred  pren'd  the  day 

Which  was  to  crown  hki  troth. 
The  thoughtful  lire  would  ilgfa  and  say, 

**  O  happy  state  of  youth  1 

**  It  little  recks  the  woes  whidi  wait 

**  To  scare  its  dreams  of  joy ; 
**  Nor  thinks  to-morrow's  alter*d  fote 

**  Biay  all  those  dreams  destroy. 

**  And  though  the  flatterer  Hope  deceives, 
'    **  And  panted  prospects  shows ; 
**  Yet  man,  still  cheated,  stiU  believes 
**  Till  death  the  bright  scene  dose. 

**  So  look'd  fmf  bride,  so  sweetiy  mild, 

**  On  me  her  hezatfa  slave } 
**  But  whilst  she  iook*d,  and  whilst  she  smiled 

**  She  sunk  into  the  grave. 

"  Yet,  O  forgive  an  cHd  man's  care, 

**  Foi^ve  a  father's  seal ; 
**  Who  fondly  loves  must  greatly  fear, 

*'  Who  fears  must  greatly  feel. 


« 


Once  more  in  soft  and  sacred  bands 
'*  Shall  love  and  hymen  meet ; 
To-morrow  shall  unite  your  hands, 
*<  And— be  your  bless  complete !" 


The  rising  sun  inflam'd  the  sky. 

The  golden  orient  blush'd ; 
But  Birtha's  cheeks  a  sweeter  dyo, 

A  brighter  crimson  flush'd. 

The  priest,  in  milk-white  vestments  clad, 

Perform'd  the  mystic  rite ; 
Love  lit  the  haUow'd  torch  that  led 

To  Hymen's  chaste  delight. 

How  feeble  language  were  to  sp^ak 

Th'  immeasurable  joy, 
That  fir'd  Sir  Eldred's  ardent  choek, 

And  triumph'd  iu  hib  eye  I 


V 


OF  THE  BOWER.  335 

Sir  Ardolpk'B  ploRsoro  stood  confest, 

A  pleasure  all  his  own ; 
The  g^uarded  pleasure  of  a  breast 

Which  many  a  grief  had  knuwu. 

*TwBA  such  a  sober  sense  of  joy 

As  angels  well  might  keep ; 
A  joy  chastis'd  by  piety, 

A  joy  prepar'd  to  weep. 

To  recollect  her  scatter^  thought. 

And  shun  the  noon-tide  hour. 
The  lovely  bride  in  secret  sought 

The  coolness  of  her  bower. 

Long  she  remained— th*  enamoured  knight 

Impatient  at  her  stay ; 
And  all  unfit  to  taste  delight 

When  Birtha  was  away ; 

Betakes  him  to  the  secret  bower ; 

His  footsteps  softly  move ; 
Impelled  by  ev'ry  tender  power, 

He  steals  upon  his  love. 

O,  horror  1  horror  I  blasting  sight  I 

He  sees  his  Birtha*s  charms, 
Reclin*d  with  melting,  fond  delight* 

Within  a  stranger's  arms. 

Wild  frenzy  fires  his  flrauUc  hand, 

Distracted  at  the  sight. 
He  flies  to  where  the  lovers  stand. 

And  stabs  the  stranger  knight. 

*'  Die,  traitor,  die  I  thy  guilty  flames 

«  Demand  th*  avenging  steel  I"-— 
"  It  is  my  brother,'*  she  exclaims, 

« »Ti8  Edwy— O  farewell  1»' 

An  aged  peasant,  Edwy*8  guide. 

The  good  old  Ardolph  sought ; 
He  told  him  tliat  his  bosom's  pride, 

His  Edwy,  he  had  brought. 


336         p  SIR  ELDRED 

O  how  the  fiather*8  feelings  molt ! 

How  faint,  and  how  revive  ! 
Just  so  the  Hebrew  patriarch  felt. 

To  find  his  son  olive. 

Let  me  behold  my  darling's  face* 
**  And  bless  him  ere  I  die  1" 
Then  with  a  swift  and  vigorous  para 
He  to  the  bower  did  hie. 

O  sad  reverse ! — sunk  on  the  ground, 
His  slaughtered  son  he  view'd  ; 

And  dying  Birtha,  close  he  found, 
In  brother's  blood  imbrued. 

Cold,  speechless,  senseless.  Eld  red  near, 

Gaz'd  on  the  deed  he'd  done  ; 
Like  the  blank  statue  of  De-pair, 

Or  Madness  graved  in  stone. 

The  father  saw — so  Jephthan  6tood, 
So  tum'd  his  wu  -fraught  dye. 

When  the  dear,  destin'd  cldld  he  view'd. 
His  zeal  had  duom'd  to  die. 

He  luok'd  the  wo  he  could  not  spenlc. 

And  on  the  pale  corse  prcst 
His  wan,  discolourM  dying  check. 

And,  silent,  sunk  to  rdst. 

Then  Birtha  faintly  rais'd  her  eye, 
Which  long  had  ceas'd  to  stream, 

On  Eldred  fixed,  with  many  a  sigh. 
Its  dim  departing  beam. 

The  cold,  cold  dews  of  hastening  death. 

Upon  her  pale  face  stand ; 
And  quick  and  short  her  failing  breatli. 

And  tremulous  her  hand. 

The  cold,  cold  dews  of  Imstening  death. 

The  dim  departing  eye, 
The  quivering  hand,  the  short  quick  breath, 

He  view'd— and  did  not  die. 


OF  THE  BOWER,  337 


He  saw  her  splint  mount  in  air. 

Its  kindred  skies  to  seek ! 
His  heart  its  anguish  could  not  bear, 

And  yet  it  would  not  break. 

The  mournful  muse  fwbears  to  tell 
How  wretched  Eldred  died : 

She  draws  the  Grecian*  painter's  veil 
The  rast  distress  to  hide. 


Yet  Heaven's  decrees  are  just  and  wise. 

And  man  is  bom  to  bear : 
Joy  is  the  portion  of  the  skies ; 

Beneath  them,  all  is  care. 

Yet  blame  not  Heaven ;  Has  erring  man. 

Who  mars  his  own  best  joys ; 
Whose  passions  uncontrolled,  the  plan 

Of  promised  bliss  destroys. 

Had  Eldred  paused,  before  the  blow, 

His  hand  had  never  err'd } 
What  guilt,  what  complicated  wo. 

His.  soul  had  then  been  spar'd ! 

The  deadliest  wounds  with  which  toe  Ueed, 

Our  crimes  inflict  alone ; 
Man's  mercies  from  God's  hand  proceed, 

His  miseries  from  his  oum, 

•  In  the  celebrated  picture  of  the  sacrifice  of  IphSfenia,  Tlmaii- 
tbes  baring  exhausted  every  image  of  grief  in  the  bystanders,  threw 
a  veil  over  the  face  of  the  father,  whose  sorrow  be  was  utterly 
•ble  to  express.— Plin.  book  xxxv. 


THB 

BLEEDING   ROCK: 

OR. 

THB  METAMORPHOSIS  OF  A  NYMPH 
INTO  STONE. 


Tha  anaaal  wowid  allv'd 
Tha  SytiMi  damMU  to  Ummt  Ut  &M, 
la  a«nf»at  dittiaa  all  a  •aauaar'a  day ; 
Whila  aiMioth  Adoois  flram  Us  nadva  Rock 
Haa  pafpla  to  tha  taa,  ■appoe'd  with  blood 
Of  ThanuBai  yaattjr  «o«adad.— 


Whbrb  beaateoos  Belmont  *  rears  her  modest  brow 

To  view  Sabrina*s  silver  waves  below, 

Lir*d  young  Ianthb,  fair  as  beaaty*s  queen ; 

She  reignM  unrivall'd  in  the  sylvan  scene ; 

Hers  ev'ry  chann  of  symmetry  and  grace. 

Which  aids  the  triumph  of  the  fairest  face ; 

With  all  that  softer  elegance  of  mind. 

By  genius  heightened,  and  by  taste  refined. 

Yet  early  was  she  doom*d  the  child  of  care. 

For  hapless  love  subdued  th*  ill-foted  foir. 

Ah !  what  avails  each  c^>tivating  grace. 

The  form  enchanting,  or  the  fairest  foce  ? 

Or  what  each  beauty  of  the  heaven-bom  mind. 

The  soul  superior,  or  the  taste  refin'd  ? 

Beauty  but  serves  destruction  to  ensure ; 

And  tenKt  to  feel  the  pang  it  cannot  cure. 

Each  ndg^b'ring  youth  aspir'd  to  gain  her  hand. 
And  many  a  suitor  came  from  many  a  land : 

«  Belmont,  the  beaatiftil  teat  of  the  late  Mr  TUner,  in  Somenet- 
•hln.  OTerlooklof  the  Brietol  ehannel,  opfoslte  the  eot^nnetion  ot 
the  SeTem  and  Avon  riven.  —  Ed. 


THE  BLEEDING  ROCK.  339 

■U  In  rain  eadi  neis^Ving  youth  aspir'd, 
distant  suiUnv  all  in  min  admired. 
ne  to  hear,  yet  fearfol  to  offend, 
lover  the  ref us'd,  she  made  a  friend : 
meek  rc|}ection  wore  %o  mild  a  face, 
3  like  acceptance  leemM  it,  than  disgrace. 
mag  Polydore,  the  pride  of  mral  swains, 
wont  to  visit  Befanont's  blooming  plains. 
)  has  not  heard  how  Polydore  ooold  throw 
onerring  dart  to  wound  the  flying  doe  ? 
'  leave  the  swiftest  at  the  race  bdiind, 
r  moont  the  coarser,  and  outstrip  the  wind  ? 
1  melting  sweetness,  or  with  magio  fire, 
ithe  the  soft  flute,  or  sweep  the  well-Btrnng  lyre  ? 
a  that  flun*d  lyre  no  vulgar  mode  sprang, 
Graces  tan*d  it,  and  Apollo  strong. 
xdUo  too  was  once  a  shepherd  swain, 
fed  the  flock,  and  graced  the  rustic  plain, 
aaglit  what  charms  to  rural  life  belong, 
sodal  sweetness,  and  the  sylvan  song ; 
aoi^t  fisir  Wisdom  in  her  grove  to  woo, 
foys  how  predous,  and  her  wants  how  £bw  1 
savage  herds  in  mute  attention  stood, 
ravish*d  Echo  fill'd  the  vocal  wood ; 
sacred  sbters,  stooping  from  their  sphere, 
'ot  their  golden  harps,  intent  to  hear : 
Heaven  the  scene  survey'd  with  jealous  eyes» 
Jove,  in  envy,  calTd  him  to  the  sides, 
tung  Polydore  was  ridi  in  large  domains, 
oiling  pastures,  and  in  flow*ry  plafais  { 
1  these,  he  boasted  eadi  exterior  dUurm, 
fin  the  prudent,  and  tlM  eoU  to  warm ; 
fidrest  semUanee  of  desert  he  bore, 
eadi  fictttions  mark  of  goodness  wore; 
d  act  the  tendonese  he  never  fett, 
nrrow  soften,  and  in  anguish  mdt. 
sigh  elaborate,  the  firaudf ul  tear, 
joy  dissembled,  and  the  well-feign*d  fear, 
hese  were  his ;  and  his  eadi  treachVous  art 
;  steals  the  guileless  and  unpractis.'d  heart. 
»o  soon  he  heard  of  Air  lanthe's  fiime, 
as  each  enamonr*d  shepherd's  fiiv'rite  theme  ( 
im*d  the  rising,  and  the  setting  sun, 
shepherd's  fiav'rite  theme  was  never  done. 


340  THE  BLEEDING  ROCK. 

They  pnds'd  her  wit,  her  worth,  her  shape,  her  air 
And  even  inferior  beaoties  own'd  her  fiihr. 
'   Soch  fweet  perfection  all  his  wonder  movM  ; 
He  saw,  admir'd,  nay,  fimded  that  he  loy*d : 
Bat  Polydore  no  gen*ro«is  passion  knew. 
Lost  to  all  troth  in  feigning  to  be  true. 
No  lasting  tenderness  could  warm  a  heart, 
Too  Tain  to  fe^  too  selfish  to  impart. 

Cold  as  the  snows  of  Bhodope  descend. 
And  with  the  chilling  waves  of  Hebrus  blend ; 
So  cold  the  breast  where  vanity  presides. 
And  the  whole  snlgect  soul  absorbs  and  guides. 

Too  well  he  knew  to  make  his  conquest  sure. 
Win  her  wit  heart,  yet  keep  his  own  secure. 
So  oft  he  told  the  well  imaging  tale, 
So  oft  he  swore— how  shouM  he  not  prevail  ? 
The  well-imagin*d  tale  the  nymfdi  bdiev'd ; 
Too  unsuspecting  not  to  be  deceiv'd : 
She  lov*d  ttie  youth,  she  thought  herself  beloved. 
Not  blu8h*d  to  praise  whom  every  maid  approv'd. 
The  conquest  once  achieved,  the  brightest  fisir. 
When  conquer*d,  was  no  longer  worth  his  care 
"^^en  to  the  world  her  passion  he  could  prove. 
Vain  of  his  power,  he  jested  at  her  love. 
The  peijur'd  youtii,  from  sad  lanthe  far. 
To  win  fresh  triumphs,  wages  cruel  war. 
With  other  nymphs  behold  the  wandVer  rove, 
And  tell  the  story  of  Ianthe*s  love ; 
He  mocks  her  easy  faith,  insults  her  wo. 
Nor  pities  tears  himself  had  taught  to  flow. 
To  sad  lanthe  soon  the  tale  was  borne, 
How  Polydore  to  treachery  added  scorn. 

And  now  her  eye^s  soft  radiance  *gan  to  fail. 
And  now  the  crimson  of  her  cheek  grew  pale ; 
The  lily  there,  in  faded  beauty  shows. 
Its  sickly  empire  o*er  the  vanquish^  rose. 
Devouring  sorrow  marks  her  for  his  prey. 
And,  slow  and  certain,  mines  his  silent  way. 
Yet  as  apace  her  ebbing  life  declin'd, 
Increasing  etrengtii  sustain'd  her  firmer  mind. 
"  O  had  my  heart  been  hard  as  his,**  she  cried, 
*'  An  hapless  victim  thus  I  had  not  died  : 
"  If  there  be  gods,  and  gods  there  surely  are, 
**  Insulted  virtue  doubtless  is  their  care. 


THE  BLEEDING  ROCK.  341 

*'  Theu  hasten,  righteous  powers !  my  tedious  fate, 

**  Shorten  my  woes,  and  end  my  mortal  date : 

"  Quick  let  yonr  power  transform  this  filling  Arsme, 

**  Let  me  be  any  thing  but  what  I  am  I 

'*  And  since  the  cruel  woes  I'm  doom'd  to  feel, 

'*  Proceed,  alas !  from  haying  lov'd  too  well : 

"  Grant  me  some  form  where  lore  can  hare  no  part, 

"  No  human  weakness  reach  my  guarded  heart ; 

**  Where  no  soft  toudi  of  passion  can  be  felt, 

**  No  fond  affection  this  weak  bosom  melt. 

**  If  pity  has  not  left  yonr  blest  abodes, 

**  Change  me  to  flinty  adamant,  ye  gods  I 

"  To  hardest  rock,  or  monumental  stone, 

**  So  may  I  know  no  more  the  pangs  I've  known ; 

**  So  shall  I  thus  no  farther  torments  prore, 

**  Nor  taunting  rivals  say  she  died  for  love : 

*'  For  sure,  if  ought  can  aggravate  our  wo, 

**  Tis  the  feignM  pity  of  a  prosperous  foe." 

Thus  pray'd  the  nymph— and  straight  the  pow'rs  addrettt 

Accord  the  weeping  suppliant's  sad  request. 

Then,  strange  to  tell !  if  rural  folks  say  trite. 
To  harden'd  rock  the  stifTning  damsel  grew ; 
No  more  her  shi4>ele8s  features  can  be  known. 
Stone  is  her  body,  and  her  limbs  are  stone ; 
The  growing  rock  invades  her  beauteous  face. 
And  quickly  petrifies  each  living  grace : 
The  stone,  her  stature  not  her  shape  retfdns ; 
The  nymph  is  vanish'd,  but  the  rock  remains. 
No  vestige  now  <tf  human  shi^pe  appears. 
No  cheek  for  blushes,  and  no  eyes  for  tears : 
Yet—strange  the  marvels  poets  can  impart  I 
Unchang*d,  unchillX  remain'd  the  glowing  heart ; 
Its  vital  spirits  desttnM  stIU  to  keep; 
It  scom'd  to  mingle  with  the  marble  heap. 

When  babbling  fame  the  wondrous  tidings  b<n>«. 
Grief  seiz'd  the  soul  of  peijur'd  Polydwe ; 
And  now  the  falsehood  of  his  soul  appears, 
And  now  his  broken  vows  assail  his  ears. 
Appall'd,  his  smitten  fancy  seems  to  view 
The  nymph  so  lovely,  and  the  friend  so  true. 
For  since  her  absence,  all  the  virgin  train 
His  admiration  sought  to  win  in  vain. 

Though  not  to  keep  him  ev'n  lanthe  knew. 
From  vanity  alono  his  falsehood  grew : 


342  THE  BLEEDING  ROCK. 

O  let  tlia  youthful  heart,  thus  warned,  beware 
Of  yaoity,  how  deep,  how  wide  the  snare ; 
That  half  the  miBchiefe  youth  and  beauty  know 
From  yanity's  exhanstless  fountain  flow. 

Now  deep  remorse  deprives  his  soul  of  rest. 
And  deep  compunction  wounds  his  guilty  breast: 
Then  to  the  fetal  spot  ia  haste  he  flew. 
Eager  some  yestig^  of  the  maid  to  view ; 
The  shapeless  rock  he  mark'd,  but  found  no  trace 
Of  lost  lanthe's  form,  lanthe's  face. 
He  fix*d  his  streaming  eyes  upon  the  stone, 
**  And  take,  sweet  midd,**  he  cried,  **  my  parting^  groani 
**  Since  we  are  doom*d  thus  terribly  to  part^ 
**  No  other  nymph  shall  oyer  share  my  heart ; 
**  Thus  only  Vm  ab6olv*d'*—he  rashly  cried. 
Then  plung*d  a  deadly  poniard  in  his  side  1 
Fainting,  the  steel  he  grasped,  and  as  he  fell 
The  weapon  pierc*d  the  rock  he  loy*d  so  well ; 
The  guilttess  sted  assail'd  the  Hying  part. 
And  stabbed  the  yital,  yulnerable  heart. 
And  though  the  rocky  mass  was  pale  before. 
Behold  it  ting*d  with  ruddy  streams  ci  gore  1 
The  life-blood  issuing  from  the  wounded  stone. 
Blends  with  the  crimson  current  of  his  own ; 
From  Polydore's  firesh  wound  it  flow*d  in  part. 
But  chief  emitted  firom  lanthe's  heart. 
And  though  revolving  ages  since  have  past. 
The  meeting  torrents  undiminish'd  last ; 
Still  gushes  out  the  sanguine  stream  amain. 
The  standing  wonder  of  the  stranger  swain. 

Now  once  a  year,  so  rustic  records  tell. 
When  o*er  the  heatii  resounds  the  midnight  bell ; 
On  eve  of  midsummer,  that  foe  to  sleep. 
What  time  young  maids  their  annual  vigils  keep. 
The  tell-tale  shrub,«  fresh  gathered  to  declare 
The  swains  who  false,  from  those  who  constant  are ; 
When  ghosts  in  clanking  chains  the  churchyard  waUc, 
And  to  the  wond'ring  ear  of  fancy  talk : 
When  the  scared  maid  steals  trembling  through  the 

grove. 
To  kiss  the  grave  of  him  who  died  for  love : 
When,  with  long  watchings.  Care,  at  length  opinrest, 

*  Midrammer'inen  oontultcd  u  oracular  by  Tillage  maida. 


THE  BLEEDING  ROCK.  343 

Steals  broken  panies  of  uncertain  rest ; 
Nay,  Grief  short  snatches  of  repose  can  take. 
And  nothing  but  Despair  is  quite  awake ; 
Then,  at  that  hour,  so  still,  so  fall  of  fear. 
When  an  things  horrible  to  thought  appear. 
Is  peijurM  Polydore  obsenr'd  to  rove 
A  ghaftly  spectre  through  the  gloomy  grove ; 
Then  to  the  rock,  the  Bleeding- Rock  repair. 
Where,  sadly  sighing,  it  dissolTes  in  ahr. 

Still  when  the  hovnrs  of  solemn  rites  return. 
The  Tillage  train  in  sad  processicm  mourn ; 
Plnek  erVy  weed  wUch  might  the  qpot  disgrace, 
And  plant  the  ftirest  fleld-flowYs  in  their  place. 
Around  no  noxious  plant  or  flowYet  grows, 
But  the  flnt  daffodil  and  earliest  rose : 
The  snowdrop  spreads  its  whitest  bostnn  here. 
And  golden  cowslips  grace  the  yemal  year : 
Here  the  pale  primrose  takes  a  fidrer  hue, 
And  eT*ry  yiolet  boasts  a  brighter  blue. 
Here  builds  the  woodlark,  here  the  foithfnl  doTtt 
Laments  his  lost,  or  woos  his  living  lore. 
Secure  from  harm  is  evV-y  hallow*d  nest. 
The  spot  is  sacred  where  true  lovers  rest. 
To  guard  the  rock  from  each  malignant  sprite, 
A  troop  of  guardian  qiirits  watch  by  night ; 
Ai<rft  in  air  each  takes  his  little  stand. 
The  neighb'ring  hill  is  hence  call'd  Fabry  Land.* 

«  By  oontraetion,  Failand.  a  hill  w«ll  knomi  la  SoBMrMtehire. 
not  fkr  flrom  this  to  fhc  Btotdlac-Book,  tnma  whidi  eoaaUntly 
lamw  s  crlmoB  cuncnt.  A  dnrira  to  aeeovnt  for  thto  appearance, 
gave  riaa  to  a  whhwlcal  conTanatloa,  which  piwhiSMl  IhtM  slifbt 


[The  eauM  to  tuflktoatly  ohrlooi  t  (he  sticaa  paaring  ttrnmch  a 
•tratmn  of  red  chalk,  whidi.  Indeed,  to  the  ernnmen  diaraeter  uf 
the  soil  In  that  part  of  the  county  of  8oaiertet->Boi] 


AN  HEROIC  EPISTLE 

TO 

MISS  SALLY  HORNE, 

(aobd  three  tears.) 

Tuunge«t  Daughter  of  Dr  HORMB,  late  Bishop  of  Norwich. 

Written  on  the  blanli  learei  of  "  MOTHBR  BCNCHiB  Talbs  ;**  and 
•bowing  the  superiority  of  these  histories  to  most  others. 


To  thee  fair  creature,  Sally  Home,* 
And  sure  a  £urer  ne'er  was  bom ; 
A  grave  biographer  I  send. 
By  Newberry  in  the  churchyard  penn'd ; 
(Or,  if  to  truth  my  phrase  I  stinted. 
By  Newberry  in  tiie  churchyard  printed ;) 
Hight  Mother  Bunch— a  worthier  sage, 
Ne'er  filled,  I  ween,  th'  historic  page ; 
For  she,  of  kings  and  queens  can  prate, 
As  fast  as  patriotic  Kate ;  t 
Nor  vents  like  her,  her  idle  spleen. 
Merely  because  Hi*  king  or  queen. 
Kate,  who  each  subject  makes  a  slave. 
Would  make  each  potentate  a  knave ; 
Though  Britons  can  the  converse  prove, 
A  king  who  reigns  and  rules  by  love. 
While  Mother  Bunch's  honest  story, 
Unaw'd  by  Whig  unwarp'd  by  Tory ; 

*  She  married,  in  1791,  the  Rev.  Selby  Hele.  This  admirable 
piece,  therefore,  must  have  been  written  about  the  year  177S.— Ed. 

t  See  Mrs  Macaulay's  History  of  England.  [The  object  of  the 
female  historian,  in  this  once  celebrated  woric,  which  is  no  loafer 
read  or  heard  of,  was  to  render  monarchy  odious,  and  to  represent 
a  republican  goTemment  as  the  only  system  Ctvourable  to  liberty 
and  liappiness.  Mrs  M.:caulay  engaged  in  this  p€UrioHe  labour,  at 
the  instigation  and  expense  of  Thomas  Hollis,  a  fanatical  sealot  for 
levelliof  principles.-— Eo.] 


AN  HEROIC  EPISTLE.  345 

Paints  BOToeigiis  with  impartial  pen, 
Some  good,  some  bad,  like  other  men. 

Oh,  there  are  few  each  books  as  these, 
'Whidi  only  mean  to  teach  or  please ; 
Read  Mother  Bnnch,  then,  charming  Sally, 
Her  writings,  with  your  taste,  will  tally. 
No  pride  of  learning  she  displays. 
Nor  reads  one  word  an  hundred  ways ; 
To  please  the  yoong  she  lays  before  'em 
A  simple  tale,  tans  variorum : 
With  notes  and  margins  unperplext. 
And  comments  which  confiiae  Uie  text. 
No  double  senses  interfere 
To  pozzle  what  before  was  dear. 
Here  no  mistaken  dates  deceive  ye, 
Which  oft  occur  from  Home  to  lAwj. 
Her  dates,  more  safe  and  more  sublime. 
Seize  the  broad  phrase—**  Once  on  a  time.** 

Then  Mother  Bnnch  is  no  misleader 
In  dting  authors  who  precede  her ; 
Unlike  our  modem  wits  of  note. 
Who  purposely,  and  oft  misquote ; 
Who  injure  history,  or  intend  it. 
As  much  as  Kennicott*^  to  mend  it ; 
And  seek  no  less  the  truth  to  mangle. 
Than  he  to  dear  and  disentangle. 

These  short  dig^ressions  we  i^ply 
Our  author's  fome  to  magnify ; 
She  seeks  not  to  bewilder  youtii. 
But  all  is  true  she  gives  for  trutii : 
And,  till  to  analyse  youYe  able. 
Fable  is  safe  while  given  as  fiable ; 
As  mere  invention  you  recdve  it, 
Yon  know  'tis  fidse,  and  disbelieve  it; 
While  that  bad  chemistry  which  brings 
And  mixes  up  incongruous  things. 
With  genuine  fisct  invention  blending, 
As  if  true  history  wanted  mending ; 

*  Dr  Benjamin  Kennicott,  euon  of  Christ  Cburdi,  was  then 
employed  in  completing  »t  the  Oxford  press  his  great  edition  of  the 
Hebrew  Bible,  collated  flrom  all  the  MSS.  that  could  be  consulted 
by  himself  and  his  assistants,  at  home  and  abroad.  This  stupen- 
dous labour  occupied  twenty  years,  being  begun  in  1796,  and  endad 
Inl779.— Eo 

y  2 


346  AN  HBROIC  EPISTLE. 

Or  ta,r*riag,  to  midead  oar  youtii. 
Mere  fiOde  with  a  dash  of  truth ; 
In  all  these  heterofeneoos  tales 
The  ipjudidoiis  prefect  fiiils ; 
Of  tnUh  yoo  do  not  get  your  measure. 
And  of  pore  JicHon  lose  the  pleasure. 
But  Mother  Bunch  r^ects  such  arts, 
A  sounder  taste  her  wotIc  imparts. 

Then  if  for  prosporous  turns  you  look. 
There's  no  sudi  other  history  book. 
Old  authors  show,  nor  do  I  wrong  *em. 
How  tyrants  Bhar*d  the  world  anumg  *em  ; 
And  all  we  learn  of  ancient  times 
Are  human  woes  and  human  crimes. 
They  tell  us  nought  but  dismal  tales. 
How  Tirtue  dnks,  and  vice  preTails ; 
And  all  their  labours  but  declare 
The  miseries  of  the  good  and  £sir : 
How  one  braTO  captive  in  a  quarrel 
Was  tumbled  down-hiU  in  a  barrdll 
In  fiery  flames  how  sfnne  did  firy, 
Only  because  they  dar'd  not  lie ! 
How  female  victims  meet  their  doom. 
At  Anlis  one,  *  and  more  at  Rome ! 
How  ease  the  hero's  laurels  stain'd. 
How  Capua  lost  what  Cannae  gainM  I 
How  he,  whom  long  success  attends. 
Is  kill'd  at  home  among  his  friends ! 
How  Athens,  him  who  sery*d  so  well* 
Rewarded  with  an  oyster  shell  !f 
How  Nero  stabb*d  a  mother's  breast '. 
Ah,  barbarous  Clio,  %  spare  the  rest ; 
Conceal  these  horrors,  if  thou'rt  able. 
If  these  be  truth,  oh  give  me  fsble ! 
Till  real  deeds  are  fit  to  mention. 
Regale  my  feelings  with  invention. 

But  Mother  Bunches  morals  tell 
How  blest  all  were  who  acted  weU ! 
How  the  good  littie  girl's  regarded. 
And  boy  who  learns  his  book  rewarded ! 
How  loss  of  fovour  follows  rudeness, 
While  sugar-plums  repay  all  goodness  I 

*  Ii>higenia.  f  Aristides.  t  The  historic  muse. 


AN  HEROIC  EPISTLE.  347 

How  she  who  leams  to  read  or  write. 

Will  get  a  coach  OT  chariot  by  t; 

And  not  a  fiigot-maker^  dangfater 

Bat  has  it  at  her  christening  taught  her. 

By  some  inrited  fidry  goest, 

That  the  shall  wed  a  prince  at  least ; 

And  through  the  whole  this  truth's  pursued, 

That  to  be  bi4>py*s  to  be  good. 

If  these  to  life  be  contradictions, 

Mark  the  morality  of  Actions ; 

Azi(Mns  more  popular  they  teadi, 

That  to  be  good  is  to  be  rksh  I 

Tear  all  the  misses  marry  kings, 

And  diamonds  are  but  common  tilings ; 

While  dames  in  history  hardly  get  'em. 

Our  heroines  ope  their  mouths  and  spit  *em. 

Oh,  this  is  profitable  learning, 
TmBt  cold  historians*  dull  discerioing ; 
Who»  while  their  annals  they  impart. 
Expose  but  seldom  mend  the  heart. 
I  grant,  they  teach  to  know  mankind. 
To  learn  weYe  wretched,  weak,  and  blind : 
But  till  the  heart  from  vice  is  dear. 
Who  wants  to  know  what  passes  there  ? 
Tin  Hercules  to  cleanse  was  able. 
No  doubt  they  shut  th*  Augean  stable. 

Here  too  in  high  emphatic  tone 
The  power  of  female  worth  is  shown  ; 
ET*n  enterprising  Joan  of  Arc 
Falls  shOTt  of  true  heroic  mark ; 
Thalestria  was  a  mere  home-keeper. 
And  swift  Camilla  but  a  creeper. 
Here  deeds  of  ralour  are  as  common 
As  song  or  dance  to  real  woman ; 
And  meekest  damsels  find  it  facile 
To  storm  a  giant's  moated  castie ; 
Where  draw-bridges  do  open  fiy 
If  Tirgin  foot  approaches  nigh ; 
And  brazen  gates  with  twenty  locks. 
At  which  an  army  vainly  knocks. 
Fly  ope,  nor  on  their  hinges  linger. 
At  toudi  of  virgin's  little  finger. 

Tlien  slow  attacks,  and  tire8<ime  sieges, 
Wliich  history  makea  the  work  of  ages, 


348  AN  HEROIC  EPISTLE. 

Are  here,  by  means  of  foiry  power, 
Achiev'd  with  ease  In  half  an  hour. 
Tactics  I  <A«;y  prore  there^s  notiung  in  it» 
Who  conquer  kingdoms  in  a  minute  : 
They  never  hear  of  ten  years*  jars, 
(For  Troy^s  the  average  length  of  wars.) 
And  diplomatic  form  and  rule 
Might  learn  firom  Mother  Bunches  school. 
How  rapidly  are  state  intrigues 
Conveyed  with  boots  of  seven  long  leagues. 

Here  fiurther  too,  our  great  commanders 
Who  conquer'd  France,  and  rescued  Flanders, 
From  Mother  Bunches  Tales  might  hear 
Some  secrets  worth  a  general's  ear ; 
How  armies  need  not  stop  to  bait, 
And  heroes  never  drink  or  eat ; 
Wrapt  in  suUimer  occupation 
They  scorn  such  vulgar  renovation. 
Your  Britfoh  generals  cannot  keep 
Themselves  or  followers  half  so  cheap : 
For  men  and  horses,  out  of  books, 
Call,  one  for  com,  and  one  for  cooks  -, 
And  dull  historic  nags  must  stay 
For  provender  of  oats  and  hay : 
While  thete  bold  heroes  wing  their  flight 
Through  twenty  kingdoms  in  a  night ; 
Of  silvery  dew  they  snatch  a  cup. 
Or  on  a  slice  of  moonshine  sup ; 
And  while  they  fly  to  meet  their  queen, 
With  half  the  convex  world  between. 
Their  milk-white  palfreys  scorning  grass, 
.Tust  crop  a  rose-leaf  as  they  pass. 

Then  Mother  Bunch's  morals  strike. 
By  praising  friend  and  foe  alike. 
What  virtue  to  the  world  is  lost. 
Because  on  thy  ill-fated  coast, 
O  Carthage  I  sung  alone  by  foes. 
The  sun  of  history  never  rose ! 
Fertile  in  heroes,  didst  thou  own 
The  muse  that  makes  those  heroes  known  i 
Then  had  the  bright  reverse  appear'd. 
And  Carthaginian  truth  been  cleared : 
On  Punic  faith,  so  long  reviled, 
The  wily  African  had  smiled ; 


AN  HEROIC  EPISTLE.  310 

And,  poiribly,  not  much  had  enr'd, 
If  we  of  Roman  frand  had  heard. 

Then  leave  yonr  Robertaons  and  Bryants 
For  John  the  morderer  of  giants ; 
Since  all  mythology  profiue 
Is  quite  as  doabtfol,  quite  as  yain. 
Thouf^  Bryant,*  learned  friend  of  youth. 
His  fsble  consecrates  to  truth : 
And  Robertsont  with  just  applause 
Ifis  fliUsh'd  portraits  fsiriy  draws. 
Yet  history,  great  Raleigh  knew. 
And  knowing,  grier'd,  may  not  be  true ; 
For  how  the  facta  are  we  to  know 
Which  pass'd  a  thousand  years  ago ; 
When  he  no  just  account  could  get 
Of  quarrel  in  th*  adjacent  street  ? 
Though  from  his  chair  the  noise  he  heard. 
The  tale  of  each  relator  err'd4 

But  if  the  £eu;t*s  recorded  right. 
The  motive  seldom  comes  in  sight ; 
Hence,  while  the  furest  deeds  we  blame. 
We  often  crown  the  worst  with  fame. 
Then  read,  if  genuine  truUi  you'd  glean. 
Those  who  were  actors  in  the  scene ; 
Hear,  with  delight,  the  modest  Greek,  § 
Of  his  renownM  ten  thotuand  speak ; 
Hit  commentaries  B  read  again 
Who  led  the  troops  and  held  the  pen ; 

*  Jneob  Biyiint,   Em|.,   whoM  profomidly  emdits  work,  the 
•  Analjsis  of  Antieiit  Mythology,**  tben  jutt  pubUahrd,  wu  de- 

■ifood  to  pfovo  thai  all  ttM  UUIm  of  the  Pagan  theology  wen  do- 
tiTcd  flrooa,  and  were  perrenkuM  ol^  the  nered  Malory. 

♦  Dr  WnUam  Robertaoa  of  Bdinboifh,  antfaor  of  •*  The  History 
of  Charlea  V."  and  other  great  woriu. 

X  Thif  allodet  to  a  itory  told  of  Haleigh:  diat  when  a  prieooer 
in  the  Tower,  hearing  a  noiae  outilde  the  walla,  he  aent  to  inquire 
the  eaoae.  The  reports  of  dilferent  meaaengen  varied  in  all  tlie 
eireunutaneea  to  soeh  a  degree,  tliat  Sir  Waller  who  waa  then  em- 
ployed in  completing  his  **  History  of  the  World,**  Ml  into  a  reve- 
rie, and  eoncluded,  that  if  he  eoald  not  depend  on  the  aceomita  of 
what  had  passed  nearly  under  his  own  eyes,  how  eoold  he  be  eer- 
tain  of  the  relations  of  ancient  times  ?  Upon  this,  says  the  tale,  he 
threw  his  unpoblislied  work  into  the  fire,  and  deprived  posterity  of 
his  labours. 

6  Xenuphon.  ||  Cssar. 


350  AN  HBROIC  EPISTLE. 

The  way  to  eonqiiMt  best  he  show'd 
"Who  trod  ere  he  preacrib'd  the  road. 
Read  Ann,  for  lofty  periods  &m*d. 
Who  Charles^  age  adom'd  and  shani'd ; 
Bead  Clarendon,*  iinaw*d,  onbrib^ 
Who  ruled  th*  events  his  pen  describe ; 
Who  law,  and  courts,  and  senates  knew, 
And  saw  the  sources  whence  he  drew. 

Yet,  lorely  Sally,  be  not  firighten'd. 
Not  dread  to  hare  thy  mind  oolightenM ; 
Admire  with  me  the  fair  alliance 
WUdi  mirth,  at  Maodlin.f  makes  with  sdodce ; 
How  humour  may  with  learning  dwell, 
Go  ask  Papar-^iOT  he  can  tdL 

Marobrt  Two-shoes. 

*  ••  The  Hittorj  of  tha  Oreat  Rebellion,"  by  die  Earl  of  Claien 
don.— Ed. 

t  Dr  Home  was  at  thli  time  Preaident  of  Ifaffdalen  Cdlftge, 
Oxfoid,  where  ttiis  Uttle  poem  was  writtan.  [The  name  of  this 
dtstinguiihed  seminary  is  commonly  pronouneed  Maudlin,  not  only 
by  the  common  people,  but  by  the  students  ttiemselves.]    Bn. 


ODE 

FROM  a  M.  AT  BRISTOL,  TO 

DRAGON, 

MS  OASSICK'S  HOUSE-DOG,  AT  HAMPTON. 


Dbaoom  I  rince  lyrics  sore  the  mode. 
To  thee  I  dedicate  my  Ode, 

And  reason  good  I  {dead : 
Are  those  who  cannot  write,  to  blame 
To  draw  their  hopes  of  fiitare  Ciune, 

fYom  tiune  who  cannot  read? 

O  eoold  I,  like  tiiat  nameless  wight,* 
Ffaid  the  durfce  minote  when  to  write, 

TbBmoOiatentpora/andi/ 
Like  his,  my  mose  should  learn  to  whistle 
A  true  Henieal  Epuile, 

In  strains  wUeh  nerer  can  die. 

Father  of  lyrics,  tnn^U  Horace  I 
Can  ttiy  great  shade  do  noUdng  for  ns 

To  mend  the  British  lyre? 
Our  luckless  bards  have  broke  the  strings, 
Seiz'd  the  scar'd  muses,  fdnck'd  their  wings. 

And  put  out  all  their  fire.t 

*  See  tfi*  admirable  epbtle  to  Sir  WiUiam  Cbambtia. 

[The  poetical  ntire  here  mentioiied,  tar  many  yean  eadlcd  al- 
moet  at  mneh  q>eealaUoii,  reepeeting  its  orlffln,  aa  the  flv-fhrned 
Letters  of  Janivu.  It  is  now,  however,  settled  beyond  all  doabt, 
that  Mason  was  the  author  of  the  "  Heroie  Epistie.'^Bo. 

t  A  profusion  of  Odes  had  appeared  about  thte  time,  which  strik- 
ingly Ticdated  all  the  rules  of  lyrical  composition. 


352  ODE  TO  DRAGON. 

Dragon!  ttioa  tyrant  of  tlie  yard, 
Q/naX  namesake  of  that  forions  guard 

That  watched  the  findti  Heq>eriaa ! 
Thy  dio&eer  treasures  safely  keep. 
Nor  snatch  one  moment's  gnilty  sleep. 

Fidelity's  criterkm. 

O  Dragon !  change  witti  me  fhy  fate. 
To  me  give  np  ttiy  place  and  state. 

And  I  will  gire  thee  mine : 
I,  left  to  think,  and  thou  to  feed  I 
My  mind  enlai^'d,  thy  body  freed. 

How  blest  my  lot  and  Wne  I 

Then  shalt  thou  scent  the  ridi  r^ale 
Of  tortle  and  dilating  ale. 

Nay,  share  the  sav  Vy  Ut ; 
And  see,  what  thou  hast  never  seen. 
For  thou  hast  bat  at  Hampttm  been, 

A  feast  devoid  of  wit. 

Oft  shalt  thou  snuff  tiie  smoking  yenison, 
Devour'd,  altme^  by  hungry  denizen. 

So  fresh,  thoult  long  to  tear  it ; 
Tliough  Flaccas  *  tells  a  diff*reiit  tale 
Of  social  souls  who  chose  it  stale. 

Because  Vtxea  friend*  should  share  it. 

And  then  on  me  what  joys  would  wsut. 
Were  I  the  guardian  of  thy  gate 

How  useless  bolt  and  latch  ! 
How  vtun  were  locks,  and  bars  how  vain, 
To  shield  from  harm  the  household  train 

Whom  I,  from  love,  would  watch ! 

Not  that  'twould  crown  with  joy  my  life, 
That  Bowden,t  or  that  Bowden's  wife 

Brought  me  my  daily  pickings ; 
Though  she,  accelerating  fate. 
Decrees  the  scanty  mortal  date 

Of  turkeys  and  of  chickens  ? 

•  Hon.  lib.  li.     Sat.  2. 
t  The  gardeoer  and  poultrjr  woman  at  Hampton* 


ODE  TO  DRAGON.  3d3 

Though  fir'd  with  innocent  ambition, 
Bowden,  great  nature's  rhetorician. 

More  flowers  than  Burke  produces ; 
And  though  he's  skilled  more  roots  to  find. 
Than  ever  stock'd  an  Hebrew's  mind. 

And  knows  their  yaiions  uses. 

I'd  get  my  masters  ways  by  rote. 
Ne'er  would  I  bark  at  ragged  coat, 

N<x>  tear  the  tatteTd  sinner ; 
Like  him,  I'd  love  the  dog  of  merit. 
Caress  the  cur  of  broken  spirit. 

And  give  them  all  a  dinner. 

Nor  let  me  pair  his  biue-ey'd  dame 
With  Venus'  or  Minerva's  name. 

One  warrior,  one  coquet  j 
No;  Pallas  and  the  queen  of  beauty 
Shunn'd,  or  betray'd  that  nuptial  duty. 

Which  the  so  high  has  set. 

Whene'er  I  heard  the  rattling  coach 
Proclaim  their  long-desiTd  approach. 

How  would  I  haste  to  greet  'em ! 
Nor  ever  feel  I  wore  a  chain. 
Till,  starting,  I  perceiv'd  with  pain 

I  could  not  fly  to  meet  'em. 

The  master  loves  his  sylvan  shades. 
Here,  with  the  nine  melodious  maids. 

His  choiceat  hours  are  spent ; 
Yet  I  shall  hear  some  witling  cry, 
( Such  witling  from  my  presence  fly !) 

**  Garrick  will  soon  repent : 

**  Again  youll  see  him,  never  fear ; 
**  Some  half  a  dozen  times  a  year 

**  He  still  will  charm  the  age ; 
*'  Accnstom'd  long  to  be  admir'd, 
"  Of  shades  and  streams  hell  soon  be  tir'd, 

**  And  languish  for  the  stage." 

Peace  ! — To  his  solitude  he  bears 
The  full-blown  fame  of  thirty  years ; 


3M  ODE  TO  DRAGOX. 


Ha  wvrth.  Ii>  wil»  Hi  aoK  R«B>i; 


il 
To  Make  a  T( 

And  lay  Ui 
B«ldy  repdiiiig 
To  dare  ■Milt  to 

"  Enough  ofbott  Pre 


How  wise!  » dMtt  relraat  to  steal. 
The  rwaitj  of  life  to  feel. 

And  firom  iU  catea  to  fly*; 
To  act  one  eatan,  doaaestic  aoene. 
Earth's  bostle  and  the  grare  between 

Retire,  and  learn  to  die ! 


FLORIO: 

A  TALE, 
POS  FINE  GENTLEMEN  AND  FINE  LADIES. 

IN  TWO  PARTS. 


TO  THE  HOX.  HORACE  WALPOLE.* 


to  ae,  if  I  aiskt  hope  tlixt 
tofce  tke  Bberty  of 
of  y««ri 

far 


an  the  fitde  Tsloe. 


Iflaee  nader  your 
1  fear,  ntpraH  the  worii  with  a  Tery 
idea  of  By  poetical  peiren ;  h«t  I  ihall,  at 
,  he  sopected  of  hmfbtg  mmtt  taste,  and  of  keeping^ 
good  CMOipany,  when  I  confeas  tiiat  aome  of  the  oleas- 
antert  houn  of  my  life  hare  been  passed  in  your  ooorer- 
sataooL  I  should  be  mgost  to  yoor  rery  engaging  and 
well-bred  torn  of  wit,  tf  1  did  not  declare  that  among 
all  the  lirely  and  brilliant  Uungs  1  hare  heard  from  you, 
I  do  not  remember  erer  to  hare  heard  an  unkind  or  an 
ungenerous  one.  Let  me  be  allowed  to  bear  my  feeble 
testimony  to  your  temperate  use  of  this  charming  fa- 
culty, so  delightful  in  itself  but  nHiich  can  only  be  safely 
truirted  in  such  bands  as  yours,  where  it  is  guarded  by 
pcriiteness,  and  directed  by  humanity. 

I  bare  the  honour  to  be.  Sir, 
Tour  most  obliged  and  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

THE  AUTHOR. 
January  27th,  1786. 

*  Afterwards  Earl  of  OrfonL 


FLORIO. 


PART  I. 

Florio,  a  yoath  of  gay  renown. 
Who  llgar*d  modi  alxmt  tiie  town. 
Had  paas'd,  with  general  approbation. 
The  nukUah  forma  of  education ; 
Knew  what  was  proper  to  be  known, 
Th'  ettablishM  jargon  of  bon-ton ; 
Had  learnt,  with  rery  moderate  reading. 
The  whole  new  system  of  good  breeding. 
He  stadied  to  be  cold  and  rode, 
Thongh  native  feeling  would  intrude : 
Unlucky  sense  and  sympathy. 
Spoilt  the  rain  thing  he  strove  to  be. 
For  Florio  was  not  meant  by  nature, 
A  silly  or  a  worthless  creature : 

He  had  a  heart  disposed  to  fed. 
Had  life  and  spirit,  taste  and  zeal; 
Was  handsome,  generous ;  but,  by  fote 
Predestin'd  to  a  large  estate ! 
Hence,  all  that  graced  his  op'ning  days. 
Was  marr'd  by  Measure;  qioilt  by  praise. 
The  Destiny,  who  wore  the  thread 
Of  Florio^l  being,  sigh*d  and  said, 
"PooryouQil  this  cumbrous  twist  of  gdd 
More  than  my  shuttle  well  can  hold. 
For  whidi  thy  amdous  ftthera  toil*d^ 
Thy  white  and  even  thread  has  spoiled 
*Tis  this  shall  warp  thy  pliant  youth 
From  sense,  simpUdty,  and  truth ; 
Thy  erring  fire,  by  wealth  misled. 
Shall  scatter  pleasures  round  thy  head. 
When  wholesome  disdphne^s  control. 
Should  brace  the  nnews  of  thy  soul ; 
Coldly  thou'lt  toil  for  learning's  prize, 
For  why  should  he  that's  rich  be  wise  T* 


358  FLORIO. 

The  gnicioas  MartCT  <rf  mankind, 
¥nko  knew  ob  Tain,  corropt,  and  Uind, 
In  mercy,  tiioagh  in  anger  said. 
That  man  dioald  earn  kis  daily  bread : 
His  lot  inaction  renderi  wane, 
While  labour  nritigatm  tlie  corae. 
The  idle,  life^l  wont  hardens  bear. 
And  meet^  what  tofl  escapes,  deqpair! 

FoilgiTe,  nor  lay  the  Cult  on  me. 
This  mixture  of  mythriogy; 
The  muse  of  Paradise  has  deign*d 
With  tmflt  to  mingle  fiOries  feign*d ; 
And  thoagk  tiie  bard  vHio  woold  attain 
The  glorias,  Ifllton,  of  thy  strain. 
Win  nerer  reach  thy  style  or  thoaghts, 
He  may  be  like  tfaee-in  thy  firaltB. 

Bzhaosted  Florio,  at  the  age 
When  youth  shoold  msh  on  glar]r*8  stage ; 
When  life  shoold  open  fresh  and  new. 
And  ardent  hope  her  schemes  parsne  s 
Of  youthful  gaiety  bereft» 
Had  acaree  an  onbroaiAed  pleasure  left; 
He  found  already  to  Us  eost^ 
The  shining  gloss  <tf  life  was  lost ; 
And  {Measure  was  so  coy  a  prude. 
She  fled  tiie  m<M«,  tiie  more  pursued ; 
Or  i^  overtaken  and  caressed, 
He  loath'd  and  left  h«r  when  possessed. 
But  Florio  knew  the  worid ;  that  science 
Sets  sense  and  learning  at  defiance ; 
He  thought  the  worid  to  him  was  known. 
Whereas  he  only  knew  the  Town  : 
In  men  this  blunder  stall  you  find. 
All  think  their  little  set-Mankind. 

Thou^  high  renown  the  youth  had  gained. 
No  flagrant  crimes  his  life  had  stain*d; 
No  tool  of  felaehood,  slare  of  passion, 
B.at  spoilt  by  Custom,  and  the  Fashion. 
Though  known  among  a  certain  iei. 
He  did  not  like  to  be  in  debt ; 
He  shudder'd  at  the  dicer's  box. 
Nor  thought  it  very  heterodox 
That  tradesmen  should  be  sometimes  paid* 
And  bargains  kept  as  well  as  made. 


FLORIO.  359 

His  growing  credit,  as  a  sinner. 
Was  that  he  lik*d  to  spoil  a  dinner  ; 
Made  {deasnre  aad  made  bosiness  wait, 
And  still,  by  system,  came  too  late ; 
Yet  'twas  a  hopeful  indication, 
On  which  to  found  a  reputation : 
Small  habits,  well  pursued  betimes. 
May  reach  the  dignity  of  oimes ; 
And  who  a  juster  claim  {ureferr'd. 
Than  one  who  always  broke  his  word  ? 
His  mornings  were  not  spent  in  vice, 
Twas  lounging,  sauntering,  eating  ice  i 
Walk  np  and  down  St  James^l  street, 
Full  iBfty  times  the  youth  you*d  meet ; 
He  hated  cards,  detested  drinking. 
But  stroll'd  to  shun  the  toil  of  thinking 
*Twas  ddng  nothing  was  his  curse. 
Is  there  a  -vice  can  plague  us  wane  ? 
The  wretch  who  dig*  ^®  °^®  ^^  bread. 
Or  ploughs  that  others  may  be  fed. 
Feels  less  fstigne  than  that  decreed. 
To  M*"  who  cannot  think,  or  read. 
Not  all  the  peril  of  temptations, 
Not  all  the  conflict  of  the  passions. 
Can  quench  the  spark  <tf  glory^  flame. 
Or  quite  extinguish  ^^^rtue*s  name. 
Like  the  true  taste  for  genuine  saunter. 
Like  sloth,  the  soul's  most  dire  enchanter. 
The  active  flres  that  stir  the  1»>east, 
Her  poppies  duurm  to  iktal  rest ; 

They  rule  in  short  aad  qniek  soeeesaion. 
But  Sloth  keeps  <me  kng,  ftst  possession : 

Ambition's  reign  is  qniekiy  dos'd, 

Th'  usurper's  rage  is  soon  di^os'd ; 

Intemperance,  where  there's  bo  temptation. 

Makes  voluntary  abdication : 

Of  other  tyrants  short  the  strtfe, 

But  Indolbncb  is  king  for  life. 

The  despot  twists  with  soft  control. 

Eternal  fetters  round  tiie  soul. 
Yet  though  so  polished  Florio's  breeding. 

Think  him  not  ignorant  <tf  reading ; 

For  he  to  keep  him  from  the  vapours, 

Subscrib'd  at  Hookham's,  saw  the  papers ; 


3G0  FLORIO. 

Was  deep  in  poet^s-eomer  wit : 
Knew  what  was  in  Italics  writ ; 
Bzplain'd  lletitioiis  names  at  wffl. 
Each  gutted  syllable  could  lill : 
There  oft,  in  paragnnphs,  his  name 
Gare  symptom  sweet  of  growing  fiune  ( 
Though  yet  tiiey  only  serred  to  hint 
That  Florio  lor'd  to  see  in  print 
His  ample  boddes*  altered  shape, 
Hb  buttons  ehang'd,  his  rarying  cape. 
And  many  a  standard  phrase  was  his, 
Mlgfat  riral  bore,  or  banish  qmx  ; 
The  man  who  grasps  this  yonng  renown. 
And  early  starts  for  fiuhion's  crown ; 
In  time  that  glorious  prise  may  widd, 
"Whidi  dubs,  and  e^en  Newmarket,  yield. 

He  studied  while  he  dressed,  for  true  *tis. 
He  read  Compendmmtt  EstraeUt  BeauHe*, 
jibrigit,  Dicttormairett  Beeueilt, 
Mercurei,  Joumaux,  EgtraiU,  and  FeuUiei  t 
Ko  work  in  substance,  now  is  followed. 
The  Chemic  Extract  <mly^  swallow'd. 
He  liked  those  literary  cooks 
Who  skim  the  cream  of  others*  books ; 
And  ruin  half  an  author's  graces. 
By  plucking  bons-mots  from  their  places. 
He  wonders  any  writing  sells. 
But  these  spiced  mushrooms  and  morels ; 
His  palate  these  alone  can  touch. 
Where  every  mouthful  is  bonne  bouche. 
Some  phrase  that  with  the  public  took. 
Was  all  he  read  of  any  book  ; 
For  plan,  detail,  arrangement,  sjrstem. 
He  let  them  go,  and  never  missM  *em. 
Of  each  new  play  he  saw  a  part. 
And  all  the  jfncu  had  by  heart ; 
He  found  whatever  they  produce 
Is  fit  for  conversation's  use ; 
Learning  so  ready  for  display, 
A  page  would  prime  him  for  a  day : 
They  cram  not  with  a  mass  of  knowledge, 
Which  smacks  of  toil,  and  smells  of  collie. 
Which  in  the  memory  useless  lies. 
Or  only  makes  men— good  and  wise. 


FLORIO.  361 

This  might  hare  merit  once,  indeed 

But  now  for  other  ends  we  read. 
A  friend  he  had,  Bellario  hight, 

A  reasoning,  reading,  learned  wight ; 

At  least,  with  men  of  IlorioHt  breeding. 

He  was  a  prodigy  of  reading. 

He  knew  each  stale  and  rapid  lie 

In  tomes  of  French  philosophy ; 

And  then,  we  fidriy  may  presume, 

fVom  Pyrrho  down  to  David  Hume, 

rrwere  diflScuIt  to  single  out 

A  man  more  full  of  shallow  doubt ; 

He  knew  the  little  sceptic  prattle. 

The  8ophist*&  paltry  arts  of  battle ; 

TklkM  gravely  of  the  atomic  dance. 

Of  moral  fitness,  fote,  and  chance ; 

Admired  the  system  of  Lucretius, 

VHiose  matchless  verse  makes  nonsense  spedons  I 

To  this  his  doctrine  owes  its  merits. 

Like  poisonous  reptiles  kept  in  spirits, 

Though  sceptics  dull  his  scheme  rehearse. 

Who  have  not  souls  to  taste  his  verse. 
Bellario  founds  his  reputation 

On  dry,  stale  jokes,  about  creation  ; 
Would  prove,  by  argument  circoitous. 

The  combination  was  fortuitous. 
Swore  priests*  whole  trade  was  to  deceive 
And  prey  on  bigots  who  believe  ; 
W^th  bitter  ridicule  could  jeer. 
And  had  the  true  free^thinking  sneer. 
Grave  arguments  he  had  in  store. 
Which  have  been  answar*d  o'er  and  o'er ; 
.  And  used,  with  wondrous  penetrati<m. 
The  trite  old  trick  of  fUse  citation ; 
From  ancient  authors  fond  to  quote 
A  phrase  or  thought  they  never  wrote. 

Upon  his  highest  shelf  there  stood 
The  classics,  neatiy  cut  in  wood ; 
And  in  a  more  commodious  station. 
You  found  them  in  a  Ftench  translation : 
He  swears,  *tis  from  the  Greek  he  quotes, 
But  keeps  the  French— just  for  the  notes. 
He  worshipp'd  certain  modem  names, 

Who  history  write  in  epigrams, 

R 


1 


362  VLORIO. 


In  pointed  periods,  I 

And  aU  the  man 

^Hiidft  crowd  tlie  pert  and  florid  fttyle. 

Where  fiiet  k  dropt  to  raiae  ••mile ; 

Where  notes  indecent  or  proCMM^ 

Senre  to  raise  doobts^  Imt  not  explain : 

Where  all  is  spangle^  glitter*  show. 

And  traOt  is  orerlaid  bdow: 

Arts  seom'd  by  history^l  sober  mnse. 

Arts  Oarendon  disdain'd  to  nso. 

Whatever  the  saldeet  of  dabotf^ 
'Twas  larded  still  with  SQiptte  prate ; 
Begin  whaterer  thene  yon  will^ 
In  unbelief  he  lands  TOO.  still } 
The  good,  with  shamo  I  speak  it^  feel 
Not  half  this  proselytiiV  seal  s 
While  ofrid  thdr  Ifaster'B  cause  to  own, 
Content  to  go  to  heaven  aknes 
Hie  infidel  in  liberal  trim, 
Woold  carry  all  tiie  werid  witii  him ) 
Would  treat  his  vriie,  friend,  kindrad»  natiott. 
Mankind— with  what  y-^AmriMlation. 

Thoo^  Florio  did  not  quite  bdiere  him. 
He  thought,  why  should  n  friend  decdve  liiin  ? 
Much  as  he  priz'd  Bellaiio^  wit, 
He  liked  not  all  his  notibna  yet ; 
He  thought  him  charming,  i^easant,  odd. 
Bat  hoped  one  miglit  beUoTe  kk  Qod ; 
Yet  such  the  charms  that  graced  his  tongue, 
He  knew  not  how  to  think  him  wrong. 
Though  Florio  tried  a  thousand  ways. 
Truth's  insuppressiTe  torch  would  blaze : 
Where  once  her  flame  has  burnt,  I  doubt 
If  ever  it  go  fairly  out. 

Yet,  under  great  Bdlario^  care, 
He  ga^*d  each  day  a  better  air  j 
Which  many  a  leader  of  renown. 
Deep  in  the  learning  of  the  tonni 
Who  never  other  sdenoe  knew. 
But  what  from  that  prime  eoufce  they  drew : 
Pleased,  to  the  Opera  timy  rttpafar. 
To  get  recruits  of  knowledge  therb  x 
Mythology  gain  at  a  glance. 
And  learn  the  classics  from  a  dance ; 


FLORIO.  363 

In  Ovid  thej  iie*«r  cared  a  grot. 
How  &red  the  rentYoiu  Argooaat ; 
Yet  chann*d  they  see  Medeft  riae 
On  fiery  dragons  to  the  aldeSk    . 
For  Dido,*  thoogb  they  never  knew  her 
As  MaroHt  nu^^c  pendl  drew  het. 
Faithful  and  fond,  and  brokoi-hearted, 
Her  pions  vagab<nid  d^arted ; 
Yet  for  Didone,  how  they  roart 
And  Cora/  Ciora /  load  enoora. 

One  taste  Bellario*s  soul  poaMca*d« 
The  master  pasdon  of  his  breaat ; 
It  was  not  one  of  those  frail  joys, 
Which,  by  possession,  quickly  doys ; 
This  bliss  was  solid,  constant,  true, 
'Twas  action,  and  'twas  passion  too ; 
For  though  the  business  Blight  be  finish'd, 
The  pleasure  scarcely  was  diininish'd ; 
Did  he  ride  out,  or  sit,  or  walk. 
He  liv'd  it  o*er  again  in  talk ; 
Prolonged  the  fngitiTe  delight, 
In  words  by  day,  in  dreams  by  night. 
'Twas  eating  did  his  soul  allure, 
A  deep,  keen,  modish  ^oure ;  ■ 
Though  once  this  name,  as  I  opine. 
Meant  not  such  men  as  live  to  dine ; 
Yet  all  our  modem  wits  aasoin  as, 
ThatPs  all  they  know  of  BpLeoms : 
They  fondly  fancy  that  repletloii 
Was  the  ehUffgood  of  that  fiunM  Oreckm. 
To  live  in  gardens  IW  eC  flowMs, 
And  talk  philesophy  in  howats. 
Or,  in  the  covert  of  a  woo^ 
To  descant  on  the  nvere^n  good. 
Might  be  the  notion  of  their  fomider. 
But  they  have  notions  vastly  sounder  t 
Their  bolder  standards  they  erect. 
To  form  a  more  substantial  sect ; 
Old  Epicurus  would  not  own  *em, 
A  dinner  is  their  gutmnum  bonum. 
More  like  you'll  find  such  sparks  as  thece 
To  Epicurus*  deities ; 

*  Mkdka  and  Dido  were  Ihr  two  rei^ninf  Opera*  stthfai  Urns. 


364  FLORIO. 

like  them  they  mix  not  with  affidn. 
Bat  loll  and  laogh  at  haman  cares. 
To  beaux  this  c^erenoe  is  aUow*d 
They  choose  a  t/ofyk  for  a  doad ; 
Bellario  had  embraced  with  glee,*^ 
This  practical  philosophy. 

Yoang  Flocio's  &ther  had  a  friend. 
And  ne'er  did  Heaven  a  worthier  send ; 
A  cheerful  knight  of  good  estate. 
Whose  heart  was  warm,  whose  bounty  great. 
VHiere^er  his  wide  protection  spread. 
The  sick  were  eheer'd,  the  hungry  fed ; 
Resentment  vanished  where  he  came. 
And  lawsuits  fled  before  his  name ; 
The  old  esteem'd,  the  young  caress'd  him. 
And  all  the  smiling  village  Uess'd  him. 
Within  his  castle's  Gothic  gate, 
Sate  Plenty,  and  old-fashioned  State : 
Scarce  Prudence  could  his  iMunties  stint ; 
Such  diaracters  are  out  of  print : 
O I  would  kind  Heaven,  the  age  to  mend, 
A  new  edition  of  them  send. 
Before  our  tottering  castles  fidl. 
And  swarming  nabobs  seize  on  all ! 

Some  little  whims  he  had,  'tis  true. 
But  they  were  harmless,  and  were  few : 
He  dreaded  nought  like  alteration. 
Improvement  still  was  innovation ; 
He  said,  when  any  change  was  brewing. 
Reform  was  a  fine  name  for  ruin  ;* 
This  maxim  surely  he  would  hold, 
.   **  That  always  must  be  good  that's  old.** 
The  acts  which  dignify  the  day 
He  thought  portended  its  decay : 
And  fear'd  Would  show  a  falling  state. 
If  Stemhold  should  give  way  to  Tate : 
The  Churches  downfall  he  priedicted. 
Were  modem  tunes  not  intenUcted ; 
He  scom*d  them  all,  but  crown*d  with  palm 
The  man  who  set  the  hundredth  Psalm. 

Of  moderate  parts,  of  moderate  wit, 
But  parts  for  life  and  business  fit. 

*  TImm  linaf  were  written  many  yean  b«fbre  tiie  Preneh  Re- 
vultttiOB  had  tai  a  manner  realised  Sir  Gilberts  idc«  of  Reform. 


FLORIO.  3G5 

Whate'er  fhe  fheme,  he  did  not  fail 
At  Popery  and  the  French  to  rail ; 
And  started  wide,  with  fond  digression 
To  praise  the  Protestant  saccession. 
Of  Blackstone  he  had  read  a  part, 
And  all  Bum^s  Jostice  knew  by  heart. 
He  thought  man's  life  too  short  to  waste 
On  idle  things  caU*d  wit  and  taste. 
In  books,  that  he  might  lose  no  minute. 
His  rery  rerse  had  business  in  it. 
He  ne'er  had  heard  of  bards  of  Greece, 
But  had  read  half  of  Dyer^  Fleece. 
His  sphere  of  knowledge  still  was  wider. 
His  Oeoi^cs,  **  Philips  upon  Cider;** 
He  could  produce  in  proper  place. 
Three  apt  quotations  from  the  **  Qiase,"* 
And  in  the  hall,  from  day  to  day, 
Old  Isaac  Walton*s  Angler  lay. 

This  good  and  venerable  knight 
One  daughter  had,  his  soul's  delight : 
For  face,  no  mortal  could  resist  her, 
She  smiled  like  Hebe's  youngest  sister ; 
Her  life  as  lovely  as  her  face. 
Each  duty  mark'd  with  every  grace ; 
Her  native  sense  improved  by  reading. 
Her  native  sweetness  by  good  breeding : 
She  had  perus*d  each  choicer  sage 
Of  andent  date,  or  later  age;  . 
But  her  best  knowledge  still  she  found 
On  sacred,  not  on  daadc  ground  ; 
*Twas  thence  her  noblest  stmres  she  drew. 
And  well  she  practis'd  what  she  knew. 
Led  by  simplicity  divine,  ^ 

She  pleas'd,  and  never  tried  to  shine ; 
She  gave  to  chance  each  unschool'd  feature, 
And  left  her  cause  to  sense  and  nature. 

The  sire  of  Florio,  ere  he  died. 
Decreed  fair  Celia  Florio's  bride ; 
Bade  him  his  latest  wish  attend, 
And  win  the  daughter  of  his  friend ; 
When  the  last  rites  to  him  were  paid. 
He  charg'd  him  to  address  the  maid : 

*  A  Poem  by  Mr  Someirill*. 


366  FLORIO. 

Sir  6ilb«rt*8  heart  tii«  wish  approT*d, 
For  much  his  andent  friend  he  lor'd. 

Six  rafiid  months  like  lightning  fly. 
And  the  last  grey  was  now  tiirown  by ; 
Florio,  reluctant,  calls  to  mind 
The  orders  of  a  sire  too  Idnd : 
Yet  go  he  must }  he  must  fulfil 
The  hard  oonditians  of  the  will : 
Go,  at  that  predoos  hour  of  prime. 
Go,  at  that  swarming,  bustling  time, 
When  the  full  town  to  Joy  invites. 
Distracted  with  its  own  delights ; 
When  Pleasure  pours  tnm  her  liill  urn 
Each  tiresome  transport  in  its  turn ; 
When  dissipatioii's  altars  Uaxe, 
And  men  run  mad  a  thousand  ways ; 
When,  on  his  tablets,  there  were  found 
Engagements  for  foU  six  weeks  round ; 
Must  leave,  with  grief  and  desperation. 
Three  packs  of  cards  of  invitatioo, 
And  all  the  ravishing  delights 
Of  slavish  days  and  sleepless  nights. 

Ye  nymphs,  whom  tyrant  power  drags  dowi\ 
With  hand  despotic,  from  the  town. 
When  Almack's  doors  wide  open  stand. 
And  the  gay  partner^  offer'd  hand 
Courts  to  the  dance  j  when  steaming  rooms, 
Fetid  with  unguents  and  perfumes, 
Invite  you  to  the  mobs  polite 
Of  three  sure  balls  in  one  short  night ; 
You  may  conceive  what  Florio  felt. 
And  sympathetically  melt ; 
Yuu  may  conceive  the  hardship  dire. 
To  lawns  and  woodlands  to  retire, 
When,  freed  from  winter's  icy  chain. 
Glad  nature  revels  on  the  plain ; 
When  blushing  spring  leads  on  the  hours. 
And  May  is  prodigal  of  flowers ; 
When  passion  warbles  through  the  grove. 
And  all  is  song,  and  ail  is  love  ; 
When  new- bom  breezes  sweep  the  vale, 
And  health  adds  fragrance  to  the  gale. 


FLORIO. 


PART  II. 

Six  bays,  tmconsdoiu  oi  their  weight, 
Soon  lodg'd  him  at  ffir  Gilbert*!  gate ; 
His  trosty  Swiss,  who  flew  stiU  fester, 
Annoonc'd  th*  airiral  of  his  master : 
So  load  the  rap  which  shook  the  door, 
The  hall  re>echoed  to  the  roar ; 
Since  first  the  castle  walls  were  reared. 
So  dread  a  sound  had  ne'er  been  heard : 
The  din  alarm'd  the  frighten'd  deer. 
Who  in  a  comer  slunk  for  fear ; 
The  butler  thought  'twas  beat  of  drum. 
The  steward  swore  the  French  were  come ; 
It  tinged  with  red  poor  Florio's  face, 
He  thought  himself  in  Portland  Place. 
Short  joy  I  he  entered,  and  the  gate 
Clos'd  on  him  with  its  ponderous  weight. 

Who  like  Sir  Gilbert  now  was  blest  ? 
Vfifb.  rapture  he  embrao'd  his  guest. 
Fair  Celia  blush'd,  and  Florio  ntter'd 
Half  sentences,  w  rather  nratter*d 
Disjointed  words— as,  **  honour  1  pleasure ! 
*'  Kind—vastly  good.  Ma'am  {—beyond  measure  :** 
Tame  exj^tives,  with  which  dull  ftidiion 
Fills  vacancies  of  sense  and  passion. 

Yet,  though  discifde  of  eold  art, 
Florio  soon  found  he  had  a  heart ; 
He  saw ;  and  but  that  admiration 
Had  been  too  active,  too  like  passion ; 
Or  had  he  been  to  ton  less  true, 
Cupid  had  shot  him  through  and  through  ; 
But,  vainly  speeds  the  surest  dart, 
Where  fashion's  mail  defends  the  heart; 
The  shaft  her  cold  repulsion  found, 
And  fell,  without  the  power  to  wound : 


368  FLORIO. 

For  fiHidoii,  witli  a  tadOataf^yijt 
Dipp'd  in  her  lake  tlM  dai&igbojr; 
Tliat  lake,  wIm»w  ebSSSaof  waves  iaqiart 
The  gift  to  Creese  tke  wannert  keart : 
Yet  guarded  as  he  was  with  pU^fin, 
Wttk  sock  delight  he  eyed  tke  daooe, 
Fdond  kis  eold  heart  so  melt  before  ker. 
And  Mt  so  ready  to  adore  her. 
That  fMUoa  fear'd  her  sea  woold  yield. 
And  flew  to  snatck  Um  froBi  tke  fidd ; 
0*er  Mt  tonek'd  heart  her  «gis  tkrew. 
The  goddess  mother  straight  ke  knew  ; 
Her  power  ke  own'd,  she  saw  and  aauledk 
And  claimed  the  triumph  of  her  ehiU. 

Celia  a  taUe  stiU  supplied, 
WUek  modidi  Injury  might  deride : 
A  modest  feast  the  hope  eooTeys, 
The  master  eats  en  other  days ; 
While  goiyeous  banqoets  oft  betpeik 
A  hungry  honsdiold  all  the  week. 
And  decent  el^anee  was  ther^ 
And  plenty  with  her  liberal  air. 
But  Tolgar  plenty  gsre  offence. 
And  Bhock*d  poor  Florio's  nicer  sense. 
Patient  he  yielded  to  his  fiste. 
When  good  Sir  Gilbert  piled  his  plate ; 
He  bow*d  submissive,  made  no  question. 
But  that  'twas  sorereiga  for  digestion : 
But,  such  was  his  unlucky  whim, 
Pli^n  meats  would  ne'er  agree  with  him ; 
Yet  feign'd  to  praise  the  gotbic  treat, 
And,  if  he  ato  not,  seem'd  to  eat. 

In  sleep  sad  Florio  hop'd  to  find. 
The  pleasures  he  had  left  behind. 
Ho  dreamt,  and,  lo !  to  charm  his  eyes. 
The  form  of  Wel^e*  seem'd  to  rise  ^ 
llie  gracious  vision  wav'd  his  wand. 
And  banquets  sprung  to  Florio's  band ; 
Th'  imaginary  savours  rose 
In  tempting  odours  to  his  nose. 
A  bell,  not  fancy's  false  creation. 
Gives  joyful  "note  of  preparation;** 

*  A  celebrated  eook  Mid  conTectionsr. 


FLORIO.  369 

He  starts,  he  wakes,  the  bell  he  hears  ; 
Abu  I  it  rings  for  morning  prayers. 

But  how  to  tpeaad  next  tedious  morning. 
Was  past  his  posnble  discerning; 
Unable  to  amuse  himself. 
He  tumbled  every  well-rang*d  shelf ; 
This  book  was  doll,  and  that  was  wise, 
And  this  was  monstroos  as  to  rize. 
With  eager  joy  he  gobbled  down 
Wliate^er  related  to  the  town ; 
Whatever  looked  small,  whate'er  looked  new. 
Half-bound,  or  stitch'd  in  pink  or  blue ; 
Old  play-biUs,  Astley*s  last  year's  feats, 
And  <^era  disputes  in  sheets. 
As  these  dear  records  meet  his  eyes. 
Ghosts  of  departed  pleasures  rise ; 
He  lays  the  book  upon  the  shel^ 
And  leaves  the  day  to  spend  itself. 

To  cheat  the  tedious  hours,  whene'er 
He  sallied  forth  to  take  the  air. 
His  sympathetic  ponies  knew 
Which  way  their  lord's  affections  drew ; 
And,  every  time  he  went  abroad. 
Sought  of  themselves  the  London  road ; 
He  ask'd  each  mile  of  every  down, 
How  far  they  reckon'd  it  to  town  ? 
And  stiU  his  nimble  spixits  rise. 
Whilst  thither  he  directs  his  eyes ; 
But  when  his  coursers  back  he  guides. 
The  sinking  mercury  quick  subiddes. 
A  week  he  had  resolved  to  stay. 
But  found  a  week  in  every  day ; 
Yet  if  the  gentie  maid  was  by. 
Faint  pleasure  glistened  in  Us  eye ; 
Whene'er  she  spoke,  attention  hung 
On  the  mild  accents  of  her  tongue ; 
But  when  no  more  the  room  she  grace<1. 
The  slight  impression  was  effaced. 
Whene'er  Sir  Gilbert's  sporting  guests 
Retail'd  old  news,  or  older  jests, 
Florio,  quite  calm,  and  debonair, 
Still  humm'd  a  new  Italian  air ; 
He  did  not  even  feign  to  hear  *ero, 
But  plainly  show'd  he  could  not  bear  'em, 
K2 


370  FLORIO. 

Celia  perceiv'd  his  secret  thoaghts. 
Bat  Hked  the  yoath  with  all  his  lanlts ; 
Yet  'twas  nnUlce,  she  soMy  said. 
The  tales  of  lore  whi<Ai  die  had  read. 
Where  heroes  vowed,  and  sighed,  and  knelt ; 
Nay,  *twas  unlike  the  lore  she  felt ; 
Though  when  her  sire  the  youth  would  blame, 
She  dear'd  his  but  suspeeted  fhme. 
Ventured  to  hope,  with  ftdfring  tongue, 
*'  He  would  reform— he  was  but  young ;" 
Confess'd  his  manners  wrong  in  part, 
**  But  then— he  had  so  good  a  heart ! 
She  sunk  each  fisult,  eadi  virtue  rais'd. 
And  still,  where  truth  permitted,  prais'd ; 
His  interest  forther  to  secure. 
She  praised  his  bounty  to  the  poor , 
For,  votary  as  he  was  to  art, 
He  had  a  kind  and  melting  heart; 
Though,  with  a  smile,  he  used  to  own 
He  had  not  time  to  fe<Bl  in  tOMrn ; 
Not  that  he  blush'd  to  show  compassion,— 
It  chanced  that  year  to  be  the  fashion ; 
And  equally  the  modish  tribe. 
To  clubs  or  hospitals  subscribe. 

At  length,  to  wake  ambition's  flame, 
A  letter  from  Bellario  came ; 
Announcing  the  suinreme  delight. 
Preparing  for  a  certain  night, 
By  Flavia  fair,  retum'd  from  France, 
Who  took  him  captive  at  a  glance ; 
The  invitations  all  were  given ! 
Five  hundred  cards ! — a  little  heaven  ! 
A  dinner  first — he  would  present  him, 
And  nothing,  nothing,  must  prevent  him. 
Whoever  wished  a  noble  air. 
Must  gain  it  by  an  entree  there ; 
Of  all  the  glories  of  the  town, 
*Twas  the  first  passport  to  renown. 
Then  ridiculed  his  rural  schemes. 
His  pastoral  shades,  and  puriing  streams ; 
Sneer'd  at  his  present  brilliant  life, 
His  polished  sire,  and  high-bred  wife  I 
Thus,  doubly  to  inflame,  he  tried, 
Ilis  curiosity  and  pride. 


i 


FLORIO.  371 

The  yoath  with  afitated  heart, 
Prepared  dfarediy  to  depart ; 
Bat»  bound  in  honour  to  obey 
His  father,  at  no  distant  day 
He  pnmiised  soon  to  hasten  down, 
Though  business  called  him  now  to  town ; 
Then  fointly  hints  a  cold  proposal- 
Bat  leaves  it  to  the  knight's  disposal — 
Stammer'd  half  words  of  lore  and  duty. 
And  mutter'd  much  of—**  worth  and  beauty  i** 
Something  of  '*  passion,'*  then  he  dropp'd, 
**  And  hoped  his  ardour  '"—here  he  8t<^p'd ; 
For  some  remains  of  native  troUi 
Flushed  in  his  face,  and  checked  the  youth ; 
Yet  still  th*  ambiguous  suffUsimi, 
Ifight  pass  for  artless  love's  confusion. 
The  doting  fatho*  thought  'twas  strange, 
But  fancied  men,  like  times,  might  change ; 
Yet  own'd,  nor  could  he  cheek  Us  tongue. 
It  was  not  so  when  he  was  young. 
That  was  the  rdgn  of  love,  he  swore. 
Whose  halcyon  days  are  now  no  more. 

In  that  blest  age,  for  honour  fom'd. 
Love  paid  the  homage  virtue  daim'd ; 
Not  that  insipid,  dandling  Cupid, 
With  heart  so  hard,  and  air  so  stupid. 
Who  c(ddly  oonrts  the  charms  which  lie 
In  affectation^  half-dosed  eye. 
Love  then  was  honest,  gemdne  passion. 
And  manly  gallantry  ttie  fBdii<m ; 
Yet  pure  as  ardMit  was  the  flame 
Exdted  by  the  beanteous  dame ; 
Hope  could  subsist  on  slender  bounties. 
And  suitors  galloped  o'er  two  counties. 
The  baU*s  fair  partner  to  behold. 
Or  humbly  hope— she  caught  no  eold. 

But  mark  how  much  love's  annals  mend ! 
Should  beauty's  goddess  now  descend ; 
On  some  adventure  should  she  come, 
To  grace  a  modish  drawing-room ; 
Spite  of  her  form  and  heavenly  air 
What  beau  would  hand  her  to  her  chair  f 
Vmu  were  that  grace,  which  to  her  son, 
Disclosed  what  beauty  had  not  done  i 


372  FLORIO. 

Vain  were  tibat  motltm  which  betray^dv 
The  goddess  was  no  earth-born  maid ; 
If  noxious  Faroes  balefal  spright, 
"With  rites  infernal  ruled  the  night, 
The  group  absorbed  in  play  and  pelf 
Venus  might  call  her  doves  herself. 
As  Florio  passed  the  castle  gate, 
His  spirits  seem'd  to  lose  their  weight ; 
He  feasts  Us  lately  vacant  mind 
With  all  the  joys  he  hopes  to  find ; 
Yet  on  whate'er  his  fancy  broods. 
The  form  of  Celia  still  intrudes ; 
"Whatever  other  sounds  he  hears. 
The  voice  of  Celia  fills  his  ears ; 
Howe'er  his  random  thoughts  might  fly, 
Her  graces  dance  before  his  eye ; 
Nor  was  th*  obtrusive  vision  o'er. 
But  when  he  reach'd  Bellario's  door; 
The  friends  embraced  with  warm  delight. 
And  Flavia's  praises  crown'd  the  night. 

Soon  dawned  the  day  which  was  to  show 
Glad  Florio  what  was  heaven  below. 
Flavia,  admired  wherever  known, 
Th'  acknowledg'd  empress  of  bon-ton  ; 
O'er  fashion's  wayward  kingdom  reigus, 
And  holds  Bellario  in  her  chains : 
Various  her  powers ;  a  wit  by  day. 
By  night  unmatch'd  for  lucky  play. 
The  flattering,  fashionable  tribe. 
Each  stray  bon-root  to  her  ascribe ; 
And  all  her  "  little  senate  "  own 
She  made  the  best  charade  in  town ; 

Her  midnight  suppers  always  drew 

Whate'er  was  fine,  whate'er  was  new. 

There  oft  the  brightest  fome  you'd  see 

The  victim  of  a  repartee ; 

For  slander's  priestess  still  supplies 

The  spotless  for  the  sacrifice. 

None  at  her  polish'd  table  sit. 

But  who  aspire  to  modish  wit ; 

The  pertyUtgCt  the  unfeeling  jeer; 

The  dvil,  grave,  ironic  sneer ; 

The  laugh,  which,  more  than  censure,  wounds* 

Which,  more  than  argument,  confounds. 


FLORIO.  373 

There  the  fair  deed,  which  woald  engage 

The  wonder  of  a  m^er  age. 

With  unbelieving  scorn  it  heard. 

Or  still  to  seUsh  ends  referred  j 

If  in  the  deed  no  flaw  they  find. 

To  some  base  motive  'tis  assign'd ; 

When  malice  longs  to  throw  her  darC* 

But  finds  no  vulnerable  part. 

Because  the  Virtues  all  defend. 

At  every  pass,  their  guarded  friend } 

Then  by  one  slight  insinuation. 

One  scarce  perceiv'd  exaggeration  | 

Sly  ridicule,  with  half  a  word. 

Can  fix  her  stigma  of— absurd ; 

Nor  care  nor  skill  extracts  the  dart, 

V^th  which  she  stabs  the  feeling  heart } 

Her  cruel  caustics  inly  pain. 

And  scars  indelible  remain. 

Supreme  in  wit,  supreme  in  play. 
Despotic  Flavia  all  obey  , 
Smidl  were  her  natural  charms  of  flsee, 
Till  heighten'd  with  each  foreign  grace ; 
But  what  subdued  Bellario's  soul 
Beyond  philosophy's  control, 
Her  constant  tiU>le  was  as  fine 
As  if  ten  ny|ahs  were  to  dine ; 
She  every  day  produced  such  fish,  as 
Would  gratify  the  nice  Afddus, 
Or  realize  what  we  think  fsbaloos, 
rth*  bUl  of  fare  of  HeHogabalns. 
Yet  still  the  natural  taste  was  cheated, 
*Twas  delug*d  in  some  sanee  one  hated. 
'Twas  sauce  I  twas  sweetmeat !  'twas  confection! 
All  poignancy !  and  all  perfection  I 
Rich  erUremetSf  whose  name  none  knows, 
RagoutSt  tourtetf  tendroru,fricandeauXt 
Might  pique  the  sensuality 
O'  th*  hogs  of  Epicurus*  sty ; 
Yet  all  so  foreign,  and  so  fine. 
'Twas  easier  to  admire  than  dine. 

O  !  if  the  muse  had  power  to  tell 
Each  dish,  no  muse  has  power  to  spell ! 
Great  goddess  of  the  French  ctUsinei  , 

Not  \\  ith  unhallow'd  hands  I  mean 


374  FLORia 

To  Tiolftte  thy  secret  shade, 

WUch  eyes  profone  shall  ne'er  invade ; 

No!  of  thy  dignity  supreme, 

I  with  **  mysterious  rererenee,"  deem  ! 

Or  shoold  I  venture  with  rash  hand* 

The  vulgar  would  not  understand  i 

None  but  th*  initiated  know 

The  raptures  keen  thy  rites  bestow. 

Thus  much  to  tell  I  lawful  deem. 

Thy  works  are  never  what  they  seem  ; 

Thy  win  this  general  law  has  past. 

That  nothing  of  itself  shall  taste. 

Thy  word  this  high  decree  enacted, 

"  In  all  be  nature  counteracted  !* 

Conceive,  who  can,  the  perfect  Miss, 
For  *tis  not  given  to  all  to  guess. 
The  rapturous  joy  Bellario  found. 
When  thus  his  ev*ry  wish  was  crown'd. 
To  Florio,  as  the  best  of  Mends, 
One  dish  he  secretly  commends; 
Then  hinted,  as  a  special  fevour. 
What  gave  it  that  delicious  flavour ; 
A  mystery  he  so  much  reveres. 
He  never  to  unhallowM  ears 
Would  trust  it,  but  to  him  would  show 
How  fiEur  true  friendship's  power  could  go. 

Florio,  though  dazzled  by  the  fete. 
With  fiEur  inferior  transport  eat ; 
A  little  warp  his  taste  had  gain'd. 
Which,  unperceiv'd,  till  now,  remained  j 
For,  from  himself,  he  would  conceal 
The  change  he  did  not  choose  to  feel ; 
He  almost  wish'd  he  could  be  picking 
An  unsophisticated  chicken ; 
And  when  he  cast  his  eyes  around. 
And  not  one  simple  morsel  found, 
O  give  me,  was  his  secret  wish. 
My  charming  Celia's  plainest  dish  I  ■ 
Thus  Nature,  struggUng  for  her  rights. 
Lets  in  some  little,  casual  lights ; 
And  love  combines  to  war  with  fashion. 
Though  yet  twas  but  an  infant  passion; 

The  practis'd  Flavia  tried  each  art 
Oi  sly  attack,  to  steal  his  heart ; 


FLORIO.  375 


Her  forced  dvilities  oppress, 
Fatiguing  through  mere  gradousness ; 
While  many  a  gay,  intrepid  dame, 
By  bold  assault  essayed  the  same. 
FUl'd  with  disgust,  he  strove  to  fly 
The  artful  glance  and  fearless  eye ; 
Their  jargon  now  no  more  he  praises, 
Nor  echoes  back  their  flimsy  phrases. 
He  felt  not  Celia's  powers  efface. 
Till  weigh'd  against  bon-ton  grimace ; 
Nor  half  her  genuine  beauties  tasted, 
*Till  with  factitious  charms  contrasted, 
Th*  industrious  harpies  hover'd  round. 
Nor  peace  nor  liberty  he  found ; 
By  force  and  flattery  circumvented. 
To  play,  reluctant,  he  consented ; 
Each  dame  her  power  of  pleasing  tried. 
To  fix  the  novice  by  her  side ; 
Of  pigeons  he  the  very  best. 
Who  wealth,  with  ignorance,  possest : 
But  Flavia's  rhetoric  best  persuades 
That  sibyl  leads  him  to  the  shades ; 
The  fatal  leaves  around  the  room, 
Prophetic  tell  th'  approaching  doom ! 
Yet,  different  from  the  tale  of  old. 
It  was  the  fair  one  pluck'd  the  gold ; 
Her  arts  the  pondVous  purse  exhaust ; 
A  thousand  borrowed,  staked,  and  lost. 
Wakes  him  to  sense  and  shame  again. 
Nor  force  nor  fraud  could  more  obtain. 

He  rose,  indignant,  to  attend 
The  summons  of  a  ruin*d  friend. 
Whom  keen  Bellario's  arts  betray 
To  all  the  depth  of  desperate  play ; 
A  thoughtless  youth  who  n^ur  him  sat. 
Was  plundered  of  his  whole  estate ; 
Too  late  he  call'd  for  Florio's  aid, 
A  beggar  in  a  moment  made. 

And  now  with  horror,  Florio  views 
The  wild  confusion  which  ensues ; 
Marks  how  th*  dames,  of  late  so  fair. 
Assume  a  fierce  demoniac  air ; 
Marks  where  the  infernal  furies  hold 
Their  orgies  foul  o'er  heaps  of  gold ; 


376  FLORIO. 

And  tplrite  dire  appear  to  rise. 
Guarding  fhe  horrid  mysteries ; 
Marks  how  deforming  pasuons  tear 
The  bosoms  of  the  losing  fair ; 
How  looks  convols'd,  and  hafinirar'd  feces. 
Chase  the  scared  loves,  and  fiighten'd  grama 
ToQch'd  with  disdain,  with  horror  fir'd. 
(3elia !  he  mormor'd,  and  retired. 

That  night  no  sleep  his  eyelids  prest. 
He  thought ;  and  thonght*s  a  foe  to  rest : 
Or  if,  by  chance,  he  dos'd  his  eyes, 
What  hideous  ^ectres  round  him  rise ! 
Distemper'd  fiemcy  wildly  brings 
The  broken  images  of  things ; 
His  ruin'd  friend,  with  eyeball  flx'd. 
Swallowing  the  draught  despair  had  mix*d ; 
The  frantic  wife  beside  him  stands. 
With  bursting  heart  and  wringing  hands ; 
And  every  horror  dreams  bestow. 
Of  pining  want,  or  raving  wo. 

Next  mom,  to  check  or  cherish  thought. 
His  library's  retreat  he  sought ; 
He  view'd  each  book  with  cold  regard, 
Of  serious  sage  or  lighter  bard ; 
At  length,  among  the  motley  band. 
The  **  Idler  "  fell  into  his  hand ; 
Th*  Alluring  title  caught  his  eye, 
It  p..orai8*d  cold  inanity ; 
He  read  with  rapture  and  surprise, 
And  found  *twas  pleasant,  though  'twas  wise  | 
His  tea  grew  cold,  whilst  he,  unheeding, 
Pursued  this  reasonable  reading. 
He  wonderM  at  the  change  he  found, 
Th*  elastic  spirits  nimbly  bound ; 
Time  slipped,  without  disgust,  away. 
While  many  a  card  unanswered  lay ; 
Three  papers,  reeking  from  the  press. 
Three  pamphlets  thin,  in  azure  dress. 
Ephemeral  literature  well  known. 
The  lie  and  scandal  of  the  town  ; 
Poison  of  letters,  morals,  time ! 
Assassin  of  our  day's  fresh  prime  i 
These,  on  his  table,  half  the  day, 
Unthought  of,  and  neglected  lay. 


FLORIO.  377 

Florio  had  now  fiiU  three  hours  read. 
Hours  which  he  used  to  waste  in  bed ; 
His  pulse  beat  virtue's  vigorous  tone. 
The  reason  to  himself  unknown ; 
And  if  he  stopp'd  to  seek  the  cause, 
Fair  Celiacs  image  filled  the  pause. 
And  now,  announced,  Bellario's  name 
Had  almost  quenched  the  new-bom  flame : 
**  Admit  hhn,**  was  the  ready  word 
Which  first  escaped  him,  not  unheard ; 
When  sodden,  to  his  mental  sight. 
Uprose  the  horrors  of  last  night ; 
His  plunder'd  firiend  before  him  stands. 
And—**  not  at  home,**  his  firm  commands ; 
He  felt  the  conquest  as  a  joy 
The  first  temptation  would  destroy. 
He  knew  next  day  that  Hymen's  hand. 
Would  tack  the  slight  and  slippery  band. 
Which,  in  loose  bondage,  would  ensnare 
Bellario  bright  and  Flavia  fair. 
Oft  had  he  promis'd  to  attend 
The  nuptials  of  his  happy  friend : 
To  go— to  stay— alike  he  fears ; 
At  length  a  bolder  fiight  he  dares ; 
To  Celia  he  resolves  to  fly. 
And  catch  fresh  virtue  from  her  eye ; 
Though  three  full  weeks  did  yet  remain. 
Ere  he  engag'd  to  come  again. 
This  plan  he  tremblingly  embraced. 
With  doubtful  seal,  and  fluttering  haste ; 
Nor  ventur*d  he  one  card  to  read. 
Which  might  his  virtuous  scheme  impede ; 
Each  note,  he  dreaded  might  betray  him. 
And  shudder'd  lest  each  rap  should  stay  him. 

Behold  him  seated  in  his  chaise ; 
With  face  that  self-distrust  betrays ; 
He  hazards  not  a  single  glance 
Nor  through  the  glasses  peeps  by  chance. 
Lest  some  old  friend,  or  haunt  well  known. 
Should  melt  his  resolution  down. 
Fast  as  his  foaming  coursers  fly, 
Hyde  Park  attracts  Us  half-rais'd  eye ; 
He  steals  one  fearful,  conscious  look. 
Then  drops  his  eye  upon  his  book. 


378  FLORIO. 

Triompliant  he  perdits  to  go ; 
Bat  gives  one  righ  to  RoUeiurow. 
Long  M  he  yiew'd  Angurta's  towVs, 
The  Bight  reUgc*d  his  thhiMng  pow'ta } 
In  vain  he  bettor  ptani  reTolyes, 
White  the  soft  scene  Us  soul  4ls8<dyes ; 
The  tow'rs  once  loet,  his  Tiewhe  bends, 
\sniere  the  receding  smoke  eaoends ; 
But  when  nor  tmoke,  nor  tow'rs  arise. 
To  charm  Us  heart  or  cheat  Us  eyes ; 
When  once  he  got  entirdy  dear 
IVom  this  enfeebling  atmoqdiere ; 
His  ndnd  was  braced,  Us  spfaits  light. 
His  heart  was  gay.  Ids  Iramonr  1»ight ; 
Thus  feeling,  at  his  inmost  sool. 
The  sweet  reward  of  self-comtrol. 

Impatient  now,  and  all  aliye. 
He  thoof^t  he  never  should  arrive ; 
At  last  he  spies  Sir  OUbert's  trees; 
Now  the  near  batOements  he  sees  ; 
The  gates  he  enter'd  with  delight, 
And,  self-announced,  embraced  ttie  knight : 
The  yonth  his  joy  nnfeiga'd  exprest, 
The  knight  witii  joy  receiv'd  his  gaest. 
And  own'd,  with  no  unwilling  tongue, 
*Twas  done  like  men  when  he  was  young. 
Three  weeks  subducted,  went  to  prove, 
A  feeling  like  old-fiuhion*d  love. 
For  Celia,  not  a  word  she  said. 
But  bluah'd,  "celestial,  rosy  red  !** 
Her  modest  charms  transport  the  youth. 
Who  iHromis*d  everlastiDg  truth. 

Celia,  in  honour  of  the  day. 
Unusual  splendour  would  disfday : 
Such  was  the  charm  her  sweetness  gave. 
He  thought  her  wedgwood  had  been  t^ve  ; 
Her  taste  diffused  a  gracious  air. 
And  chaste  simplidty  was  there. 
Whose  secret  power,  though  silent,  great  is. 
The  loveliest  of  the  sweet  penates. 
Florio,  now  present  to  the  scene. 
With  spirits  light,  and  gradous  mien. 
Sir  Gilbert's  port  politdy  praises. 
And  carefully  avoids  French  phrases; 


k 


FLORIO.  379 

Endoree  the  duly  dissertation 

On  land-tax,  and  a  rain*d  nation ; 

Listens  to  many  a  tedious  tale 

Of  poachers  who  deserved  a  jail : 

Heard  all  the  business  of  the  quorum, 

Each  cause  and  crime  produced  before  *em  4 

Heard  them  abuse  with  complaisance 

The  language,  wines,  and  wits  of  Fnaee ; 

Nor  did  he  hum  a  single  air. 

While  good  Sir  Ottbert  flUM  his  chair. 

Abroad,  with  joy  and  grateful  pride,     * 
He  walks,  with  Celia  by  his  ride : 
A  thousand  dieerfnl  thoughts  arise. 
Each  rural  scene  enchants  hte  eyes ; 
With  transport  he  begins  to  look 
On  nature's  all-instructive  book ; 
No  objects  now  seem  mean  or  low. 
Which  point  to  him  firom  whom  they  flow. 
A  berry  or  a  bud  excites 
A  chain  of  reasoning  which  delights, 
Which,  spite  of  sceptic  ebullitionii. 
Proves  atiieists  not  the  best  logicians. 
A  tree,  a  brook,  a  blade  of  grass. 
Suggests  reflections  as  they  pass. 
Till  Florio,  with  a  sigh,  confest 
The  simplest  pleasures  are  the  best ! 
Bellario's  systems  sink  in  air. 
He  feels  the  perfect,  good,  and  fkir. 
As  pious  Celia  raised  the  theme 
To  holy  foith  and  love  supreme. 
Enlightened  Florio  leam*d  to  trace 
In  nature's  God  the  God  <rf  grace. 

In  wisdom  as  the  convert  grew. 
The  hours  on  rapid  pinions  flew ; 
When  call'd  to  ^ss,  that  Titus  wore 
A  wig  the  alter'd  Florio  swore ; 
Or  else,  in  estimating  time. 
He  ne'er  had  raark'd  it  as  a  crime. 
That  he  had  lost  but  one  dayi't  bl^ng. 
When  we  so  many  lose,  by  dressing. 

The  rest,  suflBce  it  now  to  say. 
Was  finish 'd  in  the  usual  way. 
Cupid,  impatient  for  his  hour. 
Reviled  slow  Themis'  tedious  power. 


380  FLORIO. 

Whose  parrhment  legends,  ugning,  sealing. 
Are  cruel  ferms  for  lore  to  deal  in. 

At  length,  to  Florio's  eager  eyes, 
Behold  the  day  of  bliss  arise  1 
The  golden  son  illumes  the  globe. 
The  burning  torch,  the  saffron  robe. 
Just  as  of  old,  glad  Hymen  wears, 
And  Cupid,  as  of  old,  appears 
In  Hymen's  train;  so  strange  the  case. 
They  hardly  knew  each  other*s  face ; 
Yet  b«th  confessed,  with  glowing  heart. 
They  never  were  designM  to  part ; 
Quoth  Hymen,  sure  youYe  strangely  slighted. 
At  weddings  not  to  be  invited ; 
The  reason^s  dear  enough,  quoth  Cupid, 
My  company  is  thought  but  stui^d. 
Where  Plutus  is  the  favourite  guest, 
For  he  and  I  scarce  speak  at  best. 

The  self-same  sun  which  joins  the  twain 
Soet  Flavia  severed  from  her  swain : 
BeUario  sues  for  a  divorce. 
And  both  pursue  their  sep'rate  C4>ursf>. 

Oh  wedded  love !  thy  bUsB  how  rare ! 
And  yet  the  ill-assorted  pair ; 
The  pair  who  choose  at  fiashion's  voice. 
Or  drag  the  chtdn  of  venal  choice. 
Have  little  cause  to  curse  the  state ; 
Who  maket  should  never  blame  their  fate ; 
Such  flimsy  ties,  say  where's  the  wonder, 
If  Doctor's  Commons  snap  asunder. 

In  either  case,  *tis  still  the  i^ife 
Gives  cast  and  colour  to  the  life. 
Florio  escaped  from  fashion's  sdiool. 
His  heart  and  conduct  learns  to  rule ; 
Conscience  his  useful  life  approves ; 
He  serves  his  God,  his  country  loves ; 
Reveres  her  laws,  protects  her  rights. 
And,  for  her  interests,  pleads  or  fights ; 
Reviews  with  scorn  his  former  life. 
And,  for  Ills  rescue,  thanks  his  wi/a. 


THR 


BAS  BLEU,  OR  CONVERSATION. 


ADDRESSBD  TO  MRS  VB8BY. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


TBS  folkminff  trifle  owes  its  birth  and  name  to  the  mistake  of  a 
fsreigiier  ofdiUiiietioii  who  gmtt  the  literal  appellation  of  the  Am- 
Hw  to  a  small  party  of  Mends,  who  had  been  often  called,  by  way 
ef  pleasantry,  the  BIm  8ioiin»gt.  These  little  societies  have  been 
sonetlnies  misrepresented.  Tliey  were  eomposed  of  persons  dis- 
tlofuished.  In  general,  Ibr  their  rank,  talents,  or  respectable  diar- 
aeter,  who  met  fire<inently  at  Mrs  Veeey's  and  at  a  (bw  other 
houses,  fiir  the  sole  purpose  of  eonTerwtion,  and  were  diilterent  in 
no  respeet  fkom  other  pattlei^  but  that  the  eompany  did  not  play 
ateards. 

Maj  the  Author  be  permitted  to  bear  her  grateM  testimony 
^whieh  will  not  be  suqeeted  of  flattety,  now  that  most  of  the  per- 
sons named  in  this  poem  are  gone  down  to  the  grave)  to  the  many 
pleasant  and  instructive  hours  slie  liad  the  honour  to  pass  in  this 
eompany  ;  in  which  learning  was  as  little  disflgured  by  pedantry 
good  taste  as  little  tinctured  by  afbetation,  and  general  conversa- 
tion as  little  disgraced  by  calumny,  levity,  and  the  other  censur- 
able errors  with  which  it  is  too  commonly  tainted,  as  has  peibaps 
Wen  known  in  any  society. 


THE  BAS  BLEU: 

OB. 

CONVERSATION. 

ADDSK88KD  TO  MHS  TSSKY. 


cskt!  of  yenethejvdgvaadlMeQd! 
.  while  my  idle  stzain  attend: 
Not  with  the  days  of  early  Oraeee, 
I  mean  to  o{.e  my  deader  pieet  t 
The  rare  sympoeinm  to  proclaim 
Which  crown*d  the  Athenians*  loeial  name ; 
Or  how  A8|Nitia*to  parties  shene^ 
The  first  Ba$-Meu  at  Atiiens  known ; 
Where  Socrates  nnhending  lat, 
With  Aldbiades  te  ehat ; 
And  Pericles  yoociisaftd  to  mix 
Taste,  wit,  and  mirth,  with  politics. 
Nor  need  I  stop  my  tale^  to  show. 
At  least  to  readsfi  sodi  as  yov. 
How  all  at  Borne  esteem^  pottle^ 
Sapp'd  with  LuddhiB  every  night ; 
Lucnllns,  ^h^mw  from  Pentas  eome^ 
Brought  oon^piestSb  ttid  htonght  <lientos  home. 
Name  bat  the  snppenialii'  ApeUo^ 
What  dasric  imagea  wfll  fDOow  I 
How  wit  flew  rooBdt  while  eaeli  might  take 
Conchylia  from  tlw  Laerine  lake ; 
And  Attic  salt,  and  Garom  saooe, 
And  lettaoe  from  the  ide  of  Cos ; 
The  first  and  hist  from  Oreeoe  transplanted, 
Us'd  here— becaose  the  riiyme  I  wanted : 
How  pheasants*  heads,  with  cost  collected. 
And  phenicopters*  stood  neglected. 
To  Uingh  at  Sdpio^  tacky  hit, 
Pompey's  bon>mot,  or  Cesar's  wit! 


384  THE  BAS  BLEU: 

Intemperaiioe,  listening  to  the  tale ; 

ForiTOt  the  muDet  growing*  stale ; 

And  admiration,  balano'd,  hung 

'Twixt  peacock^B  brains,  and  Tally's  tongue. 

I  shall  not  stop  to  dwell  <ai  these, 

But  be  as  epic  as  I  {dease. 

And  plunge  at  once  in  media*  ret. 

To  {HTove  the  priyilege  I  (dead, 

111  quote  some  Greek  I  cannot  read ; 

Stunn'd  by  authority  you  yield. 

And  I,  not  reason,  keep  the  field. 

Long  was  society  o*er-run 
By  whist,  that  desolating  Hun ; 
Long  did  quadrille  despotic  sit^ 
That  Vandal  of  colloquial  wit ; 
And  conrersation's  setting  light 
Lay  half-obscur'd  in  Gothic  night ; 
At  length  the  mental  shades  decline, 
Colloquial  wit  begins  to  shine ; 
Genius  prevails,  and  oonversatkm 
Emerges  into  retfitrmaiion. 
The  vanquished  trifAe  crown  to  you 
Boscawen  sage,  bright  Montagu, 
Divided,  fell ; — ^your  cares  in  haste 
Rescued  the  ravag'd  realms  of  taste ; 
And  Lyttelton*s  accomplish'd  name. 
And  witty  Fulteney  shar'd  the  fume ; 
The  men,  not  bound  by  pedant  rules, 
Nor  laidiesi  precietuet  ridicules : 
For  polish'd  Walpole  show'd  the  way. 
How  wits  may  be  both  learned  and  gay ; 
And  Carter  taught  the  female  train. 
The  deeply  wise  are  never  vain ; 
And  she,  who  Shakspeare's  wrongs  redrest, 
Proved  that  the  brightest  are  the  beet. 
This  just  deduction  still  they  drew. 
And  well  they  practised  what  they  knew ; 
Nor  taste,  nor  wit,  deserves  apj^us^ 
Unless  stUl  true  to  critic  laws ; 


*  S«neea  wys,  that  in  his  time  the  Ronuna  were  arrived  at  mieh 
a  pitch  of  luxury,  that  the  mullet  was  considered  stale  that  did  not 
die  in  the  liands  of  the  guest 

t  See  Moliere's  Comedy. 


^mii^mmk  i  i 


OR,  CONVERSATION.  3S6 

Good  terue,  of  fiicalties  the  best. 
Inspire  and  regulate  the  rest 

O !  how  nnlike  the  wit  that  fell, 
Rambooillet  !*  at  thy  quaint  hotel ; 
Where  point,  and  tnm,  and  eqaivoqae 
Distorted  every  word  they  spoke ! 
AU  so  intolerably  bright, 
Plain  common  sense  was  put  to  flight ; 
Each  speaker,  so  ingenious  ever, 
*Twas  tiresome  to  be  quite  so  clever ; 
Their  twisted  wit  forgot  to  please. 
And  mood  and  figure  banish'd  ease ; 
No  votive  altar  smok'd  to  thee. 
Chaste  queen,  divine  Simplicity ! 
But  forced  conceit,  which  ever  fails. 
And  stiff  antithesis  prevails ; 
Uneasy  rivalry  destroys 
Society's  unlaboured  joys : 
Nature,  of  stilts  and  fetters  tir*d. 
Impatient  from  the  wits  retir'd. 
Long  time  the  exile,  houseless  strayed 
Till  S^vlgn^t  received  the  maid. 

Though  here  she  comes  to  bless  our  isle, 
Not  universal  is  her  smile. 
Muse  1  snatch  the  lyre  which  Cambridge  X  stmug. 
When  he  the  empty  ball-room  sung ; 
*Tis  tun'd  above  thy  pitch,  I  doubt. 
And  thou  no  music  wouldst  draw  out ; 
Yet  in  a  lower  note,  presume 
To  sing  the  full,  dull  drawing-room.$ 

*  The  neiety  at  the  hotel  de  BamboolUet,  though  eotnpoicd  of 
the  moat  polite  end  ingenlooi  penons  In  France,  wai  mueh  tainted 
with  affectation  and  (klse  taate.    See  Voitore,  Menage,  fte. 

The  late  earl  of  Mansfield  told  the  author,  that,  when  he  wai 
ambassador  at  Paris,  he  was  assured  that  it  had  not  been  unosoal 
for  thoie  persons  of  a  purer  taste,  who  firequented  these  assemblies, 
to  come  out  from  their  society  so  weary  of  wit  and  laboured  inge- 
nuity, that  they  used  to  express  the  comfort  they  felt  In  their 
emancipation,  by  saying,  "  AOotuJ  ftnaom  da  acUebmuf 

t  Madame  de  Mvigni,  the  best  epistolary  writer  of  Pranee.— Bo. 

t  Richard  Owen  Cambridge,  Esq.,  of  Twickenham,  author  of 
the  "  Scribleiad,  a  Mock  Heroic,*'  and  several  elegant  pieees  in 
prose.  He  was  one  of  the  elub  of  wits,  who  elubbed  their  talents  in 
the  paper  called  "  The  World.*'~ED. 

§  These  grave  and  formal  parties  now  scarcely  exist,  having  been 
swallowed  up  in  the  reigning  multitudinotis  assemblies. 

8 


{ 


886  THE  BAS  BLEU^ 

Where  the  dire  circle  keeps  its  •tatioa. 
Each  common  phrase  is  an  orstion ; 
And  cracking  fiuu  and  whi8p*rinff  misses 
Compose  their  conversatioB  blisses. 
The  matron  marks  the  goodly  show. 
While  the  tall  daughter  eyes  the  bean— 
The  frigid  beau !  Ah  1  luckless  fiiir, 
*Ti8  not  for  you  that  studied  air ; 
Ah !  not  for  you  that  sideloog  gUince, 
And  all  that  charming  nonchalance ; 
Ah  I  not  for  you  the  three  long  hours 
He  winrshipp'd  the  *'  cosmetic  powers  ;** 
That  finished  head  which  breathes  perfume. 
And  kills  the  nenree  of  half  the  room ; 
And  all  the  murders  meant  to  lie 
In  that  lai^e,  languishing,  grey  eye  ; 
Desist :— less  wild  th'  attempt  would  be. 
To  warm  the  snows  of  Rhodope : 
Too  cold  to  feel,  too  proud  to  feign. 
For  him  you're  wise  and  fair  in  vidn ; 
In  vain  to  charm  him  you  intend. 
Self  is  his  object,  aim,  and  end* 

Chill  shade  of  that  affected  peer,* 
Who  dreaded  mirth,  come  safidy  here  I 
For  here  no  vulgar  joy  effives 
Thy  rage  for  polish,  ton,  and  graces. 
Cold  ceremony^s  leaden  hand 
Waves  o'er  the  room  her  poppy  wand ; 
Arrives  the  stranger ;  every  guest  • 
Conspires  to  torture  the  distrest ; 
At  once  they  rise— so  have  I  seei^^ 
You  guess  the  simile  I  mean. 
Take  what  comparison  you  please. 
The  crowded  streets,  the  swarming  bees. 
The  pebbles  on  the  shores  that  lie. 
The  stars  which  form  the  galaxy ; 
These  serve  t*  embellish  what  is  said. 
And  show,  besides,  that  one  has  read  ;— 
At  once  they  rise— th*  astonish'd  guest 
Back  in  a  comer  slinks,  distrest ; 
Scared  at  the  many  bowing  round. 
And  shock'd  at  her  own  voice's  sound, 

•  Lord  Chetterfleld,  who  though  a  wit,  soteomly  pniiioancc4  it 
*  ■&!  against  the  graces  to  laogh.— Eo. 


OR,  CONVERSATION.  387 

Forgot  the  thing  she  meant  to  say. 

Her  words  half-nttor'd,  die  away ; 

In  sweet  oblirion  down  die  uaks, 

And  of  her  next  appointment  thinks. 

While  her  load  neighbour  on  tiw  right. 

Boasts  what  she  has  to  do  to-night , 

So  very  much,  you'd  swear  her  pride  is 

To  match  the  labour  of  Alddes ; 

*Tis  true,  in  hjrperboUc  measure, 

She  nobly  calls  her  labours  pleasure ; 

In  this  unlike  Alcmena*s  son. 

She  never  means  they  should  be  done ; 

Her  fancy  of  no  limits  dreams. 

No  w!  plus  ultra  stops  her  schemes ; 

Twelve  I  she'd  have  scmm'd  the  paltry  round. 

No  pillars  would  have  mark'd  her  bound : 

Calpe  and  Abyla,  in  vain 

Had  nodded  cross  th*  opposing  main ; 

A  circumnavigator  she 

On  Ton's  illimitable  sea. 

We  pass  the  pleasures  vast  and  various. 
Of  routs,  not  social  but  gregarious : 
Where  high  heroic  self-denial 
Sustiuns  her  self-inflicted  trial. 
Day-lab'rers !  what  an  easy  life. 
To  feed  ten  cliildren  and  a  wife  1 
No — I  may  juster  pity  spare 
To  the  night  lab'rer's  keener  care ; 
And,  pleas'd,  to  gentler  scenes  retreat» 
Where  Conversation  htrfds  her  seat 

Small  were  that  art  which  would  ensure 
The  circle's  boasted  quadrature ! 
See  Vesey*^  *  (riastic  geiriius  make 
A  circle  every  figure  take ; 
Nay,  shapes  and  forms,  which  would  defy 
All  science  of  geometry ; 
Isosceles  and  parallel. 
Names  hard  to  speak,  and  hard  to  spell ! 

«  ThU  unUble  lady  ww  remsikidils  for  htr  talsnt  in  toMktng 
the  formality  of  a  circle,  by  invitint  her  i>arUet  to  tana  theniMlvM 
Into  little  aeparate  groupi.  [She  was  the  wife  of  the  lioiMivrable 
Acmondeebjun  Vetey,  an  Irish  gentleman,  and  the  friend  of  Bvrke, 
on  whose  recommendation  be  beeame  a  member  of  Johnson's 
Literary  Clab.~Eo.] 


388  THE  BAS  BLEU : 

Til*  enchantress  waWd  her  wand,  and  spoke  1 

H«r  potent  wand  the  circle  broke ; 

The  social  spirits  hoTer  round. 

And  bless  the  liberated  ground. 

Ask  yon  what  charms  this  gift  dispense  ? 

'Tis  the  strong  spell  of  conunon  sense. 

Away  duU  ceremony  flew, 

And  with  her  bore  detraction  too. 

Nor  only  geometric  art 
Does  this  presiding  power  impart ; 
But  chemists  too,  who  want  the  essence 
Which  makes  or  mars  all  coalescence. 
Of  her  the  secret  rare  might  get. 
How  different  kinds  amalgamate : 
And  he,  who  wilder  studies  chose, 
Find  here  a  new  metempsychose ; 
How  forms  can  other  forms  assume, 
V^thin  her  Fythagoric  room ; 
Or  be,  and  stranger  is  th*  event, 
The  very  things  which  nature  meant ; 
Nor  strive,  by  art  and  affectation. 
To  cross  their  genuine  destinati<m. 
Here  sober  duchesses  are  seen. 
Chaste  wits,  and  critics  void  of  spleen ; 
Physicians,  fraught  with  real  science, 
And  Whigs  and  Tories  in  alliance ; 
Poets,  fulfilling  Christian  duties 
Just  lawyers,  reasonable  beauties ; 
Bishops  who  preach,  and  peers  who  pay. 
And  countesses  who  seldom  play ; 
Leam'd  antiquaries,  who,  from  college, 
Regect  the  rust,  and  bring  the  knowledge ; 
And,  hear  it,  age,  believe  it,  youth,-^ 
Polemics,  really  seeking  truth  ; 
And  travellers  of  that  rare  tribe, 
WhoVe  seen  the  countries  they  describe ; 
Who  studied  tliere,  so  strange  their  plan. 
Not  plants  nor  herbs  alone,  but  roan ; 
While  travellers,  of  other  notions. 
Scale  mountain  tops,  and  traverse  oceans ; 
As  if,  so  much  these  schemes  engross, 
The  study  of  mankind— was  moss. 
Ladies  who  point,  nor  think  me  partial. 
An  epigram  as  well  as  Martial ; 


OR,  CONVERSATION.  389 

Yet  in  all  female  worth  succeed. 
As  well  as  those  who  cannot  read. 

Right  pleasant  were  the  task,  I  ween. 
To  name  the  groups  which  fill  the  scene ; 
But  rhyme's  of  such  Csstidious  nature. 
She  proudly  scorns  all  nomenclature. 
Nor  grace  our  northern  names  her  lips. 
Like  Homer's  catalogue  of  ships. 

Once— fiaithful  memory !  heave  a  sigh. 
Here  Roscius  gladden'd  every  eye.  * 
Why  comes  not  Maro  ?]  far  ftt>m  town. 
He  rears  the  urn  to  taste,  and  Brown ;  % 
Plants  cypress  round  the  tomb  of  Gray, 
Or  decks  his  English  garden  gay  j 
Whose  mingled  sweets  exhale  perfume. 
And  promise  a  perennial  bloom. 
Here,  rigid  Cato,  $  awful  sage ! 
Bold  censor  of  a  thoughtless  age, 
Once  dealt  his  pointed  moral  round, 
And,  not  unheeded,  fell  the  sound ; 
The  muse  his  hcmour'd  memory  weeps. 
For  Cato  now  with  Roscius  sleeps ! 
Here  once  Horteiisius  i|  lov'd  to  sit, 
Apostate  now  from  social  wit ; 
Ah !  why  in  wrangling  senates  waste 
The  noblest  parts,  the  lumpiest  taste  f 
Why  democratic  thunders  wield, 
And  quit  the  muses'  calmer  field  ? 
Taste  thou  the  gentler  joys  they  give, 
\\  ith  Horace  and  with  Lelius  live. 

Hail !  Conversation,  soothing  power. 
Sweet  goddess  of  the  social  hour  I 

*  Garrlek. 

t  The  ReT.  William  MaMm,  the  biofimpher  of  Ormj,  and  anthor. 
jmoag  other  pieces,  of  a  didaetio  poem,  entitled  "  The  Ea|U«h 
Oaiden." 

X  John  Brown,  famed  as  an  artist,  bat  more  as  the  layer  out  of 
ffrouodt  in  a  picturesque  style.  He  obtained  the  name  of  Capabili- 
ty Brown,  from  a  phrase  he  had  of  sayiny  when  eonaulted,  that  tiie 
sput  bad  **  a  capability  of  improvement." 

f  Dr  Samuel  Johnson. 

II  This  was  written  in  the  year  1781,  when  Edmund  Burke  had 
Joined  the  then  opposition. 


f 


390  THBBASBLBU: 

Not  with  mate  heart-felt  warmth,  at  lea*t» 

Does  Lelius  bead,  thy  true  high  priest  j 

Than  I  the  lowest  of  tiiy  train, 

These  fleld-fiowers  bring  to  deck  thy  feme  ? 

Who  to  thy  shrine  like  him  can  haste. 

With  warmer  seal,  or  purer  taste  f 

O  may  thy  worship  long  prevail. 

And  thy  true  votaries  never  fail ! 

Long  may  thy  polished  altars  blaae 

With  wax-lights'  undiminish'd  rays! 

Still  be  thy  nightly  offerings  pidd, 

Libations  large  of  lemonade ! 

On  silver  vases,  loaded,  rise 

The  biscuits*  ample  sacrifice  I 

Nor  be  the  milk-white  streams  forgot 

Of  thirst-assuaging,  cool  oigeat ; 

Rise,  incense  pure  from  fragrant  tea, 

Delicious  incense,  worthy  thee ! 

Hail,  Conversation,  heavenly  fair. 
Thou  bliss  of  life,  and  balm  uf  care ! 
Still  may  thy  gentle  reign  extend. 
And  taste  with  wit  and  science  blend. 
Soft  polisher  of  rugged  man  I 
Refiner  of  the  social  plan ! 
For  thee,  best  solace  of  his  toil ! 
The  sage  consumes  his  midnii(ht  oil ; 
And  keeps  late  vigils,  to  produce 
Materiab  fur  thy  future  use ; 
Calls  forth  the  else  neglected  knowledge. 
Of  school,  of  travel,  and  of  college. 
If  none  behold,  ah !  wherefore  fair  ? 
Ah !  wherefore  wise,  if  none  must  hear  ? 
Our  intellectual  ore  must  shine. 
Not  slumber,  idly,  in  the  mine. 
Let  Education's  moral  mint 
The  noblest  images  imprint ; 
Let  taste  her  curious  touchstone  hold. 
To  try  if  standard  be  the  gold ; 
But  'tis  thy  commerce,  Conversation, 
Must  give  it  use  by  circulation ; 
That  noblest  commerce  of  mankind. 
Whose  precious  merchandise  is  Mind  I 

What  stoic  traveller  would  try 
A  sterile  soil  and  parching  sky. 


OR,  CONVERSATION.  391 

Or  dare  the  intemp'iwte  northern  zone. 
If  what  he  saw  mast  ne'er  be  known  ? 
For  this  he  bids  his  home  farewell ; 
The  joy  of  seeing  k  to  tell. 
Trust  me,  he  never  would  have  stirr'd. 
Were  he  forbid  to  speak  a  word ; 
And  curiosity  woold  sleep. 
If  her  own  secrets  she  most  keep : 
The  bless  of  telling  what  is  past 
Becomes  her  rich  reward  at  last. 
Who'd  mock  at  death,  at  danger  smile. 
To  steal  one  peep  at  father  Nile ; 
Who,  at  Palmyra  risk  his  neck. 
Or  search  the  ruins  of  Balbec ; 
If  these  must  hide  old  Nilus'  frnit. 
Nor  Libyan  tales  at  home  recount ; 
If  those  must  sink  their  learned  labour, 
Nor  with  tlieir  ruins  treat  a  neighbour  ? 
Range— study— think— do  all  we  can. 
Colloquial  pleasures  are  for  num. 

Yet  not  from  low  desire  to  shine 
Does  genius  toil  in  learning's  mine ; 
Not  to  indulge  in  idle  vision, 
But  strike  new  fight  by  strong  collision. 
Of  Conversation,  wisdom's  friend. 
This  is  the  object  and  the  end. 
Of  moral  truth,  man's  proper  science. 
With  sense  and  learning  ba  alliance, 
To  search  the  depths,  and  thence  i^oduce 
What  tends  to  practice  and  to  use. 
And  next  in  value  we  shall  find 
What  mends  the  taste,  and  forms  the  raliid. 
If  high  those  truths  in  estimation, 
Whose  search  is  crown'd  with  demonstration ; 
To  these  assign  no  scanty  praise, 
Our  taste  which  clears,  oar  views  whidi  raise. 
For  grant  that  matfaeraatic  truth 
Best  balances  the  mind  of  youth ; 
Yet  scarce  the  truth  of  taste  is  found 
To  grow  from  principles  less  sound. 

O'er  books,  the  mind  inactive  lies. 
Books,  the  mind's  food,  not  exercise 
Her  vigorous  wing  she  scarcely  feels, 
'Till  use  the  latent  strength  reveals ; 


302  THE  BA8  BLBUt 

Her  ilmnberiiig  energies  call'd  forth. 
She  rises,  conscunis  of  her  wrorth ; 
And,  at  her  new-foond  powers  elated. 
Thinks  them  not  roos'd,  bat  new  orated. 

Enlighten'd  spirits !  yoo,  who  know 
What  charms  from  polish*d  efmyene  flow. 
Speak,  for  you  can,  the  pore  delight 
When  kindling  sympathies  nnite ; 
When  correspondent  tastes  impart 
Communion  sweet  from  heart  to  heart ; 
You  ne*er  the  c<rid  gradati<ms  need 
Which  vulgar  souls  to  union  lead; 
No  dry  ditcusskm  to  unfold 
The  meaning  caught  era  well  *tis  t<dd : 
In  taste,  in  learning,  wit,  or  sdmee. 
Still  Idndled  souls  demand  alliance : 
Bach  in  the  other  Joys  to  find 
The  image  answering  to  his  mind. 
Bat  sparks  electric  only  strike 
On  souls  dectrical  alike ; 
The  flash  of  intellect  exfdres, 
Unless  it  meet  congenial  fires : 
The  language  to  th'  dect  alone 
Is,  like  the  mason^s  mystery,  known ; 
In  vain  the  unerring  sign  is  made 
To  him  who  is  not  of  the  trcule. 
What  lively  pleasure  to  divine. 
The  thought  implied,  the  hinted  line. 
To  feel  aUosion^s  artful  force. 
And  trace  the  image  to  its  source ! 
Quick  memory  blends  her  scattered  rays 
*Till  fancy  kindles  at  the  blaze ; 
The  works  of  ages  start  to  view. 
And  ancient  wit  dlcits  new. 

But  wit  and  parts  if  thus  we  praise. 
What  nobler  altars  should  we  raise, 
Tliose  sacriilces  could  we  see. 
Which  wit,  O  Virtue !  makes  to  thee. 
At  once  the  rising  thought  to  dash,  .• 
To  quench  at  once  the  bursting  flatih ! 
The  shining  mischief  to  subdue. 
And  lose  the  praise  and  {Measure  too ! 
Though  Venus'  self,  could  you  detect  her. 
Imbuing  with  her  richest  nectar. 


OR,  CONVERSATION.  393 

The  thought  unchaste— to  check  that  thought, 

To  spurn  a  fame  so  dearly  bought ; 

This  is  high  principle's  contnd  1 

This  is  true  continence  of  soul ! 

Blush,  heroes,  at  your  cheap  renown, 

A  vanquished  realm,  a  plunderM  town  I 

Your  conquests  were  to  gain  a  name, 

This  conquest  triumphs  over  fame ; 

So  pure  its  essence,  'twere  destroyed, 

If  known,  and  if  commended,  void. 

Amidst  the  brightest  truths  believed. 

Amidst  the  fairest  deeds  achiev'd. 

Shall  stand  recorded  and  admir'd. 

That  virtue  sunk  what  viit  inspir'd. 

But  let  the  letter'd,  and  the  fair, 
And,  chiefly,  let  the  wit  beware ; 
You,  whose  warm  spirits  never  fail. 
Forgive  the  hint  which  ends  my  tale. 
O  shun  the  perils  which  attend 
On  wit,  on  warmth,  and  heed  your  friend ; 
Though  science  nura'd  you  in  her  bowers. 
Though  fimcy  crown  your  brow  with  flowers. 
Each  thought,  though  bright  invention  fill, 
Though  Attic  bees  each  word  distil ; 
Yet,  if  one  gracious  power  refuse 
Her  gentle  influence  to  infiise ; 
If  she  withhold  her  magic  spell. 
Nor  in  the  social  circle  dwell ; 
In  vain  shall  listening  crowds  approve. 
They'll  praise  you,  but  they  will  not  love. 
What  i»  this  power,  you're  loth  to  mention. 
This  charm,  this  witchcraft  ?  tis  attention : 
Mute  angel,  yes ;  thy  looks  dispense 
The  silence  of  intelligence ; 
Thy  graceful  form  I  well  discern. 
In  act  to  listen  and  to  leam ; 
*Tis  thou  for  talents  shalt  obtain 
That  pardon  wit  would  hope  in  vain ; 
Thy  wondrous  power,  thy  secret  charm, 
Sliall  envy  of  her  sting  disarm ; 
Thy  silent  flattery  soothes  our  spirit. 
And  we  forgive  eclipsing  merit ; 
Our  jealous  souls  no  longer  bum. 
Nor  hate  thee,  though  thou  shine  in  turn ; 

b2 


SIM  THE  B AS  BLEU :  &e. 

The  tweet  atoneinent  Bcreene  tlie  fault, 
And  love  and  pndae  are  dieaply  bou^t. 

With  tome  compiaeeney  to  hear 
Thoan^  tomewhat  long  the  tale  appear. 
The  dull  relation  to  attend. 
Which  mars  the  story  you  eould  mend  i 
*Tia  more  than  wit»  'tis  moral  beauty, 
*Ti8  pleasure  rising  out  of  duty. 
Mor  vainly  think,  the  time  you  wastes 
When  temper  tiiumplis  over  taste. 


SENSIBILITY: 

AN  EPISTLB 
TO  THB  HONOURABLE  MRS  BOSCAWEN.* 


AccKPT,  Boscawen !  these  unpoIishM  lays. 
Nor  blame  too  roach  the  verse  you  cannot  praise. 
For  you,  far  other  bards  have  wak*d  the  string. 
Far  other  bards  for  you  were  wont  to  dng ; 
Yet  on  the  gale  their  puting  music  steals. 
Yet  your  diarm*d  ear  the  lov'd  impression  feels : 
You  heard  the  lyres  of  Littelton  and  Young, 
And  that  a  grace,  and  this  a  seraph  strung. 
These  are  no  more !  but  not  with  these  decline 
The  Attic  diasteness  or  the  vig'rous  line. 
Still,  sad  Elflida's  poetf  shall  coroplain. 
Still,  either  Warton  breathe  his  clEissic  strain : 
While,  for  the  wonders  of  the  gothic  page, 
Otranto^s  fame  shall  vindicate  the  age. 
Nor  tremble  lest  the  tuneful  art  expire, 
While  Beattie  strikes  anew  old  Spenser's  lyre ; 
He,  best  to  paint  the  genuine  minstrel  knew, 
Who  from  himself  the  living  portrait  drew. 

Though  Latin  bards  had  gloried  in  his  name, 
When  in  full  brightness  burnt  the  Latian  flame ; 
Yet  fhr'd  with  loftier  hopes  than  transient  bajrs. 
See  Lowth  {  despise  the  meed  of  mortal  praise ; 
Spurn  the  cheap  wreath  by  human  science  won. 
Bom  on  the  wing  sublime  of  Amos*  wml 
He  seiz'd  the  mantle  as  the  prophet  flew. 
And  with  his  mantle  caught  his  spirit  too. 

*  Frances,  daughter  of  William  Brelyn  Olanville.  Biq.,  mar- 
ried, in  174S,  Admiral  Boicawen.  by  whom  die  bad  George  Bvelyn, 
third  Tifcoant  Falmouth;  Frances,  married  the  honourable  John 
Leveson  Oower;  and  Bliiabeth.  duchess  of  Beaufort.  Mrs  Boe- 
cawen  died  in  1805.  She  was  a  woman  of  very  superior  talcnta, 
and  of  a  generous  spirit — Ed. 

•,  Milton  calls  Euripides  tad  BlwlraU  port. 

t  Then  bishop  of  London.     He  died  in  1787* 


S96  SENSIBILITY. 

To  snatch  bright  beauty  from  devouriog  Me, 
And  lengthen  iiature*s  transitory  date ; 
At  once  the  critic's  and  the  painter's  art, 
With  Fresnoy's  skQl  and  Guidon  grace  impart ; 
To  form  with  code  correct  the  graphic  school, 
And  lawless  fancy  corb  by  sober  role ; 
To  show  how  genius  fires,  how  taste  restrains, 
While,  what  both  are,  his  pendl  best  explains. 
Hare  we  not  Reynolds  ?*  Uves  not  Jeajma  yet. 
To  prove  his  lowest  title  was  a  wit  ?♦ 

Thonn^  purer  flames  thy  hallow'd  seal  inspire 
Than  e*er  were  kindled  at  the  muse's  fire ; 
Thee,  mitred  Chester !{  all  the  Nine  shall  boast ; 
And  is  not  Johnson  ours  ?  himself  an  host ! 

Yes,  still  for  you  your  gentle  stars  dispense 
The  charm  of  friendship  and  the  feast  of  sense : 
Yours  is  the  bliss,  and  Heav^  no  dearer  sends. 
To  call  the  wisest,  brightest,  host,  your  friends ; 
And  while  to  these  I  raise  the  Totive  line, 
O  let  me  grateful  own  these  friends  are  mine ; 
With  Carter}  trace  the  wit  to  Athens  known. 
Or  view  in  Montagu  that  wit  our  own : 
Or  mark,  well  pleas'd,  Chapone'sll  instructive  page. 
Intent  to  raise  the  morals  of  the  age : 
Or  boast,  in  Walsingham,  the  various  power 
To  cheer  the  lonely,  grace  the  letter'd  hour : 
Delany,^  too,  is  ours,  serenely  bright. 
Wisdom's  strong  ray,  and  virtue*s  milder  light : 

*  See  Sir  Joshoa  Reynoldi'  very  able  notes  to  Du  Fresnoy's 
poem  on  the  "  Art  of  Painting,"  translated  bjr  Mr  Mason.  Also, 
bis  series  of  "  Discourses  to  the  Academy,"  which  thoofh  written 
professedly  on  the  subject  of  paintinf,  contain  the  principles  of 
general  art,  and  are  delivered  with  so  much  perspicuous  good  sense 
as  to  be  admirably  calculated  to  assist  in  formiof  the  taste  of  the 
general  reader. 

■I  Mr  Soame  Jenyns  had  just  published  his  work  "  On  the  In- 
ternal Evidence  of  the  Christian  Religion." 

t  Dr  Beilby  Porteus.  then  bishop  of  Chester.  See  his  admirable 
poem  on  death. 

I  Elisabeth  Carter,  the  translator  of  Epictetus.  She  died  in 
1806,  at  the  age  of  eighty-eight.— Ed. 

II  Hester  Chapone,  author  of  "  Letters  on  the  Improvement  of 
the  Mind,"  and  other  worlis.  Her  maiden  name  was  Mulso.  Sh« 
died  in  1801,  at  the  age  of  seventy -four.— Ed. 

f  The  widow  of  the  Rev.  Dr  Delany,  and  celebrated  for  her 
exact  imitations  in  silk  of  the  beauties  of  vegeUble  life.    She  was 


SENSIBILITY.  397 

And  she  who  blessM  the  friend,  and  grac'd  the  lays 
Of  poignant  Swift,  stiil  gilds  our  social  days ; 
Long,  long,  protract  thy  light,  O  star  benign ! 
Whose  setting  beams  with  milder  lustre  shine. 

Nor,  Barbauld,  shall  my  glowing  heart  refuse 
Its  tribute  to  thy  virtues,  or  thy  muse  ; 
This  humble  merit  shall  at  least  be  mine, 
The  poet^B  chaplet  for  thy  brow  to  twine ; 
My  verse  thy  talents  to  the  world  shall  teach. 
And  praise  the  genius  it  despairs  to  reach. 
Yet  what  is  wit,  and  what  the  poet's  art  ? 
Can  genius  shield  the  vulnerable  heart  ? 
Ah,  no !  where  bright  imagination  reigns. 
The  fine- wrought  spirit  feels  acuter  pains ; 
Where  glow  exalted  sense  and  taste  refin'd. 
There  keener  anguish  rankles  in  the  miud ; 
There,  feeling  is  diffusM  through  ev'ry  part. 
Thrills  in  each  nerve,  and  lives  in  all  the  heart ; 
And  those  whose  gen'rous  souls  each  tear  would  keep 
From  others'  eyes,  are  bom  themselves  to  weep. 
Can  all  the  boasted  pow'rs  of  wit  and  song. 
Of  life  one  pang  remove,  one  hour  prolong  ? 
Fallacious  hope  1  which  daily  truths  deride ; 
For  you,  alas !  have  wept,  and  Garrick  died ! 
O  shades  of  Hampton !  witness,  as  I  mourn. 
Could  wit  or  song  elude  your  favMte's  urn? 
Though  living  virtue  still  your  haunts  endears, 
Yet  buried  worth  shall  justify  my  tears. 
Who  now  with  spirit  keen,  yet  judgment  cool. 
The  errors  of  my  orjdian  muse  shall  rule  ? 
With  keen  acumen  how  his  piercing  eye 
The  fault  conceal'd  from  vulgar  view  would  spy  ! 
While  with  a  generous  warmth  he  strove  to  hide, 
Nay,  vindicate  the  fault  his  taste  had  spied. 
So  pleas'd  could  he  detect  a  happy  line 
That  he  would  fancy  merit  ev'n  in  mine. 

His  wit  so  pointed  it  ne^er  miss'd  its  end. 
And  so  well  temper*d  it  ne'er  lost  a  friend ; 
How  his  keen  eye,  quick  mind,  and  ardent  heart, 
Impov'rish'd  nature,  and  exhausted  art, 

in  ererjr  re«peet  a  moct  amiable  and  aeeomplithed  woman;  and  a 
rreat  Ikvourite  of  Oeoif  e  III.,  and  queen  Charlotte,  who  gave  her 
a  pension  of  three  hundred  a  year,  and  a  luuidsome  well-ftimished 
bouse  at  Windsor,  where  she  was  often  visited  by  their  majesties. 


4 


398  SENSIBILITY. 

A  muae  of  in  hM  tuag,*  if  miiM  eonld  trace. 
Or  verse  retrieve  the  evaaescent  grace  I 
How  rival  bards  with  rival  itatesmeo  strove. 
Who  most  shoald  gain  his  praise,  or  win  his  love  ! 
Opposing  parties  to  one  point  he  drew. 
Thus  Tally's  Atticus  was  Caesar's  too. 

Though  time  his  mellowing  hand  across  has  stole. 
Softening  the  tints  of  sorrow  on  the  soul ; 
The  deep  impression  long  my  heart  shall  fill. 
And  evYy  fointer  trace  be  perfect  stilL 

Foi^ve,  my  firiend,  if  wounded  memory  melt. 
Yon  best  can  pardkm  who  have  deepest  felt. 
You,  who  for  Britain's  herot  and  your  own. 
The  deadliest  pang  which  rends  the  soul  have  known ; 
You,  who  have  found  how  much  the  feeling  heart 
Shapes  its  own  wound,  and  points  itself  the  dart  j 
You,  who  are  calPd  the  varied  loss  to  mourn ; 
You,  who  have  clasp'da  son's  untimely  urn ; 
Yon,  who  from  frequent  fond  experience  feel 
The  wounds  sach  minds  receive  can  never  heal ; 
That  grief  a  thousand  entrances  can  find. 
Where  parts  superior  dignify  the  mind ; 
Yet  would  you  change  that  sense  acute  to  gain 
A  dear-bought  absence  from  the  poignant  pain ; 
Commuting  ev*ry  grief  those  feelings  give, 
In  loveless,  joyless  apathy  to  live  ? 

For  though  in  souls  where  energies  abound. 
Pain  through  its  numerous  avenues  can  wound ; 
Yet  the  same  avenues  are  open  still. 
To  casual  blessings  as  to  casual  ilL 
Nur  is  the  trembling  temper  m6re  awake 
To  every  wound  calamity  can  make. 
Than  is  the  finely  fashioned  nerve  alive 
To  ev'ry  transport  pleasure  has  to  give. 

Let  not  the  vulgar  read  this  pensive  strain. 
Their  jests  the  tender  anguish  would  profane. 
Yet  these  some  deem  the  hf4»piest  of  their  kind. 
Whose  low  enjoyments  never  reach'd  the  mind ; 
Who  ne'er  a  pain  but  for  themselves  have  known. 
Who  ne'er  have  felt  a  sorrow  but  their  own  j 
Who  deem  romantic  ev'ry  finer  thought 
Conceiv'd  by  pity,  or  by  friendship  wrought; 
Whose  insulated  souls  ne'er  feel  the  power 
Of  gen'rous  sympathy's  ecstatic  hour; 
*  See  Mr  Sberidan't  b«au\Uu\  nvoTvody.     i  Admir*!  Boccaiven. 


SENSIBILITY.  399 

Whose  disconnected  hearts  ne^er  taste  the  bliss 
Extracted  from  another'to  happiness ; 
Who  ne'er  the  high  heroic  duty  knowr, 
Fot  public  good  the  prirate  to  forego. 

Then  wherefore  happy  ?  Where's  the  kindred  mind  ? 
Where  the  large  soul  which  takes  in  human  kind  ? 
Yes — *tis  the  untold  sorrow  to  explain. 
To  mitigate  the  but  suspected  pain ; 
The  rule  of  holy  sympathy  to  keep, 
Joy  for  the  joyful,  tears  for  them  that  weep : 
To  these  the  virtuous  half  their  pleasures  owe^ 
Pleasures,  the  selfish  are  not  bom  to  know ; 
They  never  know,  in  all  their  coarser  bliss, 
The  sacred  rapture  of  a  pain  like  this. 
Then  take,  ye  happy  vulgar,  take  your  part 
Of  sordid  joy  wliieh  never  touch'd  the  heart. 

Benevolence,  which  seldom  stays  to  chooeie. 
Lest  pausing  prudence  tempt  her  to  refuse ; 
Friendship,  which  once  determin'd,  never  sworves, 
Weighs  ere  it  trusts,  but  weighs  not  ere  it  serves ; 
And  soft-ey'd  pity,  and  forgiveness  bland. 
And  melting  charity  with  open  hand ; 
And  artless  love,  believing  and  believ'd, 
And  honest  confidence  which  ne*er  deceiv'd ; 
And  mercy,  stretching  out  ere  want  can  speak. 
To  wipe  the  tear  wfaidi  stain's  afBiction'^  cheek ; 
These  ye  have  never  known— then  take  your  port 
Of  sordid  joy  which  never  touch'd  the  heart. 

You  who  have  melted  in  bright  glory's  flame. 
Or  felt  the  grateful  breath  of  well-eam'd  ftune ; 
Or  you,  the  chosen  agents  from  above. 
Whose  bounty  vindicates  Almighty  love  $ 
You,  who  subdue  the  vain  desire  of  show, 
Not  to  accumulate,  but  to  bestow ; 
You,  who  the  dreary  haunts  of  sorrow  seek. 
Raise  the  sunk  heart,  and  flush  the  fading  cheek ; 
You,  who  divide  the  joys  and  share  the  pains, 
When  merit  triumphs,  or  oppress*d  comfdains ; 
You  who,  with  pensive  Petrarch,  love  to  mourn. 
Or  weave  the  garland  for  Tibullus'  urn ; 
You,  whose  touch'd  hearts  with  real  sorrows  swell, 
Or  feel,  when  genius  paints  those  sorrows  well. 
Would  you  renounce  such  energies  as  these, 
For  vulgar  pleasures,  or  for  selfish  ease  ? 


400  SENSIBILITY. 

Would  you,  to  *8cape  the  pun,  the  joy  forego, 

And  miss  the  transport  to  avoid  the  wo  f 

Would  you  the  sense  of  actual  pity  lose, 

Or  cease  to  share  the  mournings  of  the  muse  ? 

No,  Greville,*  no  1  Thy  song,  though  steep'd  in  tears. 

Though  all  thy  soul  in  all  thy  strain  appears ; 

Yet  wouldst  tiiou  all  thy  well-sung  anguish  choose. 

And  all  th*  inglorious  peace  thou  b«gg*st,  refuse. 

And  while  discretion  all  our  views  should  guide. 
Beware,  lest  secret  aims  and  ends  she  hidei 
Though  midst  the  crowd  of  virtues,  ^  her  part. 
Like  a  firm  sentinel,  to  guard  the  heart ; 
Beware,  lest  Prudence  self  become  uiigust. 
Who  never  was  deceiv'd,  I  would  not  trust ; 
Prudence  must  never  be  suspicion's  slave. 
The  world's  wise  man  is  more  than  half  a  knave. 

And  yon,  Boscawen,  while  you  fondly  melt 
In  raptures  none  but  mothers  ever  felt ; 
And  as  you  view,  prophetic,  in  your  race, 
AU  Levison*s  sweetness,  and  all  Beaufort's  grace ; 
Yet  dread  what  dangers  each  lov'd  child  may  share. 
The  youth,  if  valiant,  or  the  maid,  if  fair ; 
You  who  have  felt,  so  frwl  is  mortal  joy ! 
That,  while  we  clasp  the  phantom,  we  destroy ; 
That  perils  multiply  as  blessings  flow. 
That  sorrows  grajfted  on  ei^oyments  grow ; 
That  clouds  impending  dim  our  brightest  views. 
That  who  have  most  to  love  have  most  to  lose ; 
Yet  from  these  fiur  possessions  would  you  part. 
To  shelter  from  contingent  ills  your  heart  ? 
Would  you  forego  the  objects  of  your  prayer. 
To  save  the  dangers  of  a  distant  care  ? 
Renounce  the  brightness  opening  to  your  view, 
For  all  the  safety  duluess  ever  knew  ? 
Would  you  consent,  to  shun  the  fears  you  prove, 
That  they  should  merit  less,  or  you  less  love  ? 

Yet  while  we  clsdm  the  sympathy  divine. 
Which  makes,  O  man,  the  woes  of  others  thine ; 
While  her  fair  triumphs  swell  the  modish  page. 
She  drives  the  sterner  virtues  from  the  stage : 

*  See  her  beauUfiU  "  Ode  to  Indifferenee."  [Thia  in^nious 
ladjr  WM  the  wife  of  the  Honourable  Fulke  Greville.  Her  maiden 
name  was  Macartney  ;  and  she  left  a  daughter,  destined,  under 
the  name  of  Crewe,  to  be  the  rival  of  her  mother's  beauty  and 
accomplishments.—  Ed.] 


SENSIBILITY.  401 

While  feeling  boasts  her  ever-tearfol  eye. 
Fair  truth,  Ann  foith,  and  manly  justice  fly : 
Justice,  prime  good !  from  whose  prolific  lavir. 
All  worth,  all  virtue,  their  strong  essence  draw ; 
Justice,  a  grace  quite  obsolete  we  hold. 
The  feign'd  Astrea  of  an  age  of  gold : 
The  sterling  attribute  we  scarcely  own, 
While  spurious  candour  fills  the  vacant  throne. 

Sweet  Sensibility !  thou  secret  power 
Who  shed^st  thy  gifts  upon  the  natal  hour. 
Like  fairy  favours ;  art  can  never  seise, 
Nor  affectation  catch  thy  power  to  please : 
Thy  subtle  essence  still  eludes  the  chains 
Of  definition,  and  defeats  her  pains. 
Sweet  Sensibility!  thou  keen  delight ! 
Unprompted  moral !  sudden  sense  of  tif^t  I 
Perception  exquisite !  fair  virtue's  seed ! 
Thou  quick  precursor  of  the  lib'ral  deed ! 
Thou  hasty  conscience !  reason's  blushing  mom ! 
Instinctive  Idndness  ere  reflection's  bom ! 
Prompt  sense  of  equity !  to  thee  belongs 
The  swift  redreis  of  unexamin'd  wrongs  I 
Eagor  to  serve,  the  cause  perhaps  untried. 
But  always  apt  to  choose  the  suff'ring  side ! 
To  those  who  know  thee  not,  no  words  can  paint. 
And  those  who  know  thee,  know  all  words  are  foiut ! 

She  does  not  feel  thy  powY  who  boasts  thy  llame. 
And  rounds  her  every  period  with  thy  name ; 
Nor  she  who  vents  her  disproportion'd  sighs 
Vnth  pining  Lesbia  when  her  sparrow  dies : 
Nor  she  who  melts  when  hi^iless  Shore  expires, 
While  real  mis*ry  unreliev'd  retires ! 
Who  thinks  fdgn*d  sorrows  all  her  tears  deserve, 
And  weeps  o*er  Werter  *  while  her  children  starve. 

As  words  are  but  th*  external  marks  to  tell 
The  fair  ideas  in  the  mind  that  dwell ; 
And  only  are  of  things  the  outward  sign. 
And  not  the  things  themselves  they  but  define ; 
So  exclamations,  tender  tones,  fond  tears. 
And  ail  the  graeefiil  drapery  feeling  wears ; 

*  A  Oerman  work  of  fletioD,  which,  under  the  UUe  of  the  **  Sor- 
row! of  Werter,**  at  that  period,  did  as  much  mifchief  asnoug  th« 
readers  of  romanoe,  as  the  produetioas  of  Sterne  and  Rouaaeau  bad 
done  before. 


40S  SENSIBILITY. 

TbeM  are  her  gmtb,  not  her,  they  hot  expren 

Her  form,  her  temUance,  her  appropriate  dressy 

And  theae  fiiir  marln,  relaetant  I  relate, 

Theee  lorely  sjrmboto  may  be  counterfeit. 

There  are,  who  fill  with  brilliant  i^nts  the  pag(>. 

If  a  poor  linnet  meet  the  gunner's  rage; 

There  are,  who  for  a  dying  fawn  deplore. 

As  if  friend,  parent,  country  were  no  mere ; 

yfho  boast  quick  rapture  trembling  in  thnr  eye. 

If  from  the  spider's  snare  they  snatdi  a  fly  { 

There  are,  whose  well-sung  plaints  eadi  breast  inflame, 

And  break  all  hearts— but  his  from  whom  they  came  1 

He,  scorning  lifsls  low  duties  to  attmd. 

Writes  odes  on  friendsh^  KdiOe  he  cheats  his  tiriend. 

Of  jaJs  and  punishments  he  grieves  to  hear. 

And  pensions  *prisoa*d  virtue  witti  a  tear ; 

While  unpaid  bills  his  creditor  presents, 

And  ruin*d  innocence  hb  crime  laments. 

Not  so  the  tender  moralist  of  Tweed, 

His  gen*rous  Bfan  of  Fsellng  feels  indeed. 

O  love  divine !  sole  source  of  charity ! 
More  dear  one  genuine  deed  perform'd  for  thee. 
Than  all  the  periods  feeling  e'er  could  torn. 
Than  all  thy  touching  page,  perverted  Sterne ! 
Not  that  by  deeds  aloue  this  love's  express'd. 
If  so  the  affluent  only  were  the  bless'd ; 
One  silent  wish,  one  pray*r,  one  soothing  word. 
The  page  of  tnercy  shall,  wdl  pleas'd,  record ; 
One  soul-felt  sigh  by  pow'rle«  pity  given. 
Accepted  incense !  shall  ascend  to  heav'n  I 

Since  trifles  make  the  sum  of  human  things. 
And  half  our  misery  frt>m  our  foibles  springs  { 
Since  life's  best  joys  consist  in  peace  and  ease, 
And  though  but  few  can  serve,  yet  all  may  please ; 
O  let  th'  ungentle  spirit  leam  from  hence, 
A  small  unkindness  is  a  great  offence. 
To  spread  large  bounties,  though  we  wish  in  vain. 
Yet  all  may  shun  the  guilt  of  giving  pain : 
To  bless  mimkind  with  tides  of  flowing  wealth. 
With  rank  to  grace  them,  or  to  crown  with  health. 
Our  Uttle  lot  denies ;  yet  Ub'ral  stiU, 
Heaven  gives  its  counterpoise  to  every  ill ; 
Nor  let  us  murmur  at  our  stinted  powers. 
When  kindness,  love,  and  concord  may  be  ours. 


SENSIBILITY.  403 

The  gift  of  ministeiiDg  to  othen*  ease. 

To  all  her  bods  impartial  she  decrees ; 

The  gentle  offices  of  patient  love. 

Beyond  all  flattery,  and  all  price  above ; 

The  mild  forbearance  at  a  brother's  fuilt, 

The  angry  word  supprese'd,  the  tannting  thought ; 

Subduing  and  subdued,  the  petty  strife. 

Which  douds  the  colour  of  domestic  Hfe ; 

The  sober  comfort,  all  the  peace  which  springs 

Flrom  the  large  aggregate  <rf  little  things ; 

On  these  small  cares  of  daughter,  wife,  or  friend. 

The  almost  sacred  Joys  of  home  depend : 

There,  Sensibility,  thou  best  mayst  reogn. 

Home  is  thy  true  legitimate  domain. 

A  solitary  bliss  thou  ne'er  eouldst  find. 

Thy  joys  with  those  thou  lov^t  are  intertwined ; 

And  he  whose  hel[rful  tenderness  removes 

The  rankling  thorn  whidi  wounds  the  breast  he  loves, 

Smoottis  not  another's  rugged  path  alone. 

But  dears  th*  obstruction  which  impedes  his  own. 

The  hint  malevolent,  the  look  obliqae, 
The  obvious  satire,  or  implied  dislike ; 
The  sneer  equivocal,  the  harsh  re{dy, 
And  all  the  cruel  language  of  the  eye ; 
The  artful  iqjury,  whose  venom'd  dart 
Scarce  wounds  tiie  heuing,  while  it  stabs  the  heart ; 
The  guarded  phrase,  whose  meaning  kills,  yet  told. 
The  list'ner  wonders  how  you  thought  it  cold ; 
Small  slights,  neglect,  nnmix'd  perhaps  with  hate. 
Make  up  in  number  what  they  want  in  weight. 
These,  and  a  thousand  grie&  minnte  as  ttiese. 
Corrode  our  comfort  and  destaroy  oar  ease. 

As  feeling  tends  to  good  or  leans  to  ill, 
It  gives  fresh  force  to  vice  or  prindple  j 
"Us  not  a  gift  peculiar  to  the  good, 
"Ha  often  but  the  virtue  of  the  blood : 
And  what  would  seem  compassion's  moral  flow, 
Is  but  a  circulation  swift  or  slow : 
But  to  divert  it  to  its  proper  course. 
There  wisdom's  power  appears,  there  reaaon's  force : 
If  ill  directed  it  pursue  the  wrong. 
It  adds  new  strength  to  what  before  was  stron   ( 
Brealcs  out  in  wild  irregular  desires, 
Disorder'd  passions,  and  illidt  fires ; 


404  SENSIBILITY. 

"Vl^thoat,  deforms  the  man,  depraves  within. 

And  makes  the  work  of  God  the  slare  of  Mn. 

But  if  reUgion^s  bias  rule  the  soul. 

Then  sensibility  exalts  the  whole ; 

Sheds  its  sweet  sunshine  on  the  moral  part. 

Nor  wastes  on  fimcy  what  should  warm  the  heart. 

Cold  and  inert  the  mental  powers  would  lie. 

Without  this  quick'ning  spark  of  Deity. 

To  melt  the  rich  materials  from  the  mine, 

To  bid  the  mass  of  intellect  refine, 

To  bend  the  firm,  to  animate  the  cold. 

And  Heaven's  own  image  stamp  on  nature's  gold ; 

To  give  immortal  mind  its  finest  tone. 

Oh,  Sensibility  I  is  all  thy  own. 

This  is  th'  ethereal  flame  which  lights  and  warms. 

In  song  enchants  us,  and  in  action  charms. 

'Us  this  that  makes  the  pensive  strains  of  Giay  * 

Win  to  the  open  heart  their  easy  way ; 

Makes  the  toudi*d  spirit  glow  with  kindred  fire. 

When  sweet  Serena's  poet  wakes  the  lyre : 

Makes  Portland^t  &ce  its  brightest  rapture  wear. 

When  her  large  bounty  smooths  the  bed  of  care : 

*Ti8  this  that  breathes  through  S6vign6*s  fair  page. 

That  nameless  grace  which  soothes  a  second  age ; 

*Tis  this,  whose  charms  the  soul  resistless  seize. 

And  gives  Boscawen  half  her  power  to  please. 

Yet  why  those  terrors  ?  why  that  anxious  care  ? 
Since  your  last  hope  {  the  deathful  war  will  dare  ? 
Why  dread  that  energy  of  soul  which  leads 
To  dang'rous  glory  by  heroic  deeds  ? 
Why  mourn  to  view  his  ardent  soul  aspire  ? 
You  fear  the  son  because  you  knew  the  sire. 
Hereditary  valour  you  deplore. 
And  dread,  yet  wish,  to  find  one  hero  more. 

*  This  is  meant  of  the  Elegy  in  a  Country  Churehyard  ;  of  which 
•exquisite  poem,  sensibility  is.  perhaps,  the  characteristic  beauty. 

\  Lady  Margaret  Cavendish  Barley,  only  child  of  the  second 
Earl  of  Oxford  and  Mor^iUiei'  -married  in  1734,  the  second  duke  of 
Portland.  Prior  celebrated  her  in  the  well-known  nursery  song, 
«•  My  noble,  lovely,  litUe  Peggy."    Her  Grace  died  in  1785— Ed. 

t  Viscount  Falmouth,  Admiral  Boscawen 's  only  remaining  aon, 
was  then  in  AmericA  and  at  the  battle  of  Lexington. 


THE    SLAVE    TRADE: 


A  POEM. 


O  ipreai  dangn ! 
▼e  ions  iif  mercy !  O  complete  ynnr  wotk  , 
Wrench  from  oppreerion'e  hand  the  in.ii  roi. 
And  bid  the  cruel  feel  the  pain*  they  give. 

nomtM't  "Liberty* 


If  Heaven  has  into  being  deigned  to  call 
Thy  light,  O  liberty  I  to  shine  on  all  j 
Bright  intellectoal  sun  1  why  does  thy  ray 
To  earth  distribute  only  partial  day  ? 
Since  no.  resisting  cause  from  spirit  flows, 
Thy  universal  presence  to  oppose ; 
No  obstacles  by  nature*s  hand  imprest. 
Thy  subtle  and  ethereal  beams  arrest ; 
Not  swayed  by  matter  is  thy  course  benign. 
Or  more  direct  or  more  oblique  to  shine ; 
Nor  motion's  laws  can  speed  thy  actire  course. 
Nor  strong  repulsion^  pow*rs  obstruct  thy  force ; 
Since  there  is  no  conrexity  in  mind, 
Why  are  thy  genial  beams  to  parts  confin'd  ? 
While  the  chill  north  with  thy  bright  ray  is  blest, 
Why  should  fell  darkness  half  the  south  infest  ? 
Was  it  decreed,  fair  Freedom !  at  thy  birth. 
That  thou  shouldst  ne'er  irradiate  all  tho  earth  ? 
While  Britain  basks  in  thy  full  blaze  of  Ught, 
Why  lies  sad  Afric  quench'd  in  total  night  7 

Thee  only,  sober  goddess  I  I  attest. 
In  smiles  chastised,  and  decent  graces  drest. 
To  thee,  alone,  pure  daughter  of  the  skies. 
The  hallow*d  incense  of  the  bard  should  rise '. 


406  THE  SLAVE  TRADE. 

Not  that  road  liberty,  in  wliose  wild  praise 
Too  oft  he  trims  his  prostituted  bays ; 
Not  that  unlicensed  monster  of  the  crowd. 
Whose  roar  terrific  bursts  in  peals  so  loud, 
Deafning  the  ear  of  peace ;  fierce  faction's  tool. 
Of  rash  se<tition  bom,  and  mad  misrule ; 
Whose  stubborn  mouth,  rejecting'  reason^s  rein. 
No  strength  can  govern,  and  no  skill  restrain  ; 
Whose  magic  cries  the  frantic  vulgar  draw, 
To  spurn  at  order,  and  to  outrage  law ; 
To  tread  on  grave  authority  and  power. 
And  shake  the  work  of  ages  in  an  hour : 
Convulsed  her  voice,  and  pestilent  her  breath. 
She  raves  of  mercy,  while  she  deals  out  death : 
Each  blast  is  fate ;  she  darts  from  either  hand 
Red  confiagration  o'er  th'  asttmidi'd  land ; 
Clamouring  for  peace,  she  rends  the  air  with  noise, 
And  to  reform  a  part,  the  whole  destroys. 
Reviles  oppression  only  to  oppress, 
And,  in  the  act  of  murder,  breathes  redress. 
Such  have  we  seen  on  fi*eedom*s  genuine  coast, 
Bellowing  for  blessings  which  were  neror  lost. 
'Tis  past,  and  reason  rules  the  ludd  hour, 
And  beauteous  order  reassumes  his  power; 
Lord  of  the  bright  ascendant  may  be  reign. 
Till  perfect  peace  eternal  sway  maintain.* 

O,  plaintive  Southeme  !  t  whose  impassion^  page 
Can  melt  the  soul  to  grief,  or  rouse  to  rage ! 
Now,  when  congenial  themes  engage  tiie  muse. 
She  bums  to  emulate  thy  generous  views  j 
Her  failing  efforts  mock  her  fond  desires. 
She  shares  thy  feelings,  not  partakes  thy  fires. 
Strange  power  of  song !  the  strain  that  warms  the  he  1 1 
Seems  the  same  inspiration  to  impart ; 
Touch'd  by  the  extrinsic  energy  alone, 
Wc  think  the  flame  which  melts  us  is  our  own ; 
Deceiv'd,  for  genius  we  mistake  delight, 
Charmed  as  we  read,  we  fancy  we  can  write. 

Though  not  to  me,  sweet  bard,  thy  powers  belong, 
Tlie  cause  I  plead  shall  sanctify  my  song. 
The  muse  awakes  no  artificial  fire. 
For  truth  rcgects  what  finncy  would  inspire ; 

*  AUadinir  to  Um  riots  of  London  in  the  year  I7M. 
t  Autlior  of  tiM  tragedy  of  Orooooko. 


THE  SLAVE  TRADE.  407 

Here  art  would  weare  her  gayest  flowers  in  vaio. 
The  bright  ioTention  nature  would  disdain. 
For  no  fictitioas  ills  these  numberB  flow, 
But  living  anguish  and  substantial  wo  j 
No  individual  grieft  my  bosom  melt. 
For  millions  feel  what  Oroonoko  felt ; 
Fir*d  by  no  single  wrongs,  the  counfless  host 
I  mourn,  by  rapine  drag^'d  firom  AMc*s  eoast. 

Perish  th'  illiberal  thought  whidi  would  debase 
The  native  genius  of  the  saUe  race  1 
Perish  the  proud  philosophy,  which  sought 
To  rob  them  of  the  powers  of  equal  thought ! 
Does  then  the  inmiortal  prindple  within 
Change  with  the  casual  colour  of  a  skin  ? 
Does  matter  govern  spirit  ?  or  is  mind 
Degraded  by  the  form  to  whidi  'tis  join'd  ? 

No ;  they  have  heads  to  think,  and  hearts  to  feel. 
And  souls  to  act,  with  firm  though  erring  zeal ; 
For  they  have  keen  affections,  kind  desires. 
Love  strong  as  death,  and  active  patriot  fires ; 
All  the  rude  energy,  the  fervid  fiame. 
Of  lugh-soulM  passion  and  ingenuous  shame  : 
Strong  but  luxuriant  virtues  boldly  shoot 
From  the  wild  vigour  of  a  savage  root. 

Nor  weak  with  sense  of  honour's  pitrad  eontnd. 
For  pride  is  virtue  in  a  pagan  soul ; 
A  sense  of  worth,  a  coiMGience  of  desert, 
A  high,  unbroken  hao^tiness  of  heart  { 
That  self-same  stuff  which  orst  prood  empires  swayed. 
Of  which  the  conquerors  of  the  world  were  made. 
Capricious  fate  ot  man  I  that  very  pride 
In  Aftic  scoui|f*d,  in  Rome  was  deified. 

No  muse,  O  Quashi  !*  shall  thy  deeds  roiate^ 
No  statute  snatch  thee  firom  oblivious  fatal 

*  It  U  a  point  of  hooonr  amoof  nefroes  of  a  high  spirit,  to  dio 
rather  than  to  suffer  their  (loaty  akin  to  bear  the  taaA  of  tbo 
whip.  Quashi  had  aonehow  oflinidwl  hi*  maMcr,  a  young  plaat«r, 
with  whom  he  had  been  bred  up  In  the  endearing  Intimaey  of  a 
playfelloir.  Hie  aenrieei  had  been  feithftil  i  his  attachment  aflSN 
tionate.  The  master  resolved  to  punish  him,  and  pursued  him  foi 
that  purpose.  In  trying  to  escape,  Qoashl  stumbled  and  fbll  i  tba 
master  fell  upon  him  i  they  wmtlad  long  with  doubttal  vieloryi  at 
length,  Quashi  got  uppermost,  and  being  Armly  seated  on  his  mastei's 
breast,  he  seeured  his  legs  with  one  hand,  and  with  tba  other  drew 


408  THE  SLAVE  TRADE. 

• 

For  thou  wast  bom  where  never  gentle  maae 
On  valour's  grave  the  flowers  of  genius  strews ) 
And  thou  wast  b<Hrn  where  no  recording  page 
Plucks  the  Mr  deed  from  time's  devouring  rage. 
Had  fortune  placed  thee  on  some  hi^i^«r  coast, 
"Where  polish*d  pagans  souls  heroic  boast. 
To  thee,  who  sought'st  a  voluntary  grave, 
Th*  uni^jur'd  honours  of  thy  name  to  save. 
Whose  gen*rous  arm  thy  barbarous  master  spared. 
Altars  had  smoked,  and  temples  had  been  reared. 

Whene'er  to  Afric's  shores  I  turn  my  eyes. 
Horrors  of  deepest,  deadliest  guilt  arise ; 
I  see,  by  more  than  foncy's  mirrmr  shown. 
The  burning  village  and  the  blazing  town : 
See  the  dire  victim  torn  from  social  life, 
The  shrieking  babe,  the  agonizing  wife ; 
She,  wretch  foriom  I  is  dragged  by  hostile  hands. 
To  distant  tyrants  sold,  in  distant  lands ! 
Transmitted  miseries,  and  successive  chains. 
The  sole  sad  heritage  her  child  obtains  1 
E'en  this  last  wretched  boon  their  foes  deny. 
To  weep  together,  or  together  die. 
By  felon  hands,  by  one  relentless  stroke. 
See  the  fond  links  of  feeling  nature  broke ! 
The  fibres  twisting  round  a  parent's  heart, 
Tom  from  their  grasp,  and  bleeding  as  they  part. 

Hold,  murderers,  hold  I  nor  aggravate  distress ; 
Respect  the  passions  you  yourselves  possess ; 
E'en  you,  of  ruflBan  heart  and  ruthless  hand. 
Love  your  own  offspring,  love  your  native  land : 
E'en  you,  with  fond  impatient  feelings  bum, 
Though  free  as  air,  though  certain  of  return. 
Then,  if  to  you,  who  voluntary  roam. 
So  dear  the  memory  of  your  distant  home, 
O  think  how  absence  the  loved  scene  endears 
To  him,  whose  food  is  groans,  whose  drink  is  tears  ; 

a  iharp  knire ;  then  aaid,  '*  Mftster,  I  hare  been  bred  up  with 
from  «  child ;  I  hvre  loTed  yoa  as  myielf;  in  return,  you  hare 
demned  me  to  a  punichment,  of  which  I  must  ever  have  bom< 
marks— thu*  only  I  can  avoid  them  ;"  so  saying,  he  drew  the 
with  all  his  strength  across  his  own  throat,  and  fell  down 
without  a  groan,  on  his  master's  body. 

Ramsay's  K»$nyonOie  Treatment ^ 4/Hean  I 


THE  SLAVE  TRADE.  409 

Think  on  the  wretdi,  whose  aggrarated  pains, 

To  exile  misery  adds,  to  misery  chains. 

If  warm  your  heart,  to  British  feelings  true. 

As  dear  his  land  to  him,  as  yours  to  you; 

And  liberty,  in  yoa  a  hallowM  flame^ 

Boms  onextingoiahed,  in  his  breast  the  same. 

Then  leare  him  holy  freedom's  dieering  smile. 

The  heaT*n-taagfat  fondness  for  the  parent  soil ; 

Revere  affections  mingled  with  our  fnmB, 

In  erery  nature,  erery  dime  the  same ; 

In  all,  these  feelings  eqoal  sway  maintirfn ; 

In  all,  the  love  of  home  and  freedom  rdgn; 

And  Tempo's  vale,  and  parch'd  Angola'k  sand, 

One  equal  fcmdness  of  their  sons  command. 

Th*  unconqner'd  savage  laughs  at  pain  and  toil. 

Basking  in  freedom's  beams  whidi  gild  his  native  soil. 

Does  thirst  of  empire,  does  desire  of  fruDe, 
(For  these  are  spedous  crimes,)  our  rage  inflame  ? 
No :  sordid  lust  of  gold  their  fi&te  contnds, 
The  basest  appetite  of  basest  souls : 
Gold,  better  gain'd  by  what  their  ripening  sky. 
Their  fertile  fields,  their  arts  *  and  mines  supply. 

What  wrongs,  what  injuries  does  oppression  plead, 
To  smooth  the  crime  and  sanctify  the  deed  ? 
What  strange  offence,  what  aggrayated  sin  ? 
They  stand  convicted— of  a  darker  skin! 
Barbarians,  hold  1  th*  opprobrious  commerce  spare. 
Respect  His  sacred  image  which  they  bear. 
Though  dark  and  savage,  ignorant  and  blind. 
They  claim  the  common  privilege  of  kind  $ 
Let  malice  strip  them  of  each  other  plea. 
They  still  are  men,  and  men  should  still  be  free. 
Insulted  reason  loathes  th*  inverted  trade— 
Loathes,  as  she  views  the  human  purchase  made ; 
The  outraged  goddess,  with  abhorrent  eyes, 
Sees  man  the  traffic,  soub  the  merchandise ! 
Ifan,  whom  foir  commerce  taught  with  judging  eye. 
And  liberal  hand,  to  barter  or  to  buy, 
Indignant  Nature  blushes  to  behold 
Degraded  man  himself  truck'd,  barter*d,  sold : 

*  BMldM  many  Ttliuble  prodnetkiu  of  tlM  toll,  etothi  and  ear. 
peu  of  ezquUito  mantiCMtora  are  broofht  firom  tha  eoaatof  Guinea. 

T 


I 


410  , 


In  frin  *•  Til  Jot*  •»  '"'*S.  ii«*4* 
Will  the  P«*tifWw»fc«>^'»'"  ^ 


THB  SLAVE  TRADE. 
For  hLm,  wh«ii  %gQDj  bU  fnmu  tetn ji, 


Snllm,  ba  Dliigki  wia  Kit  KMtoA  4a)li 
For  ha  iH  leral  (a  d(««4  Ik*  QatMiMl  tnM) 
To  Um  lAit  mecar  iw  tM  go4  «M*r. 
WboH  HiTHita  iroi^Vi  and  wbaf*  MW  Mny  f 
Sanca  t  Oj  nalal  ai 


Tb*  gcaat  ddlTvar  4a>)l.  U  iHfth  iH  knk*  1 
Bdwd  froD  idavT.  «*a  (MW*  taw  ««M 
On,  maat  that  DdBT  IPW  4ffl^4))M  hM. 
In  Ih  J  dark  bops.  nr*  T«nw  of  ID' «tn«*l'4 
T4a  wkilud  TW  UQib  tad  thf  WMn  MA. 


»te(Tgnb*T>f<miF4tliT*«>d> 
If  amWi  ton  (venm'd  to  tMd 
nonlrth«Iu«(nq*b) 


On  Blm,  wba  moda  Ifaw  what  IkoB  1(1,  d«i^B4  ( 
B9,  wbo  wlUibaUl  Uu  nuain,  aeenpti  Uw  •»■. 
Tby  mania)  idght  lb;  Eaiionr  wiU  lUt  talMUi 
Ha  Aad  for  iboH  vlw  asrar  baird  hli  oiDw. 
Nat  Ihint  tbe  teskoiAiK  lira  af  U^t  alnii'il, 
KBonladga  diagracB^i  and  llbert/  miaiv^d  i 
~    ■■  -QlJQdgai»       


Thim  ^Md  thT  bBidoa  cW«  to  i«l#  or  bo*  I 
VheHwT  tobiiar  uMiSab  t*  tbT  V<»4. 
Atrnot  Into  ridkw  Coaat'i  W*M  i 

"  '  '  'ar  camige  bvck  thy  vtanMiii  way* 


412  THE  SLAVE  TRADE. 

WheUier  tboa  paat  to  tame  earth's  distant  bound ; 

All  Cortei  moi^ler'd,  all  Ckdombus  found ; 

0*er  jdunder^d  realms  to  reign  detested  lord. 

Make  millions  wretched,  and  thjrself  abhorrM  :-^ 

'Whether  Cartouche*  in  forests  break  the  law. 

Or  bolder  Caesar  keep  the  world  in  awe; 

In  reason's  eye,  in  wisdom*s  fair  account 

Your  sum  of  glory  boasts  a  like  amount ; 

Tiie  means  may  dUfer,  but  the  end's  the  same ; 

C<niqne8t  is  pillage  with  a  hobUr  name. 

Who  nukes  the  sum  of  human  blessings  less. 

Or  rinks  the  stock  of  general  hiftppiness, 

Though  erring  fiune  may  grace,  though  folse  renown 

His  life  may  blaxon,  or  Us  memory  crown ; 

Yet  the  last  audit  shall  rerose  the  cause ; 

And  Ood  shall  yindicate  his  broken  laws. 

Had  those  adTonfrons  ^Irits  who  explore 
Through  ocean's  trackless  wastes  the  fur-sought  shore : 
Whether  of  wealth  insatiate,  or  of  powV, 
ConquerOTs  who  waste,  or  mfSans  who  devour : 
Had  these  possess'd,  O  Cook  1  f  thy  genfle  mind, 
Thy  love  of  arts,  thy  lore  of  human  kind ; 
Had  these  pursued  thy  mild  and  liberal  plan. 
Discoverers  had  not  been  a  curse  to  man  I 
Then,  bless'd  philanthropy  I  thy  sodal  hands 
Had  link'd  dissoTerM  wcn-lds  in  brothers*  bands ; 
Careless  if  colour  or  if  dime  divide ; 
Then,  lov'd  and  loving,  man  had  liv'd  and  died. 
Then  with  pernicious  skill  we  had  not  known 
To  bring  their  vices  back,  and  leave  our  own. 

The  purest  wreaths  whidi  hang  on  glory's  slirine. 
For  empires  founded,  peaceful  Penn  1  are  thine ; 
No  blood-stain'd  laurels  crowned  thy  virtuous  toil. 
No  slaughter'd  natives  drench'd  thy  fidr-eam'd  soil. 
Still  thy  meek  spirit  in  thy  flock  X  survives. 
Consistent  stiU,  their  doctrines  rule  their  lives : 

*  A  eelebrmted  robber  in  France,  whose  daring  achievements  for 
■ome  years  spread  terror  through  entire  provinces,  and  kept  even 
tlie  government  In  alarm. 

t  A  French  writer  has  justly  said  of  our  Dlustrioos  navigator,  that, 
nnlike  all  voyagers  who  preceded  him,  he  left  a  blessing  in  every 
new  region  where  he  came,  by  aowlng  seeds  for  the  ftiture  beoeflt  of 
the  Inhabitants.— Ed. 

t  The  Quakers  have  emancipated  all  their  slaves  throughont 
America. 


THE  SLAVE  TRADE.  413 

Thy  foUowen  <mly  hare  effiteed  the  shame 
Inscribed  by  slavery  on  the  Chriatian  name. 

Shali  Britain,  vdiere  the  sool  of  freedom  reigns, 
Forge  chains  for  others  she  herself  disdains  ? 
Forbid  it,  Heayen  1  O  let  the  nations  know 
The  liberty  she  loves  she  wiU  bestow ; 
Not  to  herself  the  glorious  gift  ctmfin^d. 
She  spreads  the  blessing  wide  as  haman  kind ; 
And,  scorning  narrow  views  of  time  and  place. 
Bids  all  be  free  in  earth's  extended  space. 

What  page  of  human  annals  can  record 
A  deed  so  Inight  as  human  rights  restored  ? 
O  may  that  godlike  deed,  that  shining  V¥^ 
Redeem  our  £une,  and  consecrate  our  age ! 
And  let  this  glory  mark  our  favour'd  shore. 
To  curb  fidse  freedom,  and  the  true  restore ! 

And  see,  the  cherub  Mercy  from  above. 
Descending  softly,  quits  the  sphere  of  love ! 
On  Britain*s  isle  she  sheds  her  heavenly  dew  j 
And  breathes  her  spirit  o'er  ih*  enlightened  few. 
From  soul  to  soul  tiie  spreading  influence  steals. 
Till  every  breast  the  soft  contagion  feels. 
She  speeds,  exulting,  to  the  burning  shore. 
With  the  best  message  angel  ever  bore : 
Hark  I  ^  the  note  which  spoke  a  Saviour^  birth  I 
Glory  to  Qod  on  high,  and  peace  on  earth  I 
She  vindicates  the  pow'r  in  heaven  ador'd. 
She  stills  the  clank  of  chains,  and  sheathes  the  sword. 
She  cheers  the  mourner,  and  with  soothing  hands 
From  bursting  hearts  unUnds  th*  (^»pressor's  bands ; 
Restores  the  lustre  <rf  the  CSiristian  name. 
And  clears  the  foulest  blot  that  dimm*d  its  fame. 

As  the  mild  vfMt  hovers  o'er  the  coast, 
A  fresher  hue  their  withered  landscapes  boast  j 
Her  healing  smiles  the  ruined  scenes  repair. 
And  blasted  Nature  wears  a  joyous  air ; 
While  she  proclaims,  through  all  thefar  qiicy  groves, 
"  Henceforth  your  fruits,  your  labours,  and  your  loves, 
**  All  that  your  dres  possess'd,  or  you  have  sown, 
**  Sacred  from  plunders-all  is  now  your  own.'* 
And  now,  her  high  commission  from  above, 
Stamp'd  with  the  holy  characters  of  love. 
The  meek-eyed  spirit  waving  in  her  hand. 
Breathes  manumission  o'er  the  rescued  land ; 


414  THE  SLAVE  TRADE. 


She  tean  fhe  bMinfer  etila'd  With  Uood  HMl  tecar^, 
AiMilibertyl  tiiy diiiiiiv elHidard  rean I 
As  the  hright  enrigflt'i  glory  the  diq^yt. 
See  pale  opprenloii  ftiiitto  beneath  the  UsM ! 
The  giant  dies  1  no  more  Us  frown  appals, 
The  chain,  nntonch'd,  drops  off  t  the  fetter  &Us. 
Astwiish^d  Echo  tdls  the  Toeal  shere, 
Oppresdon'k  fkll*n»  and  sbirery  is  no  more  I 
The  doslcy  myriads  orowd  the  sultry  plain. 
And  hail  that  merey  long  invoked  in  rain, 
Victorioas  pow'r  I  she  bursts  their  twottM  bands« 
And  ftith  and  freedom  qpring  from  Britain's  taaoda. 
And  Thou  I  great  source  of  natore  and  ol^graeeb 
Who  of  one  blood  didst  form  the  hnman  race  i 
Look  down  in  mwey  in  thy  chosen  timOf 
With  equal  eye  on  Afric*s  suflRraing  dime  t 
Disperse  her  shades  of  intellectnal  nighti 
Repeat  thy  high  behest—Let  there  be  light ! 
Brfaig  each  benighted  soul,  great  Ood,  to  Thee, 
And  with  thy  wide  salration  make  them  free  I 


BISHOP  BONNER'S  GHOST. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

In  fh«  gftident  of  th«  fwlaee  at  PuUuun,  is  a  dark  nccm  ;  at  the 
vnd  of  this  standi  a  ehairt  whieh  one*  belonged  to  Bishop  Bonner. 
A  eertain  Bidiop  of  London,*  more  than  two  hundred  years  after 
tho  death  of  tiM  aftwesaid  Bonner,  one  mominf.  Just  as  the  clock  of 
tiM  Gothle  chapel  had  stmek  six,  undertook  to  cot  with  liis  own 
hand  a  narrow  walk  throoffh  this  thicket,  which  is  since  called  the 
ilfisiift's  Walk.  He  had  no  sooner  begun  to  dear  the  way,  than,  Id 
suddenly  up  started  from  the  chair  the  Ghost  of  Bishop  Bonner, 
who,  in  a  tone  of  just  and  bitter  iDdignation,  uttered  the  following 
verses. 

*  Bishop  Porteue. 


BONNER'S  GHOST. 

WRITTEN  IN  178B.* 


Rbfobhbr,  hold !  ah,  spare  my  shade. 

Respect  the  hallow'd  dead  1 
Vain  pray'r !  I  see  the  op^mns'  glade. 

See  utter  darkness  fled. 

Just  so  your  hinovating  hand 

Let  in  the  moral  light  i 
So,  chas*d  from  this  bewilder'd  land. 

Fled  intellectual  night. 

Where  now  that  holy  gloom  which  hid 

F(ur  truth  from  vulgar  ken  ? 
Where  now  that  wisdom  which  forbid 

To  think  that  monks  were  men  ? 

The  tangled  mazes  of  the  schools. 

Which  spread  so  thick  before ; 
Whidi  knaves  entwin*d  to  puzzle  fools. 

Shall  catch  mankind  no  more. 

Those  charming  intricacies,  where  ? 

Those  venerable  lies  ? 
Those  legends,  once  the  church's  care  ? 

Those  sweet  perplexities  ? 

Ah !  fatal  age,  whose  sons  combin'd 

Of  credit  to  exhaust  us  ; 
Ah  I  fatal  age,  which  gave  mankind 

A  Luther  and  a  Faustus !  f 

*  On  fiTiiif  this  ingenious  jeu  d*  etprU  a  pUce  amoDf  her  eol« 
leeted  poemi  in  1801,  the  author  thought  proper  to  add  the  fol- 
lowing note. — "  This  little  poem  wai  neTer  before  published.  A 
few  eopies  were  printed  by  the  late  Earl  of  Orford  at  his  press  at 
Strawberry- Hill,  and  given  to  a  few  particular  friends." 

t  The  same  age  whidi  brought  heresy  into  the  diurdi,  unhappi- 
ly introduced  printing  among  the  arts,  by  whldi  means  the  serip- 
taret  were  unluckily  disseminated  wxoaag  the  vulgar. 

X2 


r 


418  BONNER*S  GHOST. 

Had  only  Jack  and  Martin  *  fiv*d. 

Our  pow*r  had  slowly  fled ; 
Our  influence  longer  had  survived. 

Had  laymen  nerer  read. 

For  knowledge  flew,  like  magic  spell. 

By  typographic  art : 
Oh,  shame  I  a  peasant  now  can  tell 

If  prieets  the  truth  impart. 

Ye  council!^  {rilgTiroages,  creeds ! 

Synods,  decrees,  and  rules  I 
Ye  warrants  of  unholy  deeds, 

Indulgences  and  bulls  1 

"Where  are  ye  now  ?  and  where,  alas ! 

The  pardons  we  dispoise  ? 
And  penances,  the  grange  of  rins ; 

And  Peter's  holy  pence  ? 

"Where  now  the  beads,  which  used  to  swell 

Lean  virtue's  spare  amount  t 
Here  only  faith  and  goodness  fill 

A  heretic's  account. 

But  soft— what  gradous  form  appears  ? 

Is  this  a  convent's  life  ? 
Atrocious  sight !  by  all  my  fears, 

A  prelate  with  a  wife  1 

Ah !  sainted  Mary,  f  not  for  this 

Our  pious  labours  join'd ; 
The  witcheries  of  domestic  bliss 

Had  shook  e'en  Gardiner's  mind. 

Hence  all  the  sinful,  human  ties. 

Which  mar  the  cloister's  plan ; 
Hence  an  the  weak  fond  charities, 

Which  make  man  feel  for  man. 

*  How  Bishop  Bomwr  eame  to  hare  read  SwUl's  Tde  of  a  Tub, 
it  may  now  be  in  rain  to  inquire. 

t  An  orthodox  queen  of  the  sisteenlh  century,  who  laboarad 
with  might  and  main,  conjointly  with  these  two  venerable  bishops 
to  eztiniuish  a  dangerous  heresy  ycleped  the  Reformation. 


BONNER'S  GHOST.  410 

But  t<nrtiir'd  memory  vainly  speaks 

The  projects  we  designed ; 
While  this  apostate  bishop  seeks 

The  freedom  of  mankind. 

Oh,  bom  in  evVy  thing  to  shake 

The  systems  planned  by  me  1 
So  heterodox,  that  he  woaM  make 

Both  soul  and  body  free. 

Nor  dime  not  eolonr  stays  his  hand ; 

^th  charity  depray'd. 
He  would  from  Thames*  to  GamUa^s  strand. 

Hare  all  be  free  and  sav'd. 

And  who  shaU  <jtaaag6  his  wayward  heart. 

His  wilful spbit  turn? 
For  those  his  hiboars  oaa*t  etmvert, 

His  weakness  will  not  bum. 

Ann.  Dona.  1900.  A  GOOD  OLD  PAPIST. 


V  By  the  lapie  oftiBM  the  thrae  UhI  rtanna  sn  Imooim  unin- 
teUif  rble.  Old  dironMM  Mf.  that  tvwaidi  tte  latttr  end  of  the 
18th  centniy,  a  bill  waa  brought  into  the  Britirii  parliament  by  an 
aetiTe  yoong  reformer,  Ibr  the  abolition  of  a  pretended  trafBe  of  the 
human  speeiea.  Bat  this  only  ihows  how  Ihlle  fidth  Is  to  be  fiven 
to  the  esagferations  of  history ;  Ibr  as  no  Tsatlte  of  ttils  Incredible 
trade  now  remains,  we  look  npon  the  whcAe  story  to  have  been  one 
of  tiiose  actions,  not  tmcommon  amoBg  amhors,  lo  biaeken  the  me- 
mory of  former  ages. 


THE 

PUPPET-SHOW: 

A  TALE. 


A  NOBLB  earl— 4he  name  I  spare. 
From  reverence  to  the  living  heir-— 
liOV*d  pleasore  :  bat,  to  speak  the  truth. 
Not  modi  refinement  graced  the  youth. 
The  path  of  pleasure  which  he  trode 
Was  somewhat  new,  and  rather  odd ; 
For,  that  he  haonted  park  or  play, 
Wb  hoose^  archives  do  not  say ; 
Or  that  more  modish  joys  he  felt. 
And  woold  in  opera  transports  melt ; 
Or  that  he  spent  his  morning's  prime 
In  Bond-street  bliss  till  dinner-time : 
No  treasur'd  anecdotes  record 
Such  pastimes  pleased  the  youthful  lord. 

One  single  taste  historians  mention, 
A  fact,  unmingled  with  invention ; 
It  was  a  taste  you'll  think,  I  fear. 
Somewhat  peculiar  for  a  peer. 
Though  the  rude  democratic  pen 
Pretends  that  peers  are  only  men. 
Whatever  town  or  country  fieur 
Was  advertis*d,  my  lord  was  there. 
'Twas  not  to  purchase  or  to  sell — 
Why  went  he  then  ?  the  muse  shall  tell. 
At  fairs  he  never  failed  to  find 
The  joy  congenial  to  his  mind. 
This  dear  diversion  would  you  know  t 
What  was  it  ?  twas  a  puppet-show  I 
Transported  with  the  mimic  art. 
The  wit  of  Punch  enthralled  his  heart. 
He  went,  each  evening,  just  at  six. 
When  Punch  exhibited  his  tricks  -, 


THE  PUPPET-SHOW.  421 

And,  not  oontonted  erery  nigbt 

To  view  this  ol^ect  of  dcdigfat. 

He  grayely  made  the  matter  known 

He  moBt  and  would  have  Ponch  hia  own  } 

For  iff  exdaims  the  noble  lord. 

Such  joys  these  transient  yiews  afford ; 

If  I  receive  such  keen  delight 

IVom  a  short  visit  every  night, 

'Tis  fidr  to  calcalate  what  pleasure 

Will  spring  fh>m  oummg  such  a  treasure. 

I  need  not  for  amusements  roam, 

I  shall  have  always  Pundi  at  home. 

He  rav*d,  with  this  new  fsney  bit. 

Of  Punch's  sense  and  Punch's  wtti 

Not  more  Nardssus  longed  t'  embrace 

The  watery  mirror's  shadowy  face ; 

Not  more  Pygmalion  long'd  to  claim 

Th*  unconscious  ol^ect  of  his  flame ; 

Tliaa  long'd  th*  enamour'd  legislator 

To  purchase  this  delightful  creature. 

Bach  night  he  regularly  sought  him. 

Nor  did  he  rest  till  he  had  bought  him. 

Soon  he  aocompUshes  the  measure. 
And  pays  profusely  for  his  treasure : 
He  bids  them  pack  the  precious  thing. 
So  careful  not  to  break  a  spring  1 
So  anxious  not  to  bruise  a  feature, 
Hh  own  new  coadi  must  fetdi  the  creature ! 
He  safriy  brought  the  idol  home. 
And  lodgM  beneath  his  splendid  dome ; 
All  obstacles  at  length  surmounted. 
My  lord  on  perfect  pleasure  counted. 

If  you  have  feelings,  guess  you  may, 
How  glad  he  pass'd  the  live-long  day. 
His  eating-room  he  makes  the  station. 
Of  his  new  fav*rite's  habitation. 
**  Convivial  Punch  1"  he  cried,  **  to-day 
**  Thy  genius  shall  have  full  display  I 
**  How  shall  I  laugh  to  hear  thy  wit 
**  At  supper  nightly  as  I  sit ! 
**  Oh  how  delightful,  as  I  dine, 
**  To  hear  some  sallies.  Punch,  of  thine  !** 

Next  day,  at  table,  as  he  sat^ 
Impatient  to  begin  the  chat, 


488  THE  PUPPET-SHOW. 

Punch  WM  pcodaieeds  b«l  Pmehi  I  trow, 

DiTMtad  of  Us  poppofeHriiow* 

Wm  nothing,  ww  a  Urfof  of  wires, 

Whose  HHBMMM  4iMippoii^  Md  tires. 

DepilT'd  of  aU  ezteinrio  aid. 

The  empty  idol  was  betray'd. 

No  artful  hand  to  pvU  the  qprings, 

And  Punch  DO  kM^er  sqoeaks  or  rings. 

Ah,  me  I  what  horrw  sris*d  my  lord, 

*Twa8  paint,  *twas  show,  'twas pasted-bospdl 

He  marrell^d  why  the  ploasent  thiny 

Which  could  oneh  erowds  togetiier  Ining  I 

Which  cliarm*d  hkn  iniien  the  show  was  foil. 

At  home  Bhoold  be  so  Toy  dalL 

He  ne*er  suspected  *twis  tte  scenery. 

He  noTor  dreamt  *twis  tlM  mscWnwy  t 

The  lights,  the  noise,  the  tridcs,  the  distance, 

QaTe  the  dvmb  idol  this  assintsnce. 

Prepoeteroospeerl  fiur  better  go 

To  thy  congenial  pappet-akow) 

Than  bay,  divested  of  its  glares 

The  empty  thing  which  darm'd  thee  thwe. 

Be  still  content  abroad  to  roam, 

For  Punch  exhibits  not  at  home. 

The  moral  of  the  tale  I  aing 
To  modem  matdies  hmne  I  bring. 
Ye  youths,  in  quest  of  vrlTes  who  go 
To  erery  crowded  puppet-diow ; 
Jtf  firom  these  scenes,  you  choose  for  life 
A  dancing,  singing,  dreadng  wife ; 
O  maryel  not,  at  h<Mne  to  find 
An  empty  figure  roid  of  mind  \ 
Stript  cf  her  scenery  and  gamidi, 
A  thing  of  paint,  and  paste,  and  ramiah. 

Ye  candidates  for  earth^s  best  prize. 
Domestic  life's  sweet  charities  I 
If  long  yoa*Te  strayed  from  reason's  way. 
Enslaved  by  fiiAion^  wisard  sway ; 
If  by  her  witcheries  still  betray'd. 
You  wed  some  vain  fhntastie  maid  { 
Snatched,  not  selected,  as  you  go. 
The  heroine  of  the  puppet-show ; 
In  every  outward  grace  refined. 
And  destitute  of  nought  but  mind ; 


THE  PUPPET-SHOW.  423 

If,  skillfld  in  ev«7  po)idi*4  iBi» 
She  want  simplicity  <tf  he«H ; 
On  her  for  bliss  if  ftm.  de|leiid» 
Without  the  meaiis  yoa  seek  tfajs  end  { 
Yon  seek,  o'ertondi^  imttire^  faiw% 
A  consequenee  without  a  diose ; 
A  downward  pyratnid  jm.  placi^ 
The  point  inverted  for  the  hise. 
Blame  your  own  woirk,  kiot  Ikte ;  nor  rail 
If  bUss  so  iU  seenred  diould  iUL 
'Tis  after  fimded  food  to  roam, 
*Tis  bringing  PusmeIi  to  Uve  at  honm. 

And  yoo,  bright  nymphs,  who  Urns  onl'  efe% 
With  all  that  art,  that  taste  sappUes ; 
Learn  that  aoeompiidimenti,  at  best, 
Are  bat  the  gamidi  in  Bfe^  feast ; 
And  though  your  transient  gsests  may  praise 
Your  showy  board  on  gala  ^ys ; 
Yet  while  you  treat  each  frippery  sUmer 
With  mere  deserts,  and  call  "tern  tfimier. 
Your  lord,  who  lites  at  hoaoAS,  stffl  fseb 
The  want  of  nxire  substantial  meals ; 
Of  sense  and  worth,  yMsii  every  hoar 
Enlaiige  affection^  growing  power : 
Of  wortii,  not  emuhnn  of  prals^ 
Of  sense,  not  kept  for  gala  days. 

O !  in  the  highest,  hapj^est  le^ 
By  woman  be  it  neW  forgot, 
Jhat  human  life's  no  Isthmian  game^ 
Where  sports  and  showa  mutt  purdiase  fome. 
Though  at  the  poppet-Aow  he  shMie, 
Punch  was  poor  company  alone. 
Life  is  no  round  of  joeuad  honft^ 
Of  garlands  gay,  and  festiTe  bowers  \ 
E'en  to  the  young,  to  whem  I  fe^, 
Its  serious  busiuMs  Bfb  wiU  brings 
Though  bright  the  suns  which  iMW  hpptoir 
To  gild  your  doudless  atmosphere^ 
Oft  unawares,  some  direivd  storm 
Serenest  skies  may  soon  deform ; 
In  dim  affliction's  dreary  hour. 
The  flash  of  mirth  must  lose  its  peitreirt 
While  fiaith  a  constant  light  supplies, 
And  yirtue  cheers  ttte  darkest  skies. 


424  THB  PUPPET-SHOW. 

To  bless  the  iiifttriin<»dal  hoon. 
Must  three  joint  leaden  dob  their  powers ; 
Good-nature,  piety,  and  sense 
Most  thdr  ccmfederate  aids  diqiense. 
As  the  soft  powers  of  cSl  aaaoage 
Of  ocean's  waves  the  forioos  rage ; 
Loll  to  repose  the  boiling  tide, 
And  the  rough  billows  bid  subside. 
Till  every  angry  motion  sleej^ 
And  s<rfte8t  tremblings  hush  the  deep ; 
Good-nature  t  thus  thy  charms  control 
The  tumults  cl  the  troubled  soul ; 
By  labour  worn,  by  care  opprest. 
On  thee  the  wearied  head  shall  rest ; 
YTom  business  and  distraction  free. 
Delighted,  shall  return  to  thee ; 
To  thee  the  aching  heart  shall  cling. 
And  find  that  peace  it  does  not  bring. 

And  while  the  light  and  empty  foir, 
Form'd  for  the  ball-room's  dauHng  glare ; 
Abroad,  of  q;>eech  so  prompt  and  rvfjlid. 
At  home,  so  vacant  and  so  vi^d ; 
Of  every  puppet-show  the  life. 
At  home  a  dull  and  tasteless  wife ; — 
The  mind  with  sense  and  knowledge  stored 
Can  counsel  or  can  soothe  its  lord ; 
His  varied  joys  or  sorrows  feel. 
And  share  the  pains  it  cannot  heal. 

But  Piety  I  without  thy  aid, 
Love^  foirest  prospects  soon  must  fade. 
Blest  architect !  reared  by  thy  hands. 
Connubial  concord's  temple  stands. 
Though  wit,  though  genius,  raise  the  pile. 
Though  taste  assist,  though  talents  smile, 
Though  foshion,  while  her  wreathes  she  twine^ 
Her  light  Corinthian  columns  join ; 
Still  the  fnH  structure  fiEuacy  rears, 
A  tottering  house  of  cards  appears ; 
Some  sudden  gust,  nor  rare  the  case. 
May  shake  the  building  to  its  base, 
Unless,  blest  Piety  I  thou  join, 
Thy  key-stone  to  insure  the  shrine ; 
Unless  to  guard  against  surprises. 
On  thy  broad  arch  the  temple  rises. 


DAN  AND  JANE: 

OB, 

FAITH.  AND    WORKS. 
A  TALB. 


Good  Dan  and  Jane  were  man  and  wife. 

And  lived  a  loying  kind  of  life ; 

One  point,  however,  they  disputed, 

Ai^  each  by  turns  his  mate  confuted. 

'Twas  faith  and  works— this  knotty  question 

They  found  not  easy  of  digestion. 

"While  Dan  for  fiuth  alone  contended, 

Jane  equally  good  works  defended. 

**  They  are  not  Christians  sure,  but  Turks, 

**  Who  build  on  faith  and  scoff  at  works,** 

Quoth  Jane ;— while  eager  Dan  replied, 

**  By  none  but  heathens  faith's  denied/* 

**  I'll  tell  yon,  wife,*'  at  length  quoth  Dan, 

**  A  story  of  a  right  good  man. 

**  A  patriarch  sage,  of  ancient  days, 

**  A  man  of  foith,  whom  all  must  praise. 

"  In  his  own  country  he  possess'd 

**  Whate'er  can  make  a  wise  man  blest ; 

**  His  was  the  flock,  the  fleld,  the  spring, 

**  In  short,  a  little  rural  king. 

'*  Yet,  pleased,  he  quits  his  native  land, 

**  By  foith  in  the  divine  command. 

'*  God  bade  him  go ;  and  he,  content, 

"  Went  forth,  not  Imowing  where  he  went. 

**  He  trusted  in  the  promise  made, 

*'  And,  undisputing,  straight  obey*d. 

**  The  heavenly  word  he  did  not  doubt, 

**  But  prov*d  his  foith  by  going  out." 

Jane  answer*d,  with  some  little  pride — 
"  I've  an  example  on  my  side ; 
"  And  though  my  tale  be  somewhat  longer, 
"  1  trust  you'll  find  it  vastly  stronger. 


c 


486  DAN  AND  JANE; 

■*  rU  tell  you,  Daniel,  of  B  man, 

"  The  holiert  linee  the  world  beffan; 

**  Who  DOW  God^  fiayoor  la  recelTing, 

■*For  prompt  oft<y<iy  not  beUeving. 

**  One  only  aon  this  man  poasest, 

**  In  whom  hia  rigfateona  age  waa  bleat ; 

'*  And  more  to  mark  the  grace  of  Heaveub 

**  ThiB  aon  by  ndnde  waa  giyen. 

^*  And  firom  thia  child  the  word  divine 

**  Had  prondaed  an  iBiiatrioaa  line^ 

**  When,  lo  I  at  once  a  Toloe  he  hean, 

**  WUdi  aonnda  like  thunder  in  fab 

**  God  aaya— go  aacriliee  thy  aaA  1 

**— This  moment.  Lord,  it  diall  be  < 

**  He  goea,  and  fnatalrtiy  Hepwraab 

*<  To  alaythia  child  of  many  IrafiVB.  , 

'*  Now,  here  yon  see  the  gnad  eoqiedlaaeeb 

*<  Of  worka,  of  w^nal  aoimd  obedtenoe* 

*<  This  waa  not  fiidth,  bat  act  and  dead, 

**  The  Lord  commanda— the  efaild  dnll  Ueed. 

**  Thoa  Abraham  aeted,**  Jenny  cried  I 

**Thaa  Abraham  troated,**  Dan  replied* 

**  Abraham  1"  quoth  Jane,  "  why  that'a  taiy  mwi,* 

**  No,  Abraham's  him  I  mean,"  aaya  Dan. 

**  He  atanda  a  monument  of  fidth  j^* 

**  No,  *tia  for  works,  the  aoriptnre  aaitti.'* 

**'Ti8  for  hia  fidth  that  I  defend  him:" 

**  '71a  for  obedience  I  commend  him.** 

Thna  he— thua  she— both  warmly  feel. 
And  lose  their  tempo:  kk  their  seal; 
Too  quick  each  others  dioice  to  blame. 
They  did  not  see  each  meant  the  aame. 
**  At  length,  good  wife,**  said  hcmeat  Dan, 
*'  WeYe  talldng  of  the  a^-aame  man. 
**  The  worka  you  praise  I  own,  indeed* 
**  Grow  from  that  ftdth  for  which  I  i^ead  ; 
'*  And  Abraham,  whom  for  faith  I  quotes 
*'  For  worka  deaerrea  eq>ec3al  note : 
**  'Tia  not  enough  of  iiaith  to  talk, 
**  A  man  of  God,  with  God  muat  walk : 
**  Our  doctrinea  are,  at  laat,  the  aame, 
"  They  only  differ  in  the  name. 
**  The  ftith  I  fight  for,  ia  the  root; 
**  The  worka  you  value,  are  the  fruit. 


OR,  FAITH  AND  WORKS.  427 

<*  How  Bhall  yon  know  my  creed's  aiiicere, 

**  Unless  in  works  my  foith  a|q;>ear  P 

**  How  shall  I  know  a  treats  aUve, 

**  Unless  I  see  it  bear  and  thrire  ? 

**  Yoor  works  not  growii^  on  my  root, 

**  Would  prore  they  were  not  genuine  fruit 

**  If  foith  produce  no  works,  I  see, 

**  That  fidth  is  not  aUving  tree. 

**  Thus  fiiith  and  works  t<^ether  grow. 

**  No  separate  life  they  e'er  can  know : 

**  They^  soul  and  body,  hand  and  heart, 

**  What  God  bath  joined,  let  no  man  part." 


TUB 

TWO  GARDENERS. 


Tvro  gardeners  once  beneath  an  oak. 

Lay  down  to  rest,  when  Jack  thus  spoke-^ 

**  Yon  must  confess,  dear  Will,  tiiat  Nature 

'*  Is  bat  a  blondYing  kind  of  creature ; 

"  And  I— nay,  why  that  look  of  terror  ? 

**  Could  teach  her  how  to  mend  her  error." 

**  Your  talk,"  quoth  Will,  **  is  bold  and  odd, 

*'  What  you  call  Nature,  I  call  God." 

"  Well,  call  him  by  what  name  you  will,'* 

Quoth  Jack,  *'he  manages  but  ill ; 

"  Nay,  firom  the  very  tree  we're  under, 

"  111  prore  that  Providence  can  blunder." 

Quoth  Will,  **  Through  thick  and  thin  you  dash, 

"  I  shudder.  Jack,  at  words  so  rash ; 

*'  I  trust  to  what  the  Scriptures  tell, 

*'  He  hath  done  always  all  things  well."* 

Quoth  Jack,  "  Tm  lately  grown  a  wit, 

**  And  think  all  good  a  liuky  hit. 

**  To  prove  that  Providence  can  err, 

**  Not  words,  but  facts,  the  truth  aver. 

"  To  this  vast  oak  lift  up  thine  eyes, 

**  Then  view  that  acorn's  paltry  size ; 

**  How  foolish !  on  a  tree  so  tall, 

*'  To  place  that  tiny  cup  and  ball. 

**  Now  look  again,  yon  pompion*  see, 

"  It  weighs  two  pounds  at  least,  nay  three ; 

'*  Yet  this  large  ftruit,  where  is  it  found  f 

'*  Why,  meanly  trailing  on  the  ground. 

*'  Had  Providence  ask'd  my  advice, 

'*  I  would  have  changed  it  in  a  trice ; 

"  I  would  have  said,  at  nature's  birth, 

*'  Let  acorns  creep  upon  the  earth ; 

*  Afourd. 


k 


ATHEIST  AND  ACORN.  429 

'*  Bat  let  the  pomi^on,  vast  and  round, 
**  On  the  oak's  lofty  boughs  be  found." 
He  said— and  as  he  rashly  spoke, 
Lo  1  from  the  branches  of  the  oak, 
A  wind,  which  suddenly  arose. 
Beat  show'rs  of  acorns  on  his  nose ; 

**  Oh !  oh  !**  quoth  Jack,  **  Vm  wrong  I  see, 
**  And  God  is  wiser  fisr  than  me. 
**  For  did  a  shower  of  pomfrions  lai^, 
**  Thus  on  my  naked  face  discharge, 
**  I  had  been  bruis'd  and  blinded  quite, 
**  What  Heaven  appohits  I  find  is  right : 
*'  Whene'er  I'm  tempted  to  rebel, 
**  I'U  think  how  light  the  acorns  fell ; 
**  Whereas  on  oaks  had  pomfdons  hung, 
**  My  broken  skull  had  st<qpp*d  my  ttmgue.** 


%*  It  b  erident  dist  this  excellent  and  hutnietlTe  tele  wu  coo- 
ftmeted  bj  the  author,  ai  an  improrement  of  the  IbUowiog  anony- 
moua  Ikble,  whieh  appeared  in  the  London  Chronicle  ibr  the  year 
1764.    Tbemoralif  theaame,  buttherelanoplaffiarian.— Eo. 


THE  ATHEIST  AND  THE  ACORN. 

[Methinks  tiiis  world  is  oddly  made 

And  every  thing  amiss ; 
A  dull  complaining  Atheist  said. 
As  stretch'd  he  lay  beneath  a  shade. 

And  instanced  in  this. 

•*  Behold,*'  quoth  he,  *<  tiiat  mighty  thing, 

A  pumpkin  large  and  round. 
Is  held  but  by  a  little  string. 
Which  upward  cannot  make  it  springy 
Nor  bear  it  firom  the  ground. 

While  on  this  tree  a  firuit,  so  small. 

So  disproportion'd  grows. 
That  whosoe'er  surveys  this  aU« 
This  universal  casual  ball. 

Its  ill  c<mtrivaiice  knonnk 


430  ATHBIST  AND  ACORN. 

My  better  jadgmttit  would  have  huug 

That  fruit  upon  thk  tree, 
And  left  this  nut  thai  alighUy  strung, 
*Mongst  thiqg*  that  en  tiie  sorfaee  sprung; 

And  weak  and  fseUe  be. 

No  more  the  cariller  could  atj. 

No  further  fiwlts  descry, 
For  upward  gating  as  ha  lay. 
An  aoom,  IomobM  from  Us  stay, 

Fell  down  opoa  his  eye. 

The  wounded  ptvt  vUb  tears  ran  o*er. 

As  punisb*d  for  the  dn. 
Fool  I  had  that  bongh  a  pumpkin  bore, 
Thy  whimsies  would  hare  vnrkvl  no  mors^ 

Nor  skull  have  kept  them  in.] 


TB9 

LADY  AND   THE    PIEj 

OB. 
KNOW  TBTSBLP. 


A  WORTHY  B4Bil«  of  SObCT  KfOy 

Had  a  conceited  bomting  wife ; 
Of  him  she  daily  niada  oMaflaint, 
Harself  she  thongbt  a  very  laint. 
She  loT'd  to  load  manlrind  witk  blanus, 
And  <m  their  eiron  baUd  h»r  fiune. 
Her  foylite  snl^ect  et  diapste 
Was  Ere  and  the  florfaiddeii  frnit 
*'  Had  I  been  Eve,**  she  eft«t  cvltd, 
**  Man  had  not  ftll*!!*  but  wobobb  died ; 
**  I  still  had  kept  the  oidm  giv^a, 
**  Nor  for  an  appte  iMft  ny  kaaTen  s 
**  To  gratify  my  eoiioiM  «ted 
<« I  ne'er  had mte'd  tUmmakiadi 
**  Nor  from  a  rain  imkte  to  loiov, 
**  Bntail'd  on  all  my  naa  wank  wo.** 

The  avdve  npltoi, '^  I  Haar  lb  mob 
**  The  samfe  in  ipMllivw  te  f o«  ( 
<*  Tempted  aUk«,  I  dan  iMliAVSb 
<*  You  would  hwre  diidber'4  Hiet  St«." 
The  hidy  storm'd,  wA  ftU  dMted 
Sin,  curiosity,  aad  prldB. 

The  sqoire,  soPM  Mnrt  day  it  diaper, 
ResolYed  to  try  this  boMlAd  iinoar  { 
He  griev'd  such  v!aaity  poMMett  her, 
And  thus  in  setimis  teraw  addnti'd  her  t 
•*  Madam,  the  usual  tpl«»dM  laift, 
*•  With  which  onr  w«idiipf  .^y  is  graoid. 
<*  With  yon  I  most  oal  fkare  to-day. 
For  business  wnmmaiw  »e  mray. 


432  THE  LADY  AND  THE  PIR. 

Of  all  the  didnties  IVe  prepared, 
**  I  beg  not  any  may  be  spared ; 
**  Indulge  in  erery  costly  dish, 
**  Ei^oy,  *ti8  what  I  really  wish  ; 
**  Only  observe  one  prohU>ition, 
**  Nor  think  it  a  severe  condition ; 
**  On  one  small  dish  which  corer'd  stands 
**  You  most  not  dare  to  lay  your  hands  ; 
**  Go— disobey  not,  on  your  life, 
**  Or  henceforth  youYe  no  more  my  wife.** 

The  treat  was  served,  the  squire  was  gone. 
The  marm*ring  lady  dhied  alone : 
She  saw  whate'er  could  grace  a  feast. 
Or  charm  the  eye,  or  please  the  taste ; 
But  while  she  rang*d  from  this  to  that, 
From  ren^n  haunch  to  turtle  fist ; 
On  cme  small  dish  she  chanced  to  light. 
By  a  deep  corer  hid  from  sight : 
**  O  I  here  it  is— yet  not  for  me  1 
**  I  must  not  taste,  nay,  dare  not  see ; 
**  Why  place  it  there  ?  or  why  forbid 
**That  I  so  much  as  lift  the  lid  ? 
**  Prohibited  of  this  to  eat, 
**  I  care  not  for  the  sumptuous  treat ; 
**  I  wonder  if  'tis  fowl  or  fish, 
**  To  know  what's  there  I  merely  wish. 
"  I'll  look —  O  no,  I  rose  for  ever, 
**  If  I'm  betray'd,  my  husband's  &TOur. 
**  I  own  I  think  it  vastly  hard, 
**  Nay  tyranny,  to  be  debarr'd. 
**  John,  you  may  go — the  wine^  decanted, 
**  111  ring  or  call  you  when  you're  wanted." 
Now  left  alone,  ^e  waits  no  longer ; 
Temptation  presses  more  and  stronger. 
*'  ril  peep— the  harm  can  ne'er  be  much, 
*'  For  though  I  peep,  I  will  not  touch ; 
**  Why  I'm  forbid  to  lift  this  corer, 
**  One  glance  will  tell,  and  then  *tis  orer. 
"  My  husband's  absent,  so  is  John, 
**  My  peeping  nerer  can  be  known." 
Trembling,  she  yielded  to  her  wish. 
And  rais'd  the  corer  from  the  dish : 
She  starts— for,  lo  1  an  open  jde 
From  which  six  liring  spairows  fly. 


THE  LADY  AND  THls  PIE.  433 

She  calla,  she  screams,  with  wild  surprise, 

"  Haste,  John,  and  catch  these  birds,"  she  criec. 

John  hears  not ;  bat  to  crown  her  shame, 

In  at  her  call  her  husband  came. 

Sternly  he  frown'd  as  thus  he  spoke : 

"  Thus  is  your  vow'd  allegiance  broke ! 

**  Self-ignorance  led  you  to  believe 

*'  You  did  not  share  the  sin  of  Eve. 

**  Like  hers,  how  blest  was  your  condition ! 

**  Like  heayen*8,  how  small  my  prohibition ! 

**  Yet  yon,  though  fed  with  ev'ry  dainty, 

"  Sat  pining  in  the  midst  of  plenty ; 

'*  This  dish,  thus  singled  from  the  rest, 

"  Of  your  obedience  was  the  test ; 

"  Your  mind,  unbroke  by  self-deninl, 

**  Could  not  sustiun  this  slender  trial. 

**  Humility  from  this  be  taught, 

*'  Learn  candour  to  another^s  fault ; 

**  Go  know,  like  Eve,  from  this  sad  dinnor, 

**  You're  both  a  vun  and  curious  sinner.** 


THE   PLUM-C  Aiv£.d: 

on, 
THE  FARMER  AND  HIS  THREE  SONS. 


A  FARMER,  who  somo  wealth  possest, 
With  three  fine  boys  was  also  blest ; 
The  lads  were  healthy,  stoat,  and  young, 
And  neither  wanted  sense  nor  tongue. 
Tom,  Will,  and  Jack,  like  other  boys, 
Lov^d  tops  and  marbles,  sport  and  toys. 
The  father  scouted  that  false  plan,  - 
That  money  only  makes  the  man ; 
But  to  the  best  of  his  discerning, 
Was  bent  on  giving  them  good  learning ; 
He  was  a  man  of  observation. 
No  scholar,  yet  had  penetration ; 
So  with  due  care,  a  school  he  sought. 
Where  his  young  sons  might  well  be  taught. 
Quoth  he,  "  I  know  not  which  rehearses 
"  Most  properly  his  themes  or  verses ; 
*•  Yet  I  can  do  a  father's  part, 
"  And  school  the  temper,  mind,  and  heart ; 
"  The  natural  bent  of  each  I'll  know, 
"  And  trifles  best  that  bent  may  show." 

'Twas  just  before  the  closing  year. 
When  Christmas  holidays  were  near, 
The  farmer  call'd  to  see  his  boys. 
And  ask'd  how  each  his  time  employs. 
Quoth  Will,  "  There's  father,  boys,  without, 
"  He's  brought  us  something  good,  no  doubt." 
The  father  sees  their  merry  faces, 
With  joy  beholds  them,  and  embraces. 
*'  Come,  bo3r9,  of  home  you'll  have  your  fill." 
"  Yes,  Christmas  now  is  near,"  says  Will ; 
*"Ti3  just  twelve  days — these  notches  see, 
••  My  notches  with  tlie  days  agree." 


THE  PLUM-CAKES.  43u 

*  Well,**  said  the  sire,  "again  FU  come, 

"  And  gladly  fetch  my  brave  boys  home. 

**  Yon  tvro  the  dappled  mare  shall  ride, 

*'  Jack  mount  the  pony  by  my  side; 

**  Meantime,  my  lads,  We  brought  you  here 

**  No  small  provision  of  good  cheer."  ^ 

Then  from  his  pocket  straight  he  takes 

A  vast  profosion  of  plum-cakes ; 

He  counts  them  out,  a  plenteous  store, 

No  boy  shall  have  or  less  or  more ; 

Twelve  cakes  he  gives  to  each  dear  son. 

When  each  expected  only  one ; 

And  then,  with  many  a  kind  expression, 

He  leaves  them  to  their  own  discretion ; 

ResolvM  to  mark  the  use  each  made 

Of  what  he  to  their  hands  convey'd. 
The  twelve  days  past,  he  comes  once  more, 

And  brings  the  horses  to  the  door ; 

The  boys  with  rapture  see  appear 

The  pony  and  the  dappled  mare ; 

Each  moment  now  an  hour  they  count. 

And  crack  their  whips  and  long  to  mount. 

As  with  the  boys  his  ride  he  takes. 

He  asks  the  history  of  the  cakes. 

Says  Will,  "  Dear  father,  life  is  short, 
**  So  I  resolv'd  to  make  quick  sport ; 
**  The  cakes  were  all  so  nice  and  sweet, 
**  I  thought  I'd  have  one  jolly  treat ; 
"  Why  should  1  balk,  said  I,  my  taste  ? 
**  I'll  make  at  once  a  hearty  feast. 
**  So  snugly  by  myself  I  fed, 
"  When  ev'ry  boy  was  gone  to  bed ; 
"  I  gorged  them  all,  both  paste  and  plum, 
"  And  did  not  spare  a  single  crumb ; 
**  Indeed  they  made  me,  to  my  sorrow, 
**  As  sick  as  death  upon  the  morrow ; 
"  This  made  me  mourn  my  rich  repast, 
'*  And  wish  I  had  not  fed  so  fast" 
Quoth  Jack,  **  I  was  not  such  a  dunce, 
"  To  eat  my  quantum  up  at  once ; 
"  And  though  the  boys  idl  long'd  to  clutch  *em, 
"  I  would  not  let  a  creature  touch  'em ; 
"  Nor  though  the  whole  were  in  my  power, 
"  Would  1  one  single  cake  devour  ; 


0 


436  THE  PLUM-CAKES. 

**  Thanks  to  the  use  of  keys  imd  locks, 
*'  TheyYe  all  now  snag  within  my  box : 
•*  The  mischief  is,  by  hoarding  long, 
**  They're  grown  so  mouldy  and  so  strong 
"  I  find  they  won't  be  fit  to  eat, 
*'  And  I  have  lost  my  fatlier's  treat 

**  Well  Tom,"  the  anxious  parent  cries, 
**  How  did  you  manage  ?**  Tom  replies, 
**  I  shunn'd  each  wide  extreme  to  take, 
"  To  glut  my  maw,  or  hoard  my  cake ; 
'*  I  thought  each  day  its  wants  would  have, 
**  And  appetite  agfdn  might  crave ; 
**  Twelve  school-days  still  my  notches  counted, 
*'  To  twelve  my  father^  cakes  amounted  j 
**  So  evVy  day  I  took  out  one, 
**  But  never  ate  my  cake  alone ; 
"  With  ev'ry  needy  boy  I  shar'd, 
"  And  more  than  half  I  always  spared. 
*'  One  evYy  day,  *twixt  self  and  friend, 
**  Has  brought  my  dozen  to  an  end : 
*'  My  last  remaining  cake  to-day 
"  I  would  not  touch,  but  gave  away ; 
"  A  boy  was  sick,  and  scarce  could  eat, 
'*  To  him  it  proved  a  welcome  treat : 
*'  Jack  call'd  me  spendthrift  not  to  save ; 
*'  Will  dubb'd  me  fool  because  I  gave ; 
"  But  when  our  last  day  came,  I  smiled, 
"  For  Will's  were  gone,  and  Jack's  were  spoU'd 
**  Not  hoarding  much,  nor  eating  fast, 
«'  I  served  a  needy  friend  at  last." 

These  tales  the  father's  thoughts  employ  ; 
"  By  these,"  said  he,  "  I  know  each  boy  : 
"  Yet  Jack,  who  hoarded  what  he  had, 
**  The  world  will  call  a  frugal  lad ; 
"  And  selfish,  gormandizing  Will 
**  Will  meet  with  friends  and  favourers  still : 
*'  While  moderate  Tom,  so  wise  and  cool, 
*'  The  mad  and  vain  will  deem  a  fool : 
**  But  I  his  sober  plan  approve, 
*' And  Tom  has  gain'd  his  father*8  love.*' 

APPLICATION. 

So  when  our  day  of  life  is  past, 
And  all  are  fairly  judg'd  at  last ; 


THE  PLUM-CAKES. 


437 


The  miser  and  the  sensual  find 
How  each  misused  the  gifts  assign'd ; 
While  he,  who  wisely  spends  and  gives. 
To  the  true  ends  of  Uying  lives ; 
*Tis  self-denying  moderation 
Gains  the  Great  Father*s  approbation. 


TURN  THE  CARPETi 

OR  THE  TWO  WEAVERS. 
IN  A  DIALOODS  BBTWEBN  DICK  AND  JUUM. 


As  at  fheir  work  two  weayers  sat. 
Beguiling  time  with  friendly  chat ; 
They  toudi'd  upon  the  price  of  meat, 
So  Idgh,  a  wearer  scarce  could  eat. 

*'  What  with  my  brats  and  sickly  wife," 
Quoth  Dick,  *'  I'm  almost  tired  of  life ; 
*<  So  hard  my  work,  so  poor  my  fare, 
'**Ti8  more  than  mortal  man  can  bear. 

**  How  glorious  is  the  rich  man's  state  I 
**  His  house  so  fine !  his  wealth  so  great ! 
"  Heaven  is  unjust,  you  must  agree, 
**  Why  all  to  him  ?  why  none  to  me  ? 

"  In  spite  of  what  the  scripture  teaches, 
*'  In  spite  of  all  the  parson  preaches, 
*'  This  world  (indeed  I've  thought  so  long) 
*'  Is  ruled,  methinks,  extremely  wrong. 

"  Where'er  I  look,  howe'er  I  range, 
*"Tis  all  confused,  and  hard,  and  strange 
*'  The  good  are  troubled  and  oppressed, 
*'  And  all  the  wicked  are  the  bless'd." 

Quoth  John,  **  Our  ignorance  is  the  cause 
"  Why  thus  we  blame  our  Maker's  laws  j 
**  Parts  of  his  ways  alone  we  know, 
*'  'Tis  all  that  man  can  see  below. 

"  Seest  thou  that  carpet,  not  half  done, 
•*  Which  thou,  dear  Dick,  hast  well  begun  ? 
**  Behold  the  wild  confusion  there, 
**  So  rude  Uve  tnaas  it  makes  one  stare  1 


TURN  THE  CARPET.  43.0 

**  A  stranger,  ignorant  of  the  trade, 
**  Would  say,  no  meaning^s  there  convey'*] ; 
**  For  where*!)  the  middle,  where's  the  border  ? 
**Thy  carpet  now  is  all  disorder/* 

Qaoth  Dick,  *'  My  work  is  yet  in  bits, 
**  Bat  still  in  every  part  it  fits ; 
**  Besides,  yoa  reason  like  a  loat, 
**  Why,  man,  that  carpet's  inside  oaf 

**  Says  John,  **  Thou  say*st  the  thing  I  mean, 
**  And  now  I  hope  to  care  thy  spleen  ; 
"  This  world,  which  clouds  thy  soul  with  doubts 
**  Is  but  a  carpet  inside  out. 

*'  As  when  we  view  these  shreds  and  ends^ 
**  We  know  not  what  the  whole  intends  ; 
**  So  when  on  earth  things  look  but  odd, 
**  They're  working  still  some  scheme  of  God. 

"  No  plan,  no  pattern,  can  we  trace, 
*'  All  wants  proportion,  truth,  and  grace  j 
**  The  motley  mixture  we  deride, 
*'  Nor  see  the  beauteous  upper  side. 

**  But  when  we  reach  that  world  of  light, 
"  And  view  those  works  of  God  aright, 
**  Then  shall  we  see  the  whole  dedgn, 
**  And  own  the  workman  is  divine. 

"  What  now  seem  random  strokes,  will  there 
**  All  order  and  design  appear  ; 
*'  Then  shall  we  praise  what  here  we  spum'd, 
**  For  then  the  carpet  shall  be  tum'd." 

•* Thou'rt right,**  quoth  Dick,  "no  more  I'll  grumble 
**  lliat  tliis  sad  world's  so  strange  a  jumble ; 
**  My  impious  doubts  are  put  to  tlight, 
"  For  my  own  carpet  sets  me  right."* 

*  In  illustration  of  the  Important  Irsson  conveyed  in  this  pleas- 
ing tale,  we  shall  give,  without  apology,  the  following  passage  from 
one  of  Mrs  More's  latest  productions  :— *'  In  some  pieces  of  nie* 
chanism,  we  have  observed  different  artists  employed  in  different 
branches  of  the  sauie  machinery.    In  this  division  of  labour,  each 


440  TURN  THE  CARPET. 

man  performs  his  allotted  portion,  in  utter  ignorance,  perbaps,  not 
only  of  the  portions  assigned  to  the  others,  but  also  of  the  ulti- 
mate application  of  his  own.  Busy  in  executing  his  single  pin,  or 
spring,  or  wheel,  it  is  no  part  of  his  concern  to  understand  the  worlc 
assigned  to  others,  still  less  to  comprehend  the  scheme  of  the  mas- 
ter.  But  though  the  workman  is  ignorant  how  the  whole  is  to  be 
arranged,  the  machine  would  have  been  incomplete  without  his 
seemingly  inconsiderable  contribution.  In  the  mean  time,  the 
master  unites,  by  apt  junctures  and  articulations,  parts  which  were 
not  Icnown  to  lie  susceptible  of  connexion  ;  combines  the  separate 
divisions  without  difficulty,  because  the  several  workmen  have  only 
been  individually  helping  to  accomplish  the  original  plan  which 
bad  previously  existed  in  ills  inventive  mind.**— Eo, 


Mi 


1 


INSCRIPTION 

[N  A  BEAUTIFUL  RETREAT.  CALLED  FAIHY  BOWER. 


Airy  spirits,  you  who  love 
Cooling  bow'r,  or  shady  grore ; 
Streams  that  murmur  as  they  flow. 
Zephyrs  biand  that  softly  blow : 

Babbling  echo,  or  thA  tale 
Of  the  love-lorn  nightingale ; 
Hither,  airy  spirits,  come, 
This  is  your  peculiar  home. 

If  you  love  a  verdant  glade, 
If  you  love  a  noontide  shade, 
Hither  sylphs  and  fairies  fly, 
Unobserved  of  earthly  eye. 

Come,  and  wander  ev'ry  night, 
By  the  moonbeam's  glimm'riug  light ; 
And  Bgtdn  at  early  day 
Brush  the  silver  dews  away. 

Mark  where  first  the  daisies  blow, 

Where  the  bluest  violets  grow  ; 

Where  the  sweetest  linnet  sings. 

Where  the  earliest  cowslip  springs.  ■ 

Where  the  largest  acorn  lies* 
Precious  in  a  fairy's  eyes : 
Sylphs,  tliough  unconfin'd  to  place. 
Love  to  fill  an  acorn's  space. 

Come,  and  mark  within  what  bush 
Builds  the  blackbird  or  the  thrush ; 
Great  his  joy  who  first  espies, 
Greater  his  who  spares  the  prize ! 

u2 


442  INSCRIPTION. 

Come,  and  watch  the  haUow'd  bowV, 
Chase  the  insect  from  tlie  flow  Y } 
Little  offices  like  these. 
Gentle  souls  and  fairies  please. 

Mortals  I  form'd  of  grosser  clay, 
From  our  haunts  keep  far  away ; 
Or,  if  you  should  dare  appear. 
See  that  you  from  vice  are  clear. 

FoUy^s  minion,  fashion's  fool, 
Mad  ambition's  restless  tool ! 
Slare  of  passion,  slaye  of  powY, 
Fly,  ah,  fly !  this  tranquil  bowY  I 

Son  of  av'rice,  soul  of  frost. 
Wretch !  of  heav'n  abhorred  the  mcjst. 
Learn  to  pity  others*  wants. 
Or  ayold  these  hallow 'd  haunts. 

Eye  unconsdous  of  a  tear. 
When  affliction's  tnUn  appoar : 
Heart  that  never  heav'd  a  sigh 
For  another,  como  not  nigh. 

But  ye  darling  sons  of  heav'n, 
Giving  freely  what  was  giv'n  : 
You,  whose  lib'ral  hands  dispense 
The  blessings  of  benevolence : 

You,  who  wipe  the  tearful  eye, 
You,  who  stop  the  rising  sigh  ; 
You,  whose  souls  have  undenitoad 
The  luxury  of  doing  good. 

Come,  ye  happy  virtuous  few, 
Open  is  my  bow Y  to  you  j 
You,  these  mossy  banks  may  press ; 
You,  each  guardian  fay  shall  bless. 


THK 


FOOLISH    TRAVELLER; 


OR, 


A  GOOD  INN  IS  A  BAD  HOME. 


Therb  was  a  prince  of  high  degree. 
As  great  and  good  as  prince  could  be ; 
Much  power  and  wealth  were  in  his  hand. 
With  lands  and  lordships  at  command. 

One  son,  a  favMte  son,  he  had, 
An  idle  thoughtless  kind  of  lad  ; 
Whom,  spite  of  all  his  follies  past, 
lie  meant  to  make  his  heir  at  last. 


The  son  escaped  to  foreign  lands. 

And  broke  his  gracious  sire's  commands  ; 

Far,  as  he  fancied,  from  his  sight. 

In  each  low  joy  he  took  delight. 

The  youth,  detesting  peace  and  qniot. 
Indulged  in  vice,  expense,  and  riot  j 
Of  each  \vild  pleasure  rashly  tasted. 
Till  health  declined,  and  substance  watitcd. 

The  tender  sire,  to  pity  prone, 
Promis'd  to  pardon  what  was  done ; 
And,  would  he  certain  terms  fulfil. 
He  should  receive  a  kin;{dom  still. 

The  youth  tlie  pardon  little  mindod, 

So  much  his  sottish  soul  was  bllndt'il ; 

IJut  though  ho  rnonrnM  no  past  traiu^^'rc'ssioii, 

Ih'  lilv'fl  tl;<'  fiitiiiL'  rii  li  p  '    c,  :(!ii. 


444  THE  FOOLISH  TRAVELLER. 

He  lik'd  the  kingdom  when  obtained. 
But  nut  the  terms  on  which  'twas  galn'd  i 
He  hated  pain  and  self-denial. 
Chose  the  reward,  but  shonn'd  the  trial. 

He  knew  his  father's  power  how  great. 
How  glorious  too  the  promis'd  state  ! 
At  length  resolves  no  more  to  roam, 
But  striUght  to  seak  his  Father's  home. 

His  sire  had  sent  a  friend  to  say. 
He  must  be  cautious  on  his  way ; 
Told  him  what  road  he  must  pursue, 
And  always  keep  his  home  in  view. 

The  thoughtless  youth  set  out  indeed, 
But  soon  he  slackened  in  his  speed ; 
For  ev'ry  trifle  by  the  way. 
Seduced  his  idle  heart  astray. 

By  ev'ry  casual  impnlse  sway'd, 
On  ev'ry  shght  pretence  he  stay'd  ; 
To  eacli,  to  all,  his  passions  bend, 
He  quite  forgets  his  journey's  end. 

For  ev'ry  sport,  for  ev'ry  song, 
He  halted  as  he  pass'd  along ; 
Caught  by  each  idle  sight  he  saw, 
He'd  loiter  e'en  to  pick  a  straw. 

Whate'er  was  present,  seizM  his  soul, 
A  feast,  a  show,  a  brimming  bowl ; 
Contented  with  this  vulgar  lot. 
His  father's  house  he  quite  forgot. 

Those  slight  refreshments  by  the  way. 
Wliich  were  but  meant  his  strength  to  stay- 
So  sunk  his  soul  in  sloth  and  sin. 
He  look'd  no  farther  than  liis  inu. 

Hio  father's  friend  would  oft  appear, 
Aiul  sound  the  promise  in  liis  ear  ; 
Dit  would  he  rouse  liim,  "  Slugj^JU'd.  coim 
"  This  is  thy  iiiu,  and  nut  thy  huiue." 


■V  ^ 


THE  FOOLISH  TRAVELLER.  445 

Displeas'd,  he  answers,  "  Come  what  will, 

"  Of  present  bliss  I'll  take  my  fill ; 

"  In  vain  you  plead,  in  vain  I  hear, 

"  Those  joys  are  distant,  these  are  near." 

Thus  perished,  lost  to  worth  and  truth. 
In  sight  of  home,  this  hapless  youth ; 
While  beggars,  foreigners,  and  poor, 
Ei\joy'd  the  father's  boundless  store. 

APPLICATION. 

My  fable,  reader,  speaks  to  thee  :— 
In  God  this  bounteous  father  see  ; 
And  in  his  thoughtless  offspring  trace, 
Tlie  sinful,  wayward,  human  race. 

The  friend,  the  generous  father  sent. 
To  rouse,  and  to  reclaim  him,  meant. 
The  ftdthful  minister  youll  find, 
Who  calls  the  wandering,  warns  the  blind. 

Reader,  awake,  this  youth  you  blame. 
Are  not  you  doing  just  the  same  ? 
Mindless  your  comforts  are  but  given 
To  help  you  on  your  way  to  heaven. 

llie  pleasures  which  beguile  the  road. 
The  flow'rs  with  which  your  path  is  strew'd  ; 
To  these  your  whole  desires  you  bend 
And  quite  forget  your  journey^s  end. 

The  meanest  toys  your  soul  entice, 
A  feast,  a  song,  a  game  at  dice  ; 
Charmed  with  your  present  paltry  lot, 
Eternity  is  quite  forgot. 

llien  listen  to  a  warning  friend, 

Wlio  bids  you  mind  your  joumey*8  end ; 

A  wand'ring  pilgrim  here  you  roam  ; 

Tnis  world's  your  7wn,  the  next  your  Home. 


d 


THE 

IMPOSSIBILITY  CONQUERED: 

OR, 

LOVE  YOUR  NEIGHBOUR  AS  YOURSELF. 
In  the  numner  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh. 


THE  OBJECTION. 


Each  man  who  lives,  the  scriptnrcs  prove, 

Must  as  himself  his  neighbour  lore; 

But  though  the  precept's  full  of  beauty, 

*Tis  an  impracticable  duty : 

ni  prove  how  hard  it  is  to  find 
A  lover  of  this  wondrous  kind. 

IL 

Who  loves  himself  to  great  excess. 

You'll  grant  must  love  his  neighbour  less ; 

When  self  engrosses  all  the  heart 

How  can  another  have  a  part  ? 

Then  if  self-love  most  men  enthral, 
A  neighbour's  share  is  none  at  all. 

III. 

Say,  can  the  man  who  hoards  up  pcif 
E'er  love  his  neighbour  as  himself  ? 
For  if  ho  did,  would  he  not  labour 
To  hoard  a  little  for  his  neighbour  ? 

Then  tell  me,  frieud,  can  hoarding  elves 
E'er  love  their  neighbour  as  themselves  ? 

IV. 

Tlio  man  whoso  heart  is  bent  on  pleasure 
SiiiuU  love  will  lo  his  iici;;lib(mr  incHbun' ; 


THE  IBfPOSSIBILlTY  CONQUERED.    447 

Who  solely  stadies  his  own  good. 

Can't  love  another  if  he  would. 

Then  how  can  pleasore-hunting  elres 
E'er  lore  their  neighbour  as  themselves  ? 

V. 

Can  he  whom  doth  and  loitering  please 

E'er  luve  his  neighbour  like  his  ease  ? 

Or  he  who  feeds  ambition's  flame 

Lores  he  his  neighbour  like  his  fame  ? 
Such  lazy,  or  such  soaring  elves. 
Cant  lore  their  neighbour  as  themselves. 

VI. 

He  whose  gross  appetites  enslave  him, 

Who  spends  or  feasts  the  wealth  God  gave  him } 

Full,  pampered,  gorg*d  at  every  meal. 

He  cannot  for  the  empty  feel. 

How  can  such  gormandizing  elves 

E'er  love  their  neighbour  as  themselves  V 

VII. 

Then,  since  the  man  who  lusts  for  gold, 

Since  he  who  is  to  pleasure  sold ; 

Wlto  soars  in  pride,  or  sinks  in  ease. 

His  neighbour  will  not  serve  or  please ; 

Where  shall  we  hope  the  man  to  find 
To  fill  this  great  rx>mmand  indin'd ! 

VIII. 

I  dare  not  blame  Ood^s  holy  word. 

Nor  censure  scripture  as  absurd ; 

But  sure  the  rule's  of  no  arail 

If  placed  so  high  that  all  must  fail ; 
And  'tis  impossible  to  prove 
That  any  can  his  neighbour  love. 

THB  ANSWER. 

IX. 

if  es,  such  tliere  are  of  heavUy  mould, 
Juwarp'd  by  pleasure,  ease,  or  gold ; 
le  who  fulfils  the  nobler  part, 
>y  loving  Gud  with  all  his  heart ; 


448    THE  IMPOSSIBILITY  CONQUERED. 

He,  only  lie,  the  scriptorea  prove. 
Can,  as  himself,  his  neighbour  love. 

X. 

Then  join,  to  make  a  perfect  plan. 

The  love  of  God  to  love  of  man  ; 

Your  heart  in  union  both  must  bring. 

This  is  the  stream,  and  that  the  spring  ; 

This  done,  no  more  in  vun  you'll  labour, 
A  Christian  can^  but  love  his  neighbour. 

XI. 

If  then  the  rulers  too  hard  to  please  ye, 

Turn  Christian,  and  you*ll  find  it  easy. 

**  Still  'tis  impossible,"  you  cry, 

**  In  vain  shall  feeble  nature  try." 

*Tis  true ;  but  know  a  Christian  is  a  creature. 
Who  does  things  quite  impossible  to  nature. 


THE  BAD  BARGAIN: 

OR, 

THE  WORLD   SET   UP   TO   SALE. 


The  devil,  as  the  scriptures  show, 
Tempts  sinful  mortals  high  and  low ; 
And  acting  well  his  yarious  part. 
Suits  evVy  bribe  to  every  heart : 
See  there  the  prince  of  darkness  stands 
With  baits  for  souls  in  both  his  hands. 

To  one  he  offers  empires  whole, 
And  gives  a  sceptre  for  a  soul ; 
To  one,  he  freely  gives  in  barter, 
A  peerage,  or  a  star  and  garter ; 
To  one  he  pays  polite  attention. 
And  begs  him  just  to  take  a  pepsion. 

Some  are  so  fired  with  love  of  fame, 

He  bribes  them  by  an  empty  name ; 

For  fame  they  toil,  they  preach,  they  wTitc, 

Give  alms,  build  hospitals,  or  fight ; 

For  human  praise  renounce  salvation. 

And  sell  their  souls  for  reputation. 

But  the  great  gift,  the  mighty  bribe, 
Which  Satan  pours  amid  the  tribe. 
Which  millions  seize  with  eager  haste. 
And  all  desire  at  least  to  taste. 
Is — plodding  reader ! — what  d'ye  think  ? 
Alas! — 'tis  money — ^money— chink ! 

Round  the  wide  world  the  tempter  fiios, 
Presents  to  view  the  glittering  prize ; 
See  how  he  hastes  from  shore  to  shore. 
And  how  the  nations  all  adore : 


450  THIi  BAD  BARGAIN. 

Souls  flock  by  thousands  to  be  sold, 
Smit  with  the  foad  desire  of  gold. 

See,  at  yon  needy  tradesman's  shop, 

The  onirersal  tempter  stop ; 

"  Wooldst  thoo,"  he  cries,  "  increase  thy  treasureSk 

**  Use  lighter  weights  and  scantier  measores, 

"  llius  thou  Shalt  thrire  i"  the  trader's  vciUing, 

And  sella  his  sool  to  get  a  shilling. 

Next  Satan  to  a  fanner  hies, 
**  I  scorn  to  cheat,**  the  former  cries : 
Yet  still  his  heart  on  wealth  is  bent, 
And  so  the  devil  is  content ; 
Now  markets  rise,  and  riches  roll. 
And  Satan  quite  secures  his  soul. 

Mark  next  yon  cheerful  youth  so  jolly. 
So  fond  of  laughter  and  of  folly ; 
He  hates  a  stingy  gripinng  fellow. 
But  gets  each  day  a  little  mellow : 
To  Satan  too  he  sells  his  soul 
In  barter  for  a  flowing  bowl. 

But  mark  again  yon  lass  a-spinning. 
See  how  the  tempter  is  beginning ; 
Some  beau  presents  a  top-knot  nice. 
She  grants  her  yirtue  as  the  price : 
A  slave  to  vanity^s  control. 
She,  for  a  ribbon,  sells  her  soul ! 

Thus  Satan  tries  each  difierent  state, 
With  mighty  bribes  he  tempts  the  great , 
The  poor,  with  equal  force  he  plies. 
But  wins  them  with  an  humbler  prize : 
Has  gentler  arts  for  young  beginners. 
And  fouler  sins  for  older  sinners. 

Oft  too  he  cheats  our  mortal  eyes. 

For  Satan  father  is  of  lies ; 

A  thousand  swindling  tricks  he  plays  us, 

And  promises,  but  never  pays  us : 

Thus  we,  poor  fools,  are  strangely  t-aught, 

And  flnd  we've  sold  our  souls  for  nou^^h^ 


THE  BAD  BARGAIN.  4£1 

Nay,  oft,  with  quite  a  jnggler^s  art. 
He  bids  the  proffer'd  gift  depart ; 
Sets  some  gay  joy  before  our  face. 
Then  claps  a  trouble  in  its  {dace ; 
Turns  up  some  loss  for  promis'd  gain. 
And  conjures  pleasure  into  pain. 

Be  wise  then,  oh  I  ye  worldly  tribe. 
Nor  sell  your  conscience  for  a  bribe ; 
When  Satan  tempts  you  to  begin, 
Besist  him,  and  refuse  to  sin : 
Bad  is  the  bai^^ain  on  the  whole. 
To  train  the  world  and  lose  the  soul ! 


HERE   AND   THERE: 

OR, 

THIS  WORLD  AND  THE  NEXT 
Being  raitable  Tboaghts  fbr  •  Neir  Tear. 


Here  bliss  is  short,  imperfect,  insincere. 

Bat  total,  absolute,  and  perfect  there. 

Here  time's  a  moment,  short  our  happiest  state. 

There  infinite  duration  is  our  date. 

Here  Satan  tempts,  and  troubles  e'en  the  best. 

There  Satan's  power  extends  not  to  the  blest. 

In  a  weak  sinful  body  here  I  dwell. 

But  there  I  drop  this  frail  and  sickly  shelL 

Here  my  best  thoughts  are  stained  with  g-uilt  and  fear. 

But  love  and  pardon  shall  be  perfect  thei  e. 

Here  ray  best  duties  are  defil'd  ynVa  sin, 

There  all  is  ease  without,  and  peace  within. 

Here  feeble  faith  supplies  my  only  light. 

There  faith  and  hope  are  swallowed  up  in  sight. 

Here  love  of  self  my  fairest  works  destroys, 

Tliere  love  of  God  shall  perfect  all  my  joys. 

Here  things,  as  in  a  glass,  are  darkly  shown. 

There  1  shall  know  as  clearly  as  Tm  kno^vn. 

Frail  are  the  fairest  flowers  which  bloom  below, 

There  freshest  palms  on  roots  immortal  grow 

Here  wants  or  cares  perplex  my  anxious  mind, 

But  spirits  there  a  calm  fruition  find. 

Here  disappointments  my  best  schemes  destroy, 

There  tliose  that  so  w'd  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy. 

Here  vanity  is  stamped  on  all  below, 

rerfection  there  on  every  good  shall  grow. 

Here  my  fond  heart  is  fasten'd  on  some  friend. 

Whose  kindness  may,  Avhose  life  must,  have  an  end  : 

But  there  no  failure  can  1  ever  prove, 

God  cannot  disappoint  for  God  is  love. 


HERE  AND  THERE.  453 

Here  Christ  for  einners  suffer'd,  groan'd,  and  bled. 

But  there  he  reigns  the  great  triumphant  head ; 

Here^  mockM  and  icourg'd,  he  wore  a  crown  of  thorns, 

A  crown  of  glory  there  his  brow  adorns. 

Here  error  clouds  the  will,  and  dims  the  sight, 

There  all  is  knowledge,  purity,  and  light. 

Here  so  imperfect  is  this  mortal  state, 

If  blest  myself  I  mourn  some  other's  ifate. 

At  every  human  wo  I  here  repine, 

The  joy  of  every  saint  shall  there  be  mine. 

Here  if  I  lean,  the  world  shall  pierc-e  my  heart, 

But  there  that  broken  reed  and  I  shall  part. 

Here  on  no  promis'd  good  can  I  depend. 

But  there  the  Rock  of  ages  is  my  friend. 

Here  if  some  sudden  joy  delight  inspire. 

The  dread  to  lose  it  damps  the  rising  fire ; 

But  there  whatever  good  the  soul  employ, 

The  thought  that  'tis  eternal^  crowns  the  joy. 


i 


i 


BALLADS. 


It 


Uii 


THE    HONEST    MILLER 
OF  GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 
A  TRUE  BALLAD. 


Of  all  the  callings  and  the  trades 

Which  in  our  land  abound. 
The  miller's  is  as  useful,  sure, 

As  can  on  earth  be  found. 

The  lord  or  'squire  of  high  degree 

Is  needful  to  the  state, 
Because  he  lets  the  land  he  owns 

In  farms  both  small  and  great. 

The  fanner  he  manures  the  land, 
Or  else  what  com  could  grow  ? 

The  ploughman  cuts  the  furrow  deep 
Ere  he  begins  to  sow. . 

Anil  though  no  wealth  he  has,  except 

The  labour  of  his  hands ; 
Yet  honest  industry's  as  good 

As  houses  or  as  lands. 

The  thresher  he  is  useful  too 

To  all  who  like  to  eat ; 
Unless  he  winnow'd  well  the  com. 

The  chaff  would  spoil  the  wheat. 

But  vain  the  squire's  and  farmer's  care. 

And  vain  the  thresher's  toil ; 
And  vain  would  be  the  ploughman's  paint 

Who  harrows  up  the  soil ; 


45f$  THE  HONEST  MILLER. 

And  Tmin,  without  the  miller^s  tdd. 
The  sowing  and  the  dressing ; 

Then  sure  an  honest  miller— he 
Must  be  a  public  blessing. 

And  such  a  miller  now  I  make 

The  subject  of  my  song, 
Which,  though  it  shall  be  very  truc^ 

Shall  not  be  very  long. 

This  miller  lives  in  Glo'stershire, 

I  shall  not  tell  his  name ; 
For  those  who  seek  the  praise  of  6od 

Desire  no  other  fame, 

in  last  hard  winter— who  forgets 

The  frost  of  ninety- five  ? 
Then  was  all  dismal,  scarce,  and  dear. 

And  no  poor  man  could  thrive 

Then  husbandry  long  time  stood  stil^ 

And  work  was  at  a  stand ; 
To  make  the  matter  worse,  the  milla 

Were  froze  throughout  the  land. 

Our  miller  dwelt  beside  a  stream. 

All  underneath  the  hill ; 
Which  flow'd  amain  when  others  froze. 

Nor  ever  stopp'd  the  mill. 

The  clamVous  people  came  from  far 

This  favour'd  mill  to  find, 
Both  rich  and  poor  our  miller  sought, 

For  none  but  he  could  grind. 

His  neignbours  cried,  '*  Now,  miller,  seiza 
'*  The  time  to  heap  up  store, 

"  Since  thou  of  young  and  helpless  l>abe8 
*'  Hast  got  full  half  a  score.'* 

For  folks,  when  tempted  to  grow  rich 

By  means  not  over  nice. 
Oft  make  their  num'rous  babes  a  plea 


THU  HONEST  MILLER.  450 

Our  miller  Bcom'd  saoh  coonsel  base 

And  when  he  groond  the  grain, 
l^th  steadfost  lumd  refcu*d  to  tooch 

Beyond  his  lawful  gain. 

**  When  God  aflElicts  the  land,"  said  he, 

*'ShaUIaflBietitmorer 
**  And  watch  for  times  of  public  wo, 

**  To  wrong  both  rich  and  poor  ? 

*'  Thankfol  to  that  Almighty  Power 

**  Who  makes  my  riyer  flow, 
**  I'll  use  the  means  he  gires  to  soothe 

**  A  hungry  neighbourls  wo. 

**  My  riyer  flows  when  otiiers  freeze, 

**  But  *tis  at  his  command ; 
**  For  rich  and  poor  IH  grind  aUke^ 

**  No  bribe  shall  stain  my  hand  l** 

So  all  the  country  who  had  com 
Here  found  their  wants  redrest  i 

May  eyVy  village  in  the  land 
Be  with  such  milters  Uest! 


r 


KING   DIONYSIUS- 

ANO 

SQUIRE  DAMOCLES  : 

A  NEW  SONO  TO  AN  OLD  STORT. 
rBoria  to  bb  suno  at  aix  fbasts  ahd  xbkbt  umvxiwim. 


Therb  was  a  heathen  man,  sir, 

Belonging  to  a  king ; 
And  still  it  was  his  plan,  sir, 

To  covet  ey*ry  thing. 

And  if  yon  don^  beUeve  me, 
111  name  him  if  yon  please. 

For  let  me  not  deceive  ye, 
'Tvvas  one  Squire  Damocles. 

He  thought  that  jolly  living 

Must  evYy  joy  afford ; 
His  heart  knew  no  misgiving, 

While  round  the  festive  board. 

He  wanted  to  be  great,  sir. 
And  feed  on  fare  delicious ; 

And  have  his  feasts  in  state,  sir. 
Just  like  king  Dionysius. 

The  king,  to  cure  his  longing, 

Prepared  a  feast  so  fine. 
That  all  the  court  were  thronging 

To  see  the  courtier  dine. 

And  there  to  tempt  his  eye,  sir, 
Was  fish,  and  flesh,  and  fowl ; 

And  \»\yen\vft  wwa  sl-At^,  «ir. 
There  Btoo^\iXvft\mmtK«vft>iQ>N«j\. 


DIOKYSIUS  AND  DAMOCLES.         461 

Nor  did  the  king  forbid  him 

From  drinking  all  he  could ; 
The  monarch  never  chid  him. 

Bat  fill'd  him  with  Ids  food. 

0  then  to  see  the  pleasure 
Squire  Damocles  exprest ! 

*Twas  joy  beyond  all  measure : 
Was  oyer  man  so  blest  ? 

With  greedy  eyes  the  squire 

Devour*d  each  costly  dainty : 
You'd  think  he  did  aspire 

To  eat  as  much  as  twenty. 

But,  just  as  he  prepared,  sir. 

Of  bless  to  ts^e  a  swing ; 
O,  how  the  man  was  scar'd,  sir. 

By  this  so  cruel  king  I 

When  he  to  eat  intended, 

Lo !  just  above  his  head. 
He  spied  a  sword  suspended 

AU  by  a  single  thread. 

How  did  it  change  the  feasting 

To  wormwood  and  to  gall. 
To  think,  while  he  was  tasting. 

The  pointed  sword  might  fall. 

Then  in  a  moment's  time,  sir. 

He  loth'd  the  luscious  feast ; 
And  dreaded  as  a  crime,  sir. 

The  brimming  bowl  to  taste. 

Now,  if  you're  for  applying 
The  story  1  have  told, 

1  think  there's  no  denying 
'Tis  worth  its  weight  in  gold. 

Ye  gay,  who  view  this  stranger. 

And  pity  his  sad  case ; 
And  think  there  ^'as  groat  daog 

III  such  a  fearful  place ; 


4G2         DIONYSIUS  AND  DAMOCLKaw 

Come  let  fUs  awfol  tmth,  >ir, 
la  all  your  minda  be  itor'd ; 

To  each  intemp'rate  youth,  or. 
Death  is  that  pointed  sword. 

And  though  you  see  no  reason 

To  check  your  mirth  at  all. 
In  some  licentious  season 

The  sword  on  you  may  fall. 

So  learn,  while  at  your  ease,  sir. 

You  drink  down  draughts  delicious  | 
To  think  of  Damocles,  sir. 

And  old  king  Dionysius. 


THB 

HACKNEY  COACHMAN; 

THE  WAT  TO  GBT  A  GOOD  FABB. 
To  the  Tane  of~"  I  with  I  was  a  Fisbemuuk  "* 


1  AM  a  bold  coachman,  and  drive  a  g-eod  baek, 
With  a  coat  of  five  capes  that  quite  coven  my  back ; 
And  my  wife  keeps  a  saosage-shop,  not  many  miles 
From  the  narrowest  alley  in  all  broad  St  Giles. 

Though  poor,  we  are  honest  and  very  content, 
We  pay  as  we  go,  for  meat,  drink,  and  for  rent ; 
To  work  all  the  week  I  am  able  and  willing, 
I  never  get  drunk,  and  I  waste  not  a  shilling. 

And  while  at  a  tavern  my  gentleman  tarries, 
The  coachman  grows  richer  than  he  whom  he  carries  ; 
And  I'd  rather,  said  I,  since  it  saves  me  from  sin. 
Be  the  driver  witliout,  than  the  toper  within. 

Yet  though  dran-shops  I  hate,  and  the  dram-driakiug 

friend, 
I'm  not  quite  so  good,  but  I  wish  I  may  mend ; 
I  repent  of  my  sins,  since  we  all  are  depraved. 
For  a  coachman,  I  hold,  has  a  soul  to  be  saved. 

When  a  riotous  multitude  fills  up  a  street, 

And  the  greater  part  know  net,  boys,  wlierefore  they 

meet; 
If  I  see  there  is  mischief  I  never  go  there ; 
Let  others  get  tipsy,  so  I  get  my  fare. 

< 
N«w  to  church,  if  I  take  some  good  lady  to  pray, 
It  grieves  me  full  sore  to  be  kept  quite  away ; 


M 


464  THE  HACKNEY  COACHMAN. 

So  I  step  within  side,  though  the  sermon^  b^iuii. 
Fur  a  alice  of  the  service  is  better  than  none. 

Then  my  glasses  are  whole,  and  my  coach  is  so  neat, 
I  am  always  the  first  to  be  call'd  in  the  street : 
And  I'm  known  by  the  name,  (tis  a  name  rather  rare,; 
Of  the  coachman  that  nerer  asks  more  tlum  his  fare. 

Though  my  beasts  should  be  dull,  yet  I  don't  use  them  ill ; 
Though  tliey  stumble  I  swear  not,  nor  cut  them  uphill ; 
For  I  firmly  believe  there's  no  charm  in  an  oath. 
That  can  make  a  nag  trot,  when  to  walk  he  is  loath. 

And  though  I*m  a  coachman,  1*11  freely  confess, 

I  beg  of  my  Maker  my  labours  to  bless ; 

I  jMraiite  him  each  morning,  and  pray  ev'ry  night. 

And  'tis  this  makes  my  heart  fad  so  cheerful  and  Kght. 

AMien  I  drive  to  a  funeral  I  care  not  for  drink. 
That  is  not  the  moment  to  guzzle,  but  think ; 
And  I  wish  I  could  add,  both  of  coachman  and  noaster. 
That  both  of  us  strove  to  amend  a  bit  faster. 


ROBERT  AND  RICHARD  : 

OR. 

THE  GHOST  OF  POOR  MOLLY, 

U'HO  WAS  OROWNBD  IN  BICHARD'S  MILL-POND. 
Tune— ••  Collin's  Mulberry  Tns,*' 


QcoTH  Richard  to  Bob,  "  Let  things  go  as  they  will» 

**  Of  pleasure  and  fan  I  will  still  have  my  fill ; 

**  In  frolic  and  mirth  I  see  nothing  amiss, 

**  And,  though  I  get  tipsy,  what  harm  is  in  this  f 

**  For  e'en  Solomon  says,  and  I  tow  he  says  truth, 
**  Rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  the  days  of  thy  youth.'* 
"  I'm  glad,"  answered  Bob,  **  you're  of  Solomon's  creed, 
*'  But  I  beg,  if  you  quote  him,  you'll  please  to  proceed ; 

'*  For  God  (as  the  wise  man  continues  to  sing) 
**  Thy  soul  into  judgment  for  all  this  will  bring. 
**  Thus  a  man  may  get  plnng'd  in  a  woful  abyss, 
**  By  choosing  to  say.  Pray  what  harm  is  in  this  f** 

**  Come,  come,"  says  gay  Richard,"  don't  grudge  me  a  cup, 
**  I'm  resolr'd,  while  I'm  able,  I'll  still  keep  it  up ; 
**  Let  old  greybeards  deny  that  in  frolic  there's  bliss, 
**  I'll  game,  love,  and  drink— and  what  harm  is  in  thisT^ 

Says  Robert,  **  I  grant  if  you  live  for  to-day, 

**  You  may  game,  love,  and  drink,  and  may  frolic  away*, 

"  But  then,  my  dear  Dick,  I  agun  must  contend, 

**  Tliat  the  wise  man  has  bid  us — remember  the  end  P* 

Says  Richard,  **  When  sickness  or  peevish  old  age 
**  Shall  advance,  to  dismiss  me  from  life's  merry  stage ; 
••  Kopentance  ju8t  then,  boy,  may  not  be  amiss, 
"  But  wliile  youug  I'll  be  jolly— ir/ia^  harm  is  in  thi$?* 

x2 


4 


¥ntkhe 

O  haw^gbmsdf  she  looTd 

Aai  9B  awfidly  told 

She  talked  of  die  woes  isd  mmaenrinhte  fire 
Wliirii  swaxt  die  Scentiouv  &e  drunkard,  and 
Ht>«r  lie  mmM  more  maiiienis  she  bwie  kim  beit»^ , 
Tha&  alie  wept,  and  she  groan'd,  tad  rite  TaBish'd  in  air. 

Now  beggar'd  bj  zxaung,  £stemper'd  by  drink, 
Deadi  stared  in  his  face,  yet  he  dared  not  to  dunk  ; 
Desfnirin^  oi  mercy,  despising  all  truth. 
He  £ed  of  o£d  age  in  die  prime  of  hk  youth. 

On  his  tomb-stooe  good  Robert  these  mses  engrar'd. 
Which  he  hoped  some  gay  fellow  might  read  and  bo 
sared:— 


THV  KPITAFH. 


Here  Bes  a  poor  youth,  who  cali'd  drinking  his  blisi^ 
And  was  minM  by  saying,  What  harm  is  in  this  t 
\ji\  each  passer-by  to  his  oror  attend. 
And  learn  of  poor  Dick  to  remember  <Ae  end  / 


THE  CARPENTER: 

TUB  DANGER  OF  B7IL  COMPANY. 


Thbrb  tras  a  young  west  eonntry  man, 

A  carpenter  by  trade, 
A  skilful  wrheelwright  too  was  he. 

And  few  such  wagons  made. 

No  man  a  tighter  bam  could  biiild, 
Throughout  his  native  town ; 

Through  many  a  village  round  was  be 
The  best  of  workmen  known. 

His  fether  left  bim  what  be  bad. 

In  sooth  it  was  enough. 
His  shining  pewter,  pots  of  brass. 

And  all  bis  household  stuff. 

A  little  cottage  too  he  had. 
For  ease  and  comfort  plannM ; 

And  that  he  might  not  lack  fw  ought, 
An  acre  of  good  land. 

A  pleasant  orchard  too  there  was. 

Before  his  cottage  door : 
Of  cider  and  of  com  likewise, 

He  had  a  little  store. 

Active  and  healthy,  stout  and  young. 

No  business  wanted  he ; 
Kow  tell  me,  reader,  if  you  can, 

What  man  more  blest  could  be  ? 


468  THE  CARPENTER. 

To  make  his  comfort  qt^te  complete 

He  had  a  faithful  wife ; 
Frugal,  and  ueat,  and  good  was  she, 

The  blessing  of  his  life. 

Where  is  the  lord,  or  where  the  'squire. 
Had  greater  cause  to  praise. 

The  goodness  of  thai  bounteous  hand 
\Vhich  blest  his  prosperous  days  t 

Each  night  when  he  retumM  from  work. 

His  wife  so  meek  and  mild. 
His  little  supper  gladly  dressed. 

While  he  caress'd  his  child. 

One  blooming  babe  was  all  he  had, 

Hia  only  darling  dear. 
The  object  of  their  equal  love, 

The  solace  of  their  care. 

O  what  could  ruin  such  a  life, 

And  spoil  so  fair  a  lot  ? 
O  what  could  ohange  so  kind  a  heart, 

Aud  every  virtue  blot  i 

With  grief  the  cause  I  must  relate, 
The  dismiU  i*4iuse  reveal ; 

'Twos  EVIL  COMPANY  and  DRINK, 

Tl»o  source  of  every  ill. 

A  cooper  came  to  live  hard  by. 

Who  did  liis  fancy  please  ; 
An  idle  rambling'  man  was  he, 

Who  oft  had  crosa'd  tlie  seas. 

This  man  could  toll  a  merry  tale. 

And  siuif  a  merry  song  j 
And  those  who  heiu-d  liim  sing  or  talk, 

Ne'er  thought  the  evening  long. 

But  vnin  and  vicious  was  the  songj 

And  wicked  was  the  tale ; 
And  every  pnuso  he  always  fill'd 

With  cider,  gin,  or  ale. 


THE  CARPENTER.  469 

Our  carpenter  delighted  much 

To  hear  the  cooper  talk ; 
And  with  him  to  the  alehouse  oft, 

Would  take  his  evening  walk. 

At  first  he  did  not  care  to  drink. 

But  only  liked  the  fun ; 
But  soon  he  ft'om  the  cooper  learnt 

The  same  sad  course  to  run. 

He  said  the  cooper*s  company 

Was  all  for  which  he  cared ; 
But  soon  he  drank  as  much  as  he. 

To  swear  like  liim  soon  dared. 

His  hammer  now  neglected  lay. 

For  work  he  little  cared ; 
Half-finish'd  wheels,  and  broken  tools. 

Were  strew'd  about  the  yard. 

To  get  him  to  attend  his  work. 

No  prayers  could  now  prevail ; 
His  hatchet  and  his  plane  forgot, 

He  never  drove  a  nail. 

His  cheerful  evenings  now  no  mors 

With  peace  and  plenty  smiled ; 
No  more  he  sought  his  pleasing  wife. 

Nor  hugg'd  his  smiling  child. 

For  not  his  dmnken  nights  alone, 

Were  with  the  cooper  past ; 
His  days  were  at  the  Angel  spent, 

And  still  he  stayM  the  last. 

No  handsome  Sunday  suit  was  left. 

Nor  decent  Holland  shirt ; 
No  nosegay  mark'd  the  Sabbath  morn^ 

But  all  was  rags  and  dirt. 

No  more  his  church  he  did  frequent, 

A  symptom  ever  sad ; 
Where  once  the  Sunday  is  mispeut, 

The  week  days  muit  be  bad. 


470  THE  CARPENTER. 

The  eottage  mortgaged  for  its  worth* 
The  favourite  orchard  sold ; 

He  soon  began  to  feel  th*  effects 
Of  hunger  and  of  cold. 

The  pewter  dishes  one  by  one 
Were  pawn'd,  till  none  were  left ; 

And  wife  and  babe  at  home  remain'd. 
Of  every  help  bereft. 

By  chance  he  caird  at  home  one  night. 

And  in  a  surly  mood 
He  bade  his  weeping  wife  go  get 

Immediately  some  food. 

His  empty  cnpbonrd  well  he  knew 
Must  needs  be  bare  of  bread ; 

No  rasher  on  the  rack  he  saw. 
Whence  could  he  then  be  fed  ? 

His  wife*  a  piteous  sigh  did  heave, 

And  then  before  him  laid, 
A  basket  cover'd  with  a  cloth, 

But  not  a  word  she  stud. 

Then  to  her  husband  gave  a  knife. 

With  many  a  silent  tear, 
In  haste  he  tore  the  cover  off. 

And  saw  liis  child  lie  there  ! 

*'  There  lies  thy  babe,"  the  mother  said, 
"  Oppress'd  with  famine  sore  ; 

"  O  kill  us  both— 'twere  kinder  far, 
•*  We  cou'd  not  suffer  more." 

The  carpenter,  struck  to  the  heart. 
Fell  on  his  knees  straightway. 

He  wrung  his  hands,  confess'd  his  sins. 
And  did  both  weep  and  pray. 

From  that  same  hour  the  cooper  more 

He  never  would  behold  ; 
Nor  would  he  to  the  alehouse  go, 

Had  it  been  paved  \»\1\\  ^.oVd. 

*  See  ^t^\u*«  Vi«s<\!eun. 


THE  CARPENTER.  471 

His  wife  forgare  him  all  the  past. 

And  Booth*d  his  sorrowing  mind. 
And  mach  he  grievM  that  e'er  he  wrong'd 

The  worthiest  of  her  kind. 

By  labooring  hard,  and  working  late, 

By  industry  and  pains. 
His  cottage  was  at  length  redeemed. 

And  saved  were  all  his  gafais. 

His  Sandays  now  at  church  were  spent, 

His  home  was  his  delight ; 
Tlie  following  verse  himself  he  made. 

And  read  it  every  night. 

The  drunkard  murders  child  and  w\fe. 

Nor  matters  it  a  pin. 
Whether  he  stabs  them  vfith  his  knifet 

Or  starves  them  vith  his  gin. 


M 


HALF  A  LOAF  IS  BETTER  THAN  NO  BREAD. 

IM  A  OIALOOOK  BBTWKKM  JACK  AMYIL  AMD  TOM  ROD. 

To  the  Tuiw  of—"  A  Cobler  then  was.** 
Written  in  Ninety-five,  a  Tear  of  Seareitj  and  Alarm. 


TOM. 

Comb,  neighbours,  no  longer  be  patient  and  quiet, 

Come  let  us  go  kick  up  a  bit  of  a  riot ; 

rm  hungry,  my  lads,  but  Tve  little  to  eat, 

So  we'll  pull  down  the  mills,  and  we'll  seize  all  the 

meat: 
ril  give  you  good  sport,  boys,  as  ever  you  saw. 
So  a  fig  for  the  justice,  a  fig  for  the  law. 

Derry  down. 

Then  his  pitchfork  Tom  seized— Hold  a  moment,  says 

Jack, 
I'll  show  thee  thy  blunder,  brave  boy,  in  a  crack. 
And  if  I  don't  prove  we  had  better  be  still, 
I'll  assist  thee  straightway  to  pull  down  every  mill ; 
I'll  show  thee  how  passion  thy  reason  docs  cheat. 
Or  111  join  thee  in  plunder  for  bread  and  for  meat. 

Derry  down. 

Wliat  a  whirasey  to  think  thus  our  bellies  to  fill. 
For  we  stop  all  the  grinding  by  breaking  the  mill ! 
What  a  whimsey  to  think  we  shall  got  more  to  cat 
J)y  abusing  the  butchers  who  got  us  the  meat ! 
'AMiat  a  whimsey  to  tliink  we  shall  mend  our  spare  diet 
By  brcudiiio'  disturbance,  by  murder,  and  riot ! 

Derry  dowu. 


THE  RIOT.  473 

Because  I  am  dry,  'twould  be  foolish,  I  think, 
To  pull  out  my  tap,  and  spill  all  my  drink  ; 
Because  1  am  hungry  and  want  to  be  fed. 
That  is  sure  no  wise  reason  for  wasting  my  bread  : 
And  just  such  wise  reasons  for  mending  their  diet 
Are  used  by  those  blockheads  who  rush  into  riot. 

Derry  down. 

I  would  not  take  comfort  from  others*  distresses. 
But  still  I  would  mark  how  God  our  land  blesses ; 
For  though  in  Old  England  the  times  are  but  sad, 
Abroad,  I  am  told,  they  are  ten  times  as  bad  ; 
In  the  land  of  the  pope  there  is  scarce  any  grain. 
And  'tis  wOTse  still,  they  say,  both  in  Holland  and  Spain. 

Derry  down. 

Let  us  look  to  the  harvest  our  wants  to  beguile, 

See  the  lands  with  ricli  crops  how  they  every  where 

smile  I 
Meantime  to  assist  us,  by  each  western  breeze. 
Some  com  is  brought  daily  across  the  salt  seas ! 
Of  tea  we'll  drink  little,  of  gin  none  at  all. 
And  we'll  patiently  wait,  and  the  prices  will  fall. 

Derry  down. 

But  if  we*re  not  quiet,  then  let  us  not  wonder 
If  things  grow  much  worse  by  our  riot  and  plunder ; 
And  let  us  remember  whenever  we  meet. 
The  more  ale  we  drink,  boys,  the  less  we  shall  eat. 
On  those  days  spent  in  riot,  no  bread  you  brought  home ; 
Had  you  spent  Uiem  in  labour,  you  must  have  had  some. 

Derry  down. 

A  dinner  of  herbs,  says  the  wise  man,  with  quiet. 
Is  better  than  beef  amid  discord  and  riot. 
If  the  thing  could  be  help'd,  I'm  a  foe  to  all  strife. 
And  I  pray  for  a  peace  every  night  of  my  life ; 
But  in  matters  of  state  not  an  inch  will  1  budge. 
Because  I  conceive  Tm  no  very  good  judge. 

Derry  down. 

But  though  poor,  I  can  work,  ray  braveboy,  with  the  bt>it. 
Let  the  kiiig  and  the  parliament  manage  the  rest  j 
I  lament  both  the  war  and  tlie  taxes  together. 
Though  I  verily  tltink  they  don't  alter  the  weather. 


474  THE  RIOT. 


The  king ,  M I  take  it,  witk  T«ry  goMi 
Ibjr  preteat »  tai  kw,  but  caa*t  kdp  »  b«4 


The  iMfinMrt  BCD,  aUkoogk  gmk  it  tiMr  pimer, 
Tet  tiwy  aanet  eootiiTe  »  »  bit  of  A  itower  ; 
Ani  I  nerer  yet  heard,  though  our  mien  are  wiM, 
That  tiie  J  know  rcrj  wcfl  how  to  BHoage  the  akiee ; 
For  the  bert  of  them  aO,  ai  they  liMMi  to  their  ( 
Were  Bot  aUe  to  Under  lart  wiatei^  hard  frvet. 


Beddet,  I  mint  ihare  in  the  waate  of  the 
BeeaoM  I  Imre  Imd  my  fall  diare  in  ito 
And  I'm  a|it  to  bdiere  the  distrem  wfaiA  ie 
is  to  padih  and  cure  OS  of  all  diaeootent 
Bat  harrest  is  coming— potatoes  are  eoaw  1 
Onr  project  dean  up;  ye  ooa^iainen^  be 


And  though  I're  no  money,  and  ttongh  IVe  no  lands; 
Tto  head  on  my  sbonlden,  and  a  pair  of  good  hands; 
So  I'll  work  the  whole  day,  and  on  Sondays  1*11  seek 
At  diarch  bow  to  bear  all  Uie  wants  of  the  week. 
The  gentlefolks  too  will  afford  us  supplies, 
They'll  subscribe— and  they'll  give  up  th^  paddings  and 
pies.  Derry  down. 

Then  before  Fm  induced  to  take  part  in  a  riot, 
I'll  ask  this  short  question— What  shaU  I  get  by  it  ? 
So  I'll  e'en  wait  a  little,  till  cheaper  the  iMvad, 
Fur  a  mittimus  hangs  o'er  each  rioter's  head ; 
And  when  of  two  evils  I'm  ask'd  which  is  best 
I'd  rather  be  hungry  than  hang'd,  I  protest. 

Derry  down. 

Quoth  Tom,  thou  art  right ;  if  I  rise,  I'm  a  Turk ; 

So  he  threw  down  his  pitchfork,  and  went  to  his  work. 


PATIENT    JOE; 

THB  NEWCASTLE  COLLIE B. 


Hate  you  heard  of  a  collier  of  honest  renown, 
Who  dwelt  on  the  borders  of  Newcastle  town  ? 
His  name  it  was  Joseph— yon  better  may  know 
If  1  tell  you  he  always  was  call'd  Patient  Job. 

Whatever  betided,  he  thought  it  was  right, 

And  providence  still  he  kept  ever  in  sight ; 

To  those  who  love  God,  let  things  torn  as  they  would. 

He  was  certain  that  all  worked  together  for  good. 

He  prais'd  his  Creator  whatever  befell ; 
How  thankful  was  Joseph  when  matters  went  well ! 
How  sincere  were  his  carols  of  praise  for  good  health. 
And  how  grateful  for  any  increase  in  his  wealth ! 

In  trouble  he  bow*d  1dm  to  Gtod's  holy  will ; 
How  contented  was  Joseph  when  matters  went  ill ! 
When  rich  and  when  poor,  he  alike  understood, 
That  all  things  together  were  working  for  good. 

If  the  land  was  afflicted  with  war,  he  declared, 
'Twas  a  needful  correction  for  sins  which  he  shared : 
And  when  mercift^  Heaven  bade  slaughter  to  ceas«. 
How  thankful  was  Joe  for  the  blesdng  of  peace  I 

When  taxes  ran  high,  and  provisions  were  dear. 
Still  Joseph  declar'd  he  had  nothing  to  fear ; 
It  was  but  a  trial  he  well  understood. 
From  Him  who  made  all  work  togettier  for  good. 


I 


476  PATIENT  JOE. 

Thoogli  his  wife  was  but  licldjr,  his  gettiogfs  but  small, 
Yet  a  mind  so  subinissiTe  prepared  him  for  all ; 
He  lived  on  his  gains,  were  tliey  greater  or  lees. 
And  tlie  Giver  he  ceased  not  each  moment  to  bins. 

When  another  cliild  came  he  recdr^d  him  with  joy. 
And  Providence  blessed,  who  had  sent  him  the  boy ; 
But  when  the  child  died,  said  poor  Joe,  l*m  content, 
For  God  liad  a  right  to  recall  what  he  lent. 

It  was  Joseph's  ill  fortnne  to  worlc  in  a  pit 
With  some  who  lielievM  tliat  profeneness  was  wit ; 
When  disasters  befell  him,  much  pleasure  they  showed. 
And  hiugh'd  and  said*  Joseph,  will  this  work  for  good  ? 

But  ever  when  tliese  would  profisnely  advance 
That  this  happen*4  by  luck,  and  that  hi4>penM  by  chance; 
Still  Joseph  insisted  no  chance  could  be  found. 
Not  a  sparrow  by  acddent  falls  to  the  ground. 

Among  his  companions  who  workM  in  the  pit. 
And  made  him  the  butt  of  their  profligate  wit. 
Was  idle  Tim  Jenkins,  who  drank  and  who  gam*d. 
Who  mocked  at  his  bible,  and  was  not  ashamed. 

One  day  at  the  pit  his  old  comrades  he  found. 

And  they  chattered,  preparing  to  go  under  ground ; 

Tim  Jenkins,  as  usual,  was  turning  to  jest, 

Joe^s  notion— that  all  tilings  which  happen'd  were  bcMt. 

As  Joe  on  the  ground  had  unthinkingly  laid 
His  provision  for  dinner,  of  bacon  and  bread, 
A  dog,  on  the  watch,  seiz'd  the  bread  and  the  meat. 
And  off  with  his  prey  ran  with  footsteps  so  fleet. 

Now  to  see  the  delight  that  Tim  Jenkins  exprest  I 
*•  Is  the  loss  of  thy  dinner  too,  Joe,  for  the  best  ? 
*  No  doubt  on't,   said  Joe ;  "  but  as  I  must  eat, 
"  *Tis  my  duty  to  try  to  recover  my  meat. 

So  saying,  he  followed  the  dog  a  long  round. 
While  Tim,  laughing  and  swearing,  went  down  under 
ground. 


PATIENT  JOE.  477 

Poor  Joe  soon  retom'd,  though  his  bacon  was  lost, 
For  the  dog  a  good  dinner  had  made  at  his  cost. 

When  Joseph  came  back,  he  expected  a  sneer, 
But  the  foce  of  each  collier  spoke  horror  and  fear ; 
What  a  narrow  escape  hast  thou  had,  they  all  sai<^ 
The  pit  is  faU'n  in,  and  Tim  Jenkins  is  dead  I 

How  sincere  was  the  gratitude  Joseph  expre8s*d  1 
How  warm  the  compassion  which  glow'd  in  his  breast  I . 
Thus  events  great  and  small,  if  aright  nnderstood. 
Will  be  found  to  be  working  together  for  good. 

**  When  my  meat,"  Joseph  cried,  **  was  just  now  stoVn 

away, 
*'  And  I  had  no  prospect  of  eating  to-day, 
**  How  could  it  appear  to  a  short-sighted  sinner, 
•*  That  my  life  would  be  saved  by  the  loss  of  my  dinner  ?** 


r 


THE  GIN   SHOP: 
A  PBBP  INTO  A  PRISON. 


Look  through  the  land  frwn  north  to  •outl^ 

And  look  firom  east  to  west, 
And  aae  what  is  to  Engtinhmffn 

Of  life  the  deadliest  pest 

It  is  not  want,  though  that  is  bad. 
Nor  war,  though  that  is  worse  j 

But  Britons  brave  endure,  alas  i 
A  self-inflicted  curse. 

Go  where  you  will,  throughout  the  realm, 

You*ll  find  the  reigning  sin. 
In  dties,  villages,  and  towns, 

— The  monster's  name  is  Gin. 

The  prince  of  darkness  never  sent 

To  man  a  deadlier  foe ; 
**  My  name  is  Legion,"  it  may  say. 

The  source  of  many  a  woe. 

Kor  does  the  fiend  alone  deprive 

The  labourer  of  his  wealth ; 
That  is  not  all,  it  murders  too 

His  honest  name  and  health. 

We  say  the  times  are  grievous  hard. 

And  hard  they  are,  'tis  true^ 
But,  drunkards,  to  your  wives  and  bab«B 

TheyVe  harder  made  by  you. 


THE  GIN-SHOP.  479 

The  dnmkard^B  tax  is  self-impos'd, 

Like  every  other  sin ; 
The  taxes  altogether  lay 

No  weight  so  great  as  gin. 

The  state  compels  no  man  to  drink. 

Compels  no  man  to  game, 
'Tis  gin  and  gamUing  sink  him  down 

To  rags,  and  want,  and  shame. 

The  kindest  husband,  chang'd  by  gin. 

Is  for  a  tyrant  known ; 
The  tendlest  heart  that  natore  made 

Becomes  a  heart  of  stone. 

In  many  a  hoose  the  harmless  babes 

Are  poorly  doih'd  and  fed. 
Because  the  craving  gin-shop  takes 

The  children's  daily  bread. 

Come,  neighboar,  take  a  walk  with  me^ 

Through  many  a  London  street, 
And  see  the  cause  of  penury 

In  hundreds  we  shall  meet. 

We  shall  not  need  to  traTel  fax-^ 

Behold  that  great  man^  door, 
He  well  discerns  yon  idle  crew 

From  the  deseiring  poor. 

He  will  reUere  with  liberal  hand 

The  child  of  honest  thrift ; 
But  where  long  scores  at*  gin-shops  stand. 

He  will  withhold  his  gift. 

Behold  that  shiTVing  female  there. 

Who  pUes  her  wofnl  trade  I 
*Ti8  ten  to  one  youll  find  that  gin. 

That  hopdess  wretch  has  made. 

Look  down  those  steps,  and  yiew  bdow 

Yon  cellar  under  ground. 
There  er'ry  want  and  eT*ry  wo, 

And  CT'ry  sin  is  found. 


4S0  THE  GIN-SHOP. 

ThtnB  little  wretches  trembling  there^ 

^itU  hanger  and  wiUi  cold. 
Were,  by  their  parents'  love  of  gin, 

To  sin  and  misery  sold. 

Blest  be  those  friends  *  to  human  kind 
Wlio  take  these  wretches  up. 

Ere  they  have  drunk  the  bitter  dregs 
Of  their  sad  parents'  cup. 

Look  through  that  prison's  iron  bars. 
Look  through  that  dismal  grate. 

And  learn  what  dire  misfortunes  brought 
So  terrible  a  fate. 

The  debtor  and  the  felon  too. 
Though  differing  much  in  sin. 

Too  oft  you'll  find  were  thither  brought 
By  all-destroying  gin. 

Yet  Heaven  forbid  I  should  confound 

Calamity  with  guilt ! 
Or  name  the  debtor's  lesser  fault 

With  blood  of  brother  spilt. 

To  prison  dire  misfortune  oft 

I'he  guiltless  debtor  brings }         ,• 

Yet  oftener  far  it  will  be  found 
From  gin  the  misery  springs. 

Soe  the  pale  raanufactVer  there. 

How  lank  and  lean  he  lies ! 
How  haggard  is  his  sickly  cheek ! 

How  dim  his  hollow  eyes ! 

He  plied  the  loom  with  good  success. 

His  wages  still  were  high. 
Twice  what  the  village  labVer  gains. 

His  master  did  supply. 

No  book-debts  kept  him  from  his  cash» 

All  paid  as  soon  as  due  ; 
His  wages  on  the  Saturday 

To  fail  he  never  knew. 

*  The  PhlUnthropie  Soeletf* 


THE  GIN-SHOr.  4Sl 

How  amply  had  his  gnins  sulTiccd, 

On  wife  and  children  spent ! 
But  all  must  for  his  pleasure  go, 

All  to  the  gin-shop  went. 

See  that  apprentice,  young  in  years, 

But  hackneyed  long  in  sin. 
What  made  him  rob  his  master's  till  ? 

Alas !  'twas  love  of  gin. 

That  serving-man — I  knew  him  once. 

So  jaunty,  spruce,  and  smart ! 
Why  did  he  steal,  then  pawn  the  plate  ? 

'Twas  gin  ensnar'd  his  heart. 

But,  hark !  what  dismal  sound  was  that  ? 

'Tis  Saint  Sepulchre's  bell ! 
It  tolls,  alas,  for  human  guilt 

Some  malefactor's  knell. 

O !  woful  sound !  O !  what  could  c-auso 
Such  punishment  and  sin ! 

Hark !  hear  Ids  words,  he  owns  the  cause- 
Bod  company  and  gin. 

And  when  the  future  lot  is  fix'd. 

Of  darkness,  fire,  and  chains. 
How  can  the  drunkard  hope  to  'scape 

Those  everlasting  pains  ? 

For  if  the  murd'rer's  doom'd  to  wo, 

As  holy  writ  declares, 
The  drunkard  with  self-murdrrers 

That  dreadful  portion  sliares. 


Y 


I 


HYMNS, 


EPITAPHS  AND  INSCRIPTIONS. 


THE 

TRUE    HEROES: 

OR, 

THE  NOBLE  ARMY  OF  MARTYRS. 


YoD  who  lovp  A  tale  of  glor7. 

Listen  to  the  song  I  sing  ; 
Heroes  of  the  Christian  story, 

Are  the  heroes  I  shall  bring. 

Warriors  of  the  world,  avaunt  1 

Other  heroes  me  engage ; 
*Tis  not  sach  as  you  I  Avant, 

Saints  and  martyrs  grace  my  page. 

Warriors  who  the  world  o*ercame 
Were  in  brother's  blood  embrued ; 

While  the  saints  of  purer  fame, 
Greater  far— themselves  subdued. 

Fearful  Christian  !  hear  with  wonder, 
Of  the  saints  of  whom  I  tell ; 

Some  were  burnt,  some  sawn  asunder, 
Some  by  fire  or  torture  fell ; 

Some  to  savage  beasts  were  hurVd, 
One  escaped  the  lion's  den ; 

Was  a  persecuting  world 
Worthy  of  these  wondrous  men  ? 

Some  in  fiery  furnace  thrown. 
Yet  escaped,  unsinged  their  hair ; 

There  Almighty  power  was  shown ; 
For  the  Son  of  God  was  there. 

Let  us  crown  with  deathless  fame 
Those  who  scomM  and  hated  fell ; 

Martyrs  met  contempt  and  shame. 
Fearing  nought  but  sin  and  helL 


i 


4S6  THE  TRUE  HEROES. 

Hoi^  the  shower  of  stones  descende  1 
Holy  Stephen,  on  thy  head  ! 

While  his  tongue  the  truth  defended 
How  the  glorious  martyr  bled ! 

See  his  fierce  reriler  Saul, 
How  he  rails  with  impious  breath  I 

Tlien  observe  converted  Paul, 
Oft  in  perils,  oft  in  death. 

*Twas  that  God,  whose  sovereign  powet 

Did  the  lion's  fury  'suage, 
Could  alone,  in  one  short  hour, 

Still  the  persecutor's  rage. 

E'en  a  woman— women,  hear, 
Read  in  Maccabees  the  story  I 

Conqaer*d  nature,  love,  and  fear. 
To  obtain  a  crown  of  glory. 

Seven  stout  sons  she  saw  expire, 
(How  the  mother's  soul  was  pain' J  !) 

Some  by  sword,  and  some  by  tire, 
(How  the  martyr  was  sustained !) 

E'en  in  death's  acutest  anguish. 
Each  the  tyrant  still  defied ; 

Each  she  saw  in  torture  languish. 
Last  of  all  the  mother  died. 

Martyrs  who  were  thus  arrested, 
In  their  short  but  bright  career ; 

By  their  blood  the  truth  attestoil. 
Proved  thi  r  faith  and  lovo  siuccr.'. 

Though  their  lot  was  hard  and  louiy. 
Though  they  perishM  at  tlic  stake. 

Now  they  live  with  Christ  in  glory, 
Siuce  they  suffer'd  for  his  sake. 

Fierce  and  unbelieving  foes 
But  their  bodies  could  destroy  ; 

Short,  though  bitter,  were  tlioir  woc>s, 
E  ver\ast\i\g  '\s  ^.Vvc\t  \v>>i . 


A   CHRISTMAS  HYMN 


O  How  wondrous  is  the  story 
Of  our  blest  Redeemer's  birth  I 

See  the  mighty  Lord  of  glory 
Leaves  his  heaven  to  vidt  earth ! 

Hear  with  transport,  every  creature, 
Hear  the  gospel's  joyful  sound ; 

Christ  appears  in  human  nature, 
In  our  sinful  worid  is  found ; 

Comes  to  pardon  our  transgression. 
Like  a  cloud  our  sins  to  blot ; 

Comes  to  his  own  favour*d  nation. 
But  his  own  receive  him  not. 

If  the  angels  who  attended 
To  declare  the  Saviour's  birth, 

Wlio  from  heaven  with  songs  descended 
To  proclaim  good-will  on  earth ; 

If,  in  (rfty  to  our  blindness. 

They  had  brought  the  pardon  needed* 
Still  Jehovah's  wcmdrous  kindness 

Had  our  wurmest  hopes  exceeded : 

If  some  in-ophet  had  been  sent 
With  salvation^  Joyful  news. 

Who,  that  heard  the  blest  event. 
Could  their  warmest  love  refuse  I 

But  'twas  He  to  whom  in  heaven 

Halleliuahs  never  cease ; 
He,  the  mighty  God,  was  given, 

Given  to  us  a  Prince  of  peace. 


4S3  A  CHRISTMAS  HYMN. 

None  but  He  who  did  create  na 
Could  redeem  from  sin  and  hell ; 

None  but  He  could  re-instate  us 
In  the  rank  from  which  we  fell. 

Had  He  come,  the  glorious  stranger, 
DeckM  with  all  the  world  calls  great  { 

Had  He  lived  in  pomp  and  grandeur, 
Crown'd  with  more  tlian  royal  state ; 

Still  our  tongues  with  prmse  o'erflowiiig. 
On  such  boundless  love  would  dwell ; 

Still  our  hearts,  with  rapture  glowing, 
Feel  what  words  could  never  tell. 

But  wliat  wonder  should  it  raise 
Thus  our  lowest  state  to  borrow  ! 

O  the  high  mysterious  wtiys, 
6od*s  own  Son  a  child  of  sorrow  I 

'Twaa  to  bring  us  endless  pleasure, 
He  our  suffering  nature  bore ; 

*Twa8  to  give  us  heavenly  treasure. 
He  was  willing  to  be  poor. 

Come,  ye  rich,  survey  the  stable 
Wliere  your  infant  Saviour  lies ; 

From  your  full  o'erflowing  table 
Send  the  hungry  good  supplies. 

Boast  not  your  ennobled  stations. 
Boast  not  that  you're  highly  fed ; 

Jesus,  hear  it,  all  ye  nations. 
Had  not  where  to  lay  his  head. 

Learn  of  mc,  thus  cries  the  Saviour, 
If  my  kingdom  you'd  inherit ; 

Sinner,  quit  your  proud  behaviour. 
Learn  my  meek  and  lowly  spirit. 

Come,  ye  servants,  see  your  station, 
Freed  from  all  reproach  and  shame  ; 

He  wlio  purcbas'd  your  salvation 
Bore  a  servant'^  humble  name. 


A  CHRISTMAS  HYMN.  489 

Come,  ye  poor,  some  comfort  gather. 

Faint  not  in  the  race  you  ran  ; 
Hard  the  lot  your  gracious  Father 

Gave  his  dear,  his  only  Son. 

Tliink,  that  if  your  humbler  stations, 

Less  of  worldly  good  bestow, 
Vou  escape  those  strong  temptations 

Which  from  wealth  and  grandeur  flow. 

See  your  Saviour  is  ascended  I 

See  He  looks  with  pity  down  ! 
Trust  Him,  all  will  soon  be  mended, 

Et^j:  His  cross,  you'll  share  His  crown 


Y  a 


MORNING  SOLILOQUY. 


Hm  foUowint  linea  were  writtm  by  Hannah  More  for  her  own 
on,  in  early  lifc.  bat  a  copy  haTing  been  given  to  a  friend,  the 
antbor  was  importoned  to  print  it  She  complied,  and  preilzcd 
to  the  pieee  the  foUowinc— 

"As  early  risinf  ia  TeryeoododTe  to  health,  and  to  thefanprove* 
BMikt  of  the  mind  in  knowledge  and  piety,  this  SoUloqay  is  design- 
ed to  promote  so  important  an  end;  and  is  reeommended  more  par- 
ticolarly  to  young  persons,  as,  by  contracting  a  habit  of  rising  early 
in  the  days  of  their  yoath,  they  would  be  leas  liable  to  depart  Atom 
sueh  a  custom  as  they  advanoe  in  life.  The  last  stanza  is  expres- 
sire  of  the  action  of  rising,  in  order  that  those  who  repeat  it  may 
luve  no  excuse  fbr  not  ({ttitting  tlieir  beds  immediately. 


Soft  slmnben  now  mino  eyes  forsake. 

My  powers  are  all  renew'd ; 
May  my  freed  spirit  too  awake. 

With  heayenly  strength  endued ! 

Thou  silent  murderer  Sloth,  no  more 

My  mind  iraprisonM  keep ; 
Nor  let  me  waste  another  hour 

With  thee,  thou  felon  Sleep. 

Hark,  O  my  soul,  could  dying  men 

One  lavish'd  hour  retrieve. 
Though  spent  in  tears,  and  pass'd  in  pain, 

What  treasures  would  they  give  ! 

But  seas  of  pearl,  and  mines  of  gold. 

Were  oflfer'd  them  in  vain  j 
Th«'ir  pearl  of  countless  price  is  lost,* 

And  Where's  the  promis'd  gain  ? 

Lord,  when  thy  day  of  dread  account 
For  squander'd  hours  shall  come. 

Oh  let  them  not  increase  th'  amount. 
And  swell  the  former  sum  I 

*  See  Matthew  ziii.  AS. 


MORNING  SOLILOQUY. 

Teach  me  in  health  each  good  to  prize, 

I,  dying,  shall  esteem ; 
And  every  pleasure  to  despiso 

I  then  shall  worthless  deem. 

For  all  thy  wondrous  mercies  past 

My  grateful  Toice  I  raise. 
While  thus  I  quit  the  bed  of  rest 

Creation's  Lord  to  praise. 


401 


rr 


A  HYMN  OF  PRAISE, 

FOB  TUB 

ABUNDANT  HARVEST   OF   17L0. 
AFTER  A  YEAR  OP  SCARCITY. 


Gbbat  God  !  when  famine  thrcaten'd  late 

To  scuurg^o  our  guilty  laud, 
O  did  we  learn  from  that  dark  fate 

To  dread  thy  mij^hty  hand  ? 

Dill  then  our  sins  to  memory  rise  ? 

Or  owu'd  we  God  was  just  ? 
Or  raia'd  we  penitential  cries  ? 

Or  bow'd  we  in  the  dust  ? 

Did  wo  forsake  one  ovil  path? 

Was  any  sin  abhnrrM  ? 
Or  (lid  we  deprecate  thy  wrath. 

And  turn  us  to  the  I^ord  ? 

'Tis  true,  we  fail'd  not  to  rephjo, 

Hut  did  we  too  repent ! 
Or  own  the  chastisement  divine, 

In  awful  judgement  sent  P 

Though  tlie  brij^'ht  chjun  of  peace  be  brok< 
And  war,  with  ruthless  sword, 

Unpeoples  nations  at  a  stroke, 
Yet  who  regards  the  Lord  ? 

But  God,  who  in  lus  strict  decrees, 

Remembers  mercy  still, 
(3an,  in  a  moment,  if  he  please. 

Our  lioarts  with  comfort  iiil. 


^^ 


HYMN  OF  PRAISE.  493 

He  mark*d  our  angry  spirits  rise, 

Domestic  hate  increase ; 
And  fur  a  time  Withheld  supplies. 

To  teach  us  love  and  peace. 

Ho,  when  he  brings  liis  children  \o\\\ 

Has  blessings  still  in  store ; 
And  when  he  strikes  the  heaviest  blow. 

He  loves  us  but  the  more. 

Now  frost,  and  flood,  and  blight*  no  luoio, 

Our  golden  harvests  spoil ; 
See  what  an  unexampled  store 

Ucwards  the  reaper's  toil  I 

As  when  the  promised  harvest  fail'd, 

In  Canaan's  fruitful  land ; 
The  envious  patriarchs  were  assail'd 

By  famine's  pressing  hand  1 

The  angry  brothers  then  forgot 

Each  fierce  and  jarring  feud ; 
Uu.ted  by  their  adverse  lot. 

They  lov'd  as  brothers  aliould. 

So  here,  from  Heaven's  correcting  hand, 

lliough  famine  fail'd  to  move ; 
Let  plenty  now  throughout  the  laud, 

lleldndle  peace  and  love. 

Like  the  ricli  fool,  let  us  not  say. 

Soul  I  thou  hast  goods  in  store  I 
But  shake  the  overplus  away. 

To  feed  the  hungry  poor. 

Lot  rich  and  poor,  on  whom  are  now 

Such  bounteous  crops  bestow'd, 
liaise  many  a  pure  and  holy  vow 

Of  gratitude  to  God  ! 

And  while  his  gracious  name  we  praise 

For  bread  so  kindly  given  ; 
Let  us  beseet-h  him  lUl  our  days, 

To  give  the  bread  of  heaven. 
»  These  three  visitations  follow ed  each  other  in  (luitk  5uccci.Liun, 


494  A  HYMN  OF  PRAISB. 

In  that  Meet  praf  er  our  Lord  did  firame. 
Of  all  our  prayers  the  guide. 

We  ask  that  *«  Uallow'd  be  A£f  name,'* 
And  then  our  wants  suj^Ued. 

For  grare  he  Irids  us  fir^t  implore. 

Next,  that  ire  may  be  fed ; 
We  say,  **  Thy  will  be  done,"  before 

We  ask  **  our  daily  bread." 


ON   THE   REV.    MR   PENROSE. 

Tblrty-two  yean  Vicar  of  St  Oluvias,  ComwalL 

Ir  social  manners,  if  tlie  gentlest  mind. 

If  zeal  for  God,  and  love  for  human  kind. 

If  all  the  charities  which  life  endear, 

May  claim  a£fection,  or  demand  a  tear. 

Then  o'er  Pbnrosb's  venerable  urn 

Domestic  love  may  weep,  and  friendship  mourn. 

The  path  of  duty  still,  untired,  he  trod. 
He  walk'd  in  safety,  for  he  walk'd  with  God ! 
When  past  the  power  of  precept  and  of  pray  V, 
Yet  sUll  his  flock  remain*d  the  shepherd's  care ; 
Thehr  wants  still  kindly  watchful  to  supply, 
He  taught  his  best,  last  lesson,  how  to  die  I 


ON  MRS  BLAND  FORD, 

Mbbk  shade,  farewell !  go  seek  that  quiet  shore 
Where  sin  shall  vex,  and  sorrow  wound  no  more; 
Thy  lowly  worth  obtains  that  final  bliss. 
Which  pride  disdmns  to  seek,  and  wit  may  miss. 
That  path  thou'st  found  which  science  cannot  teach, 
But  faith  and  goodness  never  fail  to  reacJi : 
Then  share  the  joy  the  words  of  life  impart. 
The  Vision  promised  to  the  *'  pure  in  heart.'* 


ON  MRS   LITTLE. 
In  RedcUffe  Church,  Bristol. 

O  COULD  this  verse  her  fair  example  spread, 
And  teach  the  living  while  it  prai&'d  the  dea  i  I 


496  EPITAPHS. 

Then,  reader,  should  it  speak  her  hope  divine. 
Not  to  record  her  faith,  but  strengthen  thine ; 
llion  should  her  every  virtue  stand  confest, 
Till  every  virtue  kindled  in  thy  breast. 
But  if  thou  slight  the  monitory  strain, 
And  she  has  lived,  to  thee  at  least,  in  vain  ; 
Yet  let  her  death  an  awful  lesson  give. 
The  dying  Christian  speaks  to  all  that  live. 
Enough  for  her  tliat  here  her  ashes  rest, 
Till  God*s  own  plaudit  shall  her  worth  attest. 


ON   GENERAL   LAWRENCE. 

Memorable  for  his  Conquest  In  India,  and  for  his  Clemency  to  (he 

Tanqui«hed.  * 

On  a  Monument  erected  by  Sir  Robert  Palk. 

DoRN  tocommaud,  to  conquer,  and  to  spare, 
As  mercy  mild,  yet  terrible  as  war, 
Here  Lawkence  rests  in  death;  while  living  fame 
lYoin  Thames  to  Ganges  wafts  his  honour'd  name. 
To  him  this  frail  memorial  Friendship  rears. 
Whose  noblest  monument's  a  nation's  tears  ; 
Wiiose  deeds  on  fairer  columns  stand  engrav'd 
111  Provinces  preserv'd,  and  Cities  sav'd. 


ON   THE    R E  V.  M II   HUNTER, 

%Vho,  In  1771,  received  a  degree  from  the  University  of  Oxford,  for 
bis  work  against  Lord  Bolingbroke's  philosophy. 

Go,  happy  spirit,  seek  Uiat  blissful  land 
Where  zea'ous  Michael  leads  tlie  glorious  band 

*  Majnr-Gcncral  Stringer  Lawrence  died  in  1775,  at  Ilaldon- 
hotisc,  the  seat  of  his  nriend  Sir  Robert  Palk,  in  Devonshire.  The 
India  company  erected  a  monument  to  his  memory  in  Westminster 
Abbey ;  and  Sir  Robert  another,  still  more  elegant,  in  the  parish 
church  of  Dunchideock,  in  Devonshire,  on  which  last,  this  epitai*b  is 
inscribed. 


EPITAPHS.  497 

Of  those  who  fought  for  truth ;  blest  spirit,  go, 
And  perfect  all  the  good  begun  below  : 
Go,  hear  applauding  saints,  delighted,  tell 
How  vanquished  falsehood,  at  thy  bidding,  fell ! 
Blest  in  that  heaven,  whose  paths,  thy  virtues  sought ; 
Blest  in  that  God  whose  cause  thou  well  hast  fought ; 
O  let  thy  honoured  shade  Ids  care  approve. 
Who  this  memorial  rears  of  fih'al  love : 
A  son,  whose  father,  living,  was  his  pride ; 
A  son  who  mourns  that  sucli  a  father  died. 

The  Rev.  Thomas  Hunter,  M.  A.  vicar  of  Weaverbam,  in  Che- 
shire, died  there  in  1778.  This  epitaph  was  written  at  the  request 
of  his  son ;  and  Dr  Stonhouse  says,  the  composition  took  the  author 
only  a  few  minutes.  Two  volumes  of  Mr  Hunter's  sermons  were 
published  after  his  death,  by  subscription.  Besides  his  answer  to 
Dolingbroke,  he  wrote  an  excellent  tract  on  the  corrupt  principles  of 
Chesterfleld.— So. 


TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 

MRS  ELIZABETH   IVES, 

Aged  91,  of  Northampton. 

Her  pious  and  useful  life 
was  extended  to  an  honourable  old  nge, 

and  closed  by  an  exemplary  death. 

Her  Cliarity  had  its  source  in  Religion ; 

Her  love  of  her  neighbour  was  the  genuine  ciFcct 

of  her  love  of  God  : 

Her  Resignation 

was  the  Fruit  of  her  Faith ; 

and  she  died  in  Hope, 

because  she  had  lived 

A  Christian. 


ON  CLUKR  DICEY,  ESQ. 
In  Claybrook  Church,  Leicestershire. 

O  THOU,  or  friend  or  stranger,  who  slrnlt  tread 
Tiiese  solemn  mansions  of  the  silent  dead  I 


4 


408  EPITAPHS. 

Think,  when  this  record  to  inqidring  ey^s. 
No  more  shall  tell  the  spot  where  Dicby  lies ; 
When  this  frail  marble,  faithless  to  its  trust, 
Mould'ring  itself,  resigns  its  monlder'd  dust  i 
When  time  shall  fail,  and  nature's  self  decay. 
And  earth,  and  sun,  and  skies  dissolve  away ; 
Thy  soul  this  consummation  shall  surrive, 
D^  the  wreck,  and  but  begin  to  lire. 
This  truth,  long  slighted,  let  these  ashes  teach, 
Though  cold,  instruct  you,  and  Uiougfa  tilent  preach 
O  pause !  reflect,  repent,  reaolve,  amend  I 
Life  has  no  length.  Eternity  no  end ! 


ON  A  YOUNG  LADY. 

Go,  peaceful  shade !  exchange  for  sin  and  care 
The  glorious  palm  which  patient  sufferers  wear ! 
Go,  take  the  meed  victorious  meekness  gains. 
Go,  wear  the  crown  triumphant  fiedth  obtains. 

Those  ^ent  graces  which  the  good  conceal,- 
The  day  of  dread  disclosure  shall  reveal ; 
Theu  shall  thy  mild,  retiring  virtues  rise, 
Aud  GoJ,  both  judge  and  witness,  give  the  jwize. 


INSCRIPTION  ON  A  CENOTAPH 

IN  A  GARDEN. 

Erected  to  a  deceased  Friend. 

Vs  Uborai  souls  who  reverence  Friendship's  name. 
Who  boast  her  blessings,  and  who  feel  her  flame  ; 
O  !  if  from  early  youth  one  friend  youVe  lov*d. 
Whom  warm  affecti(m  chose,  and  taste  approved  ; 
If  you  have  known  what  anguish  rends  the  heart. 
When  such,  so  known,  so  lov'd,  for  ever  part ; 
Approach  ! — For  you  the  mourner  rears  Vua  stone. 
To  sooth  your  sorrows,  and  record  his  own. 


EPITAPHS.  499 

ON  THE  REV.  MR  LOVE,* 
In  the  Cathedna  at  Bristol. 

Whbn  worthless  grandeur  fills  the  embellisli'd  urn. 
No  poignant  grief  attends  the  sable  bier ; 

But  when  distinguished  excellence  we  mourn. 
Deep  is  the  sorrow,  genuine  is  the  tear. 

Stranger  I  shouldst  thou  approach  this  awful  slulne. 
The  merits  of  the  honoured  dead  to  seek ; 

The  friend,  the  son,  the  christian,  the  divine. 
Let  those  who  knew  him,  those  who  lov'd  him,  speak. 

O  let  them  in  some  pause  of  anguish  say. 
What  zeal  inflam'd,  what  faith  enlarg'd  his  breast  1 

How  glad  th*  unfetter'd  spirit  wing'd  its  way 
From  earth  to  heaven,  from  blessing  to  be  blest  1 

*  Samuel  Love,  M.  A.  Fellow  of  Baliol  college,  Oxford,  and  one 
of  the  minor  canons  of  Bristol  cathedral,  died  at  the  early  age  of 
twenty-nine,  in  1778.  In  such  estimation  was  he  held  for  bis  piety 
and  eloquence,  that  a  subscription  was  entered  into  for  the  erection 
of  a  monument  to  his  memory. 

Mr  Love  was  himself  no  ordinary  poet,  as  the  following  elegant 
effusion  of  bis  pen  sufficiently  proves.  Not  long  before  his  death, 
a  redbreast  took  up  its  abode  on  one  of  the  pinnacles  of  the  great 
organ  in  Bristol  cathedral,  wliere,  during  the  time  of  divine  service, 
it  never  Odled  to  aeoompany  the  solemnity  with  its  melody.  This 
incident  Mr  Love  thus  improved  t 

Sweet  social  bird,  whose  soft  harmonious  lays 
Swell  the  glad  song  of  thy  Creator's  praise; 
Say.  art  thou  eonseioaa  of  approaehlng  ills  ? 
Pell  winter's  itorms— the  pointed  bhut  that  kilU  t 

Shun'st  thou  the  savage  north's  nnpitying  breath  7 
Or  cruel  man's  more  latent  snares  of  death  ? 
Here,  dwell  aecnre;  here,  with  incessant  note. 
Pour  the  soft  music  of  thy  trembling  throat  t 
Here,  gentle  bird,  a  sure  asylum  find ; 
Nor  dread  the  chilling  fhMt,  nor  boist'rous  wind. 

No  hostile  tyrant  of  the  feather'd  race 
Shall  dare  Invade  thee  in  this  hallow  d  place; 
Nor,  while  he  sails  the  liquid  air  along. 
Check  the  shril)  numbers  of  thy  cheerful  song. 


500  EPITAPHS. 

ON  TRB 

REV.  SIR  JAMES  STONHOUSE,  BART.  M.  D. 
In  the  Clupel  at  Ibe  Hot-wells,  BristoL 

Hbbb  rests  awhile,  in  happier  climes  to  shine. 

The  Orator,  Phyadan,  and  Dirine. 

"Tvras  his.  like  Lukb,  the  double  Ut&k  to  fill. 

To  heal  the  natural  and  the  moral  ill. 

Yoo,  whose  awakened  hearts  his  labours  blest. 

Where  erery  truth  by  every  grace  was  drest ; 

Oh !  let  your  lires  evince  that  sUU  you  feel 

Th'  effectire  influence  of  his  fenrent  zeal. 

One  spirit  rescued  from  eternal  wo, 

Where  nobler  fame  titan  marble  am  bestow ; 

That  lasting  monument  will  mock  decay. 

And  stand,  triumphant,  at  the  final  day. 

He  died  December  the  8th,  17%,  in  the  80th  year  of  his 

age. 

BefisithfuL 


No  eautioas  gmmtr,  whoM  uneirinf  sight 
Stops  the  swift  ea^le  in  bis  rapid  flight. 
Shall  here  disturb  my  lovely  songster's  rest. 
Nor  wound  the  plumage  of  his  crimson  breast. 

The  truant  schoolboy  who.  In  wanton  play 
With  riseid  lime  involves  the  trcaeh'rous  spray. 
In  Tain  shall  spread  the  wily  snare  for  thee, 
Alilce  secure  thy  life  and  liberty. 

Peace  then,  sweet  warbler,  to  thy  Sntt'ring  heart  t 
Deiy  the  eye  of  hawks,  and  toils  of  art ; 
Now  shake  thy  downy  plumes,  now  gladlier  pay 
Thy  grateful  tribute  to  each  rising  day : 

While  crowds  below,  their  willing  voices  raise. 

To  sing,  with  ttoly  zeal,  Jehovah's  praise  I 

Thou,  perch'd  on  high,  shalt  hear  th*  adoring  throng, 

Catch  the  warm  strains,  and  aid  the  sacred  song. 

Increase  the  solemn  chorus,  and  inspire 

Each  tongue  with  music,  and  each  heart  with  fire. 

The  Editor  has  often  heard  this  extraordinary  bird,  and  witnessed 
with  pleasure  lis  ready  obedience  to  the  call  of  the  old  Tergrr,  ttom 
whose  hand  U  receV^teA  >:bft  tciwD^tv^  wd  evening  crums  of  bread, 
which  prolonicd  \15  nXMcoce  >a\  *Lt  ii>»m«  ^\  ^iiajt  -&«»  \7%i. 


EPITAPHS.  601 

Sir  James  Stonbouse  was,  for  more  than  twenty  years  physician 
to  the  infirmary  at  Northampton,  of  which  excellent  charity  he 
was,  indeed,  the  founder.  In  1763  he  tooii  orders,  and  obtained 
first  the  living  of  LitUe  Chtverel,  in  'Wiltshire,  to  which  alter, 
wards,  was  added  that  of  Great  Cheverel,  and  this  was  all  the  pre- 
ferment he  erer  obtained.  His  first  wife  Anne,  the  eldest  daughter 
of  John  Neale,  Esq.,  of  AUesley,  near  Coventry,  died  at  Nor- 
thampton, and  lies  in  the  church  of  All  Saints,  in  that  town.  His 
second  wife  was  Sarah,  the  only  child  of  Thomas  Eklns,  Esq., 
whose  estate  she  inherited.  Dr  Doddridge  was  her  guardian  ;  but 
he  died  before  her  marriage.  Dr  Stonbouse  was  an  admirable 
preacher,  and  truly  evangelical,  without  the  least  approximation  to 
enthusiasm. 


The  following  encomium  by  his  friend  Hannah  More,  wrilten  on 
the  fly  leaf  of  Saurin's  Sermons,  which  she  had  borrowed  of  the 
doctur  in  177&i  is  no  exaggeration. 


EPITRE  AU 

DR  STONHOUSE  SUR  LES  SERMONS  DB 

M.  SAURIN. 

Ces  divines  ardeurs,  cette  saintc  Eloquence, 
Ces  sublimes  pen^fees,  ces  conceptions  imroensos, 
Cos  essors  6vang61iquc8,  cette  humility  profondc, 
Cette  connaissance  unio  &  ce  m^pris  da  raonde, 
Cct  horrcar  du  vice,  cat  amour  dc  la  virtu, 
Cette  extreme  soumission  k  la  Tolont6  de  Dicu, 
Cette  heoreuse  indifference  pour  un  monde  inccrtain, 
Cette  compassion  pour  les  manx  du  genre  humain, 
Cet  amour,  et  cette  crainte  de  I'^tcmel  Cr6ateur, 
Ct*tte  parfaite  esp6rance  dans  le  sang*  du  Redempteur } 
Enfin,  ces  graudes  id^es — ce  language  divin— 
Qui  charme,  qui  ^leve,  qui  transporte  en  Saurin, 
J'admire  en  le  lisant,  ces  beaut6s  6clatantes, 
J'n  t'tfcoutant,  Docteur,  les  mdmes  beaut^s  m*encliaiitcut, 
Serablabie  au  prophSte  qui,  la  S^nte  Ecriture  dit, 
Luissa*  &  son  suceesseur  sou  manteau  et  son  es}rrit. 

*  2  Kings  ij.  31. 


502  EPITAPHS. 


THESE  LINES 

MAY  BB  THDS  LITERALLY  TRANSLATED. 

Tbat  warmth  divine,  that  holy  eloquence. 

Those  thoughts  sublime,  conceptions  so  immense. 

That  holy  seal,  that  deep  humility. 

Extent  of  knowledge,  perfect  chiuity. 

That  dread  of  vice,  of  virtue  such  a  love, 

Tbat  true  submisaion  to  the  'Will  above, 

That  calm  indifference  to  this  changing  scene. 

That  pity  for  the  woes  of  mortal  men. 

That  love  and  fear  of  the  eternal  Good, 

That  perfect  hope  in  the  Redeemer's  blood ; 

Those  grand  ideas,  language  so  divine, 

Which  charm,  exalt,  transport  us  in  Saurin  ; 

In  reading  himt  these  beauties  still  appear, 

In  hearing  thee,  these  beauties  charm  mine  ear; 

Like  to  that  prophet,  who,  ns  scriptures  say. 

His  cloak  and  spirit  left,  then  wing'd  to  heav'n  his  way. 


ON  SARAH  STONHOUSE. 

Second  wife  of  Sir  James  Stonhouse,  Bart 

Comb,  Resignation  !  wipe  the  human  tear. 
Domestic  anguish  drops  o'er  Virtue's  bier ; 
Bid  selfish  sorrow  hush  the  fond  complainl^ 
Nor,  from  the  God  she  lov'd,  detain  the  saint. 

lYuth,  meekness,  patience,  honour'd  shade,  were  thuie ; 

And  holy  hope,  and  charity  divine ; 

Though  these  thy  forfeit  being  could  not  save. 

Thy  faith  subdued  the  terrors  of  the  grave. 

Oh  !  if  thy  living  excellence  could  teach. 
Death  has  a  loftier  emphasis  of  speech  : 
Let  death  thy  strongest  lesson  then  impart. 
And  write,  prepare  to  die,  on  every  heart. 

She  died.  December  lOth.  1786,  aged  finy-flTc  yeara. 

BE  SERIOUS 


EPlTAniS.  603 

ON  MR  SHAPLAND, 
An  eminent  Apothecary  in  Bristol. 

WoDLDST  thou  inquire  of  him  who  sleeps  beneath, 
Tiiis  tomb  shall  teU  thee,  ^  no  common  dust. 

That,  crushed  at  length  by  oft-defeated  death. 
Fills  the  cold  urn  committed  to  its  trust. 

Stranger !  this  building  fallen  to  decay, 
Was  once  the  dwelling  of  an  honest  mind — 

A  spirit  cheerful  as  the  light  of  day — 
The  soul  of  friendship— milk  of  human  kind. 

His  art  forbade  th*  expiring  wretch  to  die. 
Empowered  the  nerveless  tongue  once  more  to  speak. 

Restored  its  lustre  to  the  sunken  eye. 
And  spread  fresh  roses  on  the  livid  cheek. 

Each  various  duty  bound  on  social  man, 
*Twas  his  with  glowing  duty  to  perform. 

As  crystal  pure,  his  stream  of  conduct  ran. 
Unstained  by  folly,  undisturb'd  by  storm. 


The  Editor  trusts  to  be  excused  for  subjointaig  to  the  sepulchral 
loscriptioos,  the  following  "  Lines,  which  were  suggested  by  see- 
ing a  rustic  stiucture^n  Mrs  Hannah  More's  Garden,  at  Barley- 
wood,  and  hearing  it  called  a  Ocuiteal  Temple," 

What  have  we  here  ?— a  temple  I  if  'tis  such. 
Art  has  done  little— if  a  shed,  too  much. 
Four  wooden  pegs  a  wooden  roof  sustain, 
JuRt  wide  enough  to  shield  you  fh>m  the  rain; 
if  in  the  middle  bolt  upright  you  stand, 
Expos'd  to  all  the  winds  on  either  handt 
This  pride  of  Barley-wood,  how  can  I  name  ? 
And  bow  inscribe  it  on  the  roll  of  fame  ? 
It  is  not  Tuscan,  Saxon,  nor  yet  Doric, 
Commemorative,  votive,  or  historic;— 
'TIb  but  an  emblem  of  its  Owner's  mind. 
Erect  and  firm,  by  no  false  taste  refin'd; 
Of  steady  fabric,  pointing  to  the  skies; 
A  friendly  beacon  to  inquiring  eyes; 
Open  to  an,  by  all  reputed  good. 
And  often  prais'd  when  little  understood. 


i 


501  EPITAPHS. 

With  m<»,  then,  stranger!  moam  departed  worth  ; 

s^eel'd  is  the  heart  that  can  forbear  to  sig^h ; 
L*^  deep  regret  all  all  thy  sorrows  forth — 

Lire  as  he  lir'd— aiMi  fear  not  then  to  die.* 


*  Dr  Saoalinnw  had  the  hichest  estena  for  Mr  Shaplaad,  viio 
kttradrd  Ids  fluBOr^  as  «eU  as  that  of  Mrs  More,  rv»  alter  he 
had  Wft  eft  cmeral  pnrtxv.  Dr  Stwihoose,  fai  1789,  presented  la 
•>tr  ThapUal  i  pi<«e  of  plate  **  as  a  trstimaay  oT  his  gratitade  Air 
the  Rsttntaoa  of  hralth,  thrangh  the  Idcaainf  of  God." 


TUT    TND. 


CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS, 


yrr,  webster,  and  geary, 

CHAKTBBHOVSB  BQtIARB,  LONDON. 


■  Glnuiry  mid  Inin,  • 


the  BtmcturB)  Punclloiu, 
Wood-Cat*  and  111  Ku* 


_ -jplULMjqB 

Ill  frw  Mciia]  kKuWti  <rf  Ov  nijKt  of  sUch  ti  itsB,  ii>d 
MftCOHiBkla  uidaHiiTilc  Kcoani  afOcolan  IQ  vJI  In  rfelilli,  W< 
erlliiB  Iku  iJx  bol  norii  on  |cal»n  ut  to  put  Inio  tbc  btMtof  lb« 

IRSE  OF  EIGHT  LECTURES  ON  ELEC 
TY.  OALTANISH,  HAONETISU,  AND  BLBCTKO- 
[ETISIf.  By  Btnr;  U.  No^,  Hambn'  nt  Ifac  London 
£■1  SodaCy.  Infoolieip  Bro.  vith  lloK^funi.   Pries  Si. 


nlm  Car  PuniDf,  f[>r  On]  Comctvm,  and  hr  WiirlBti 
mutloni  It  th*  bottant  of  thg  pif*  for  tha  EiimlnKtiini 
111.    Bdlud  by  lb*  Rei.  Bnndim  Tarnar,  U.A.    Juit 
lad,  amtainlng  HI  pafai,  Friea  k.  Gd.  bonod. 
t  li  »«  oDlj  new,  H  roninRd  villi  not  rt  Llndln  Hittit.  ul 

™ir"i.'mJ^'iJ'i.IJ^™  r?ilMilnWS»il'^'Sl™  " 


Catalogue  nf  Books,  pubUshod  Ay 


A  HISTORY  OF  BRITISH  BIRDS,  Indigenooi 
Migrratory :  including  their  Organisation,  Habita,  and  BeU 
Remarks  on  Claasificatiou  and  Nomenclature ;  an  Aoom 
the  principal  Orgaae  of  Birds,  and  Obserrations  relati 
Practical  Ornithology.  By  W.  MacgiUirray,  A.  If.,  F.R. 
tte.  Lately  pablished,  illustrated  by  nnmeroos  Wood-Col 
KngraTings,  and  handsomely  printed  in  8ro.  the  Jbm 
oocond  Tolomes,  Price  1Gb«  each. 

Vol.  T.  contdM  the  Introduction,  embracing  remsrlu  on  airtirtlfc 
NoBeacUtore,  and  on  the  Strarture  of  Birds;  also  deacriplioM 
PbcMants.  Partridge*,  GrooM,  PtanBigu,  Pigeons,  FlncMi^  8fi 
Linnets,  Crowt,  Msiplei,  Stsriings,  &c. 

Tol*  II.  contslns  %  detailed  deKription  of  the  forms  and  stractne,  sm 
sccount  of  the  hsbiu  and  distnbation  of  the  Britiah  Soag  BMiu  prop 
called,  Indvdlnr  the  Dipper,  Oriole,  Thrariies,  LarCa,  Plpiito,  Wi 
Stonecbau,  Redstarts,  Nightingale,  Warblen,  Titmice,  and  otber  gn 

VoL  III.  wiU  b€  rmbliMAed  to  June,  and  will  contain  a  detailed  dwiilp 
the  Birds  of  Prey,  and  the  remainder  of  the  Land  Birds. 

Vels.  IV.  and  V.  will  contain  the  Wsdlng  and  Swimming  BMs,  whkh  ail 
pleu  tb«  Woriu 

**  From  the  practical  knowledge  which  I  have  acqoired  of  the  Biidi  of  E 
and  more  especially  of  Uiose  which  Inhabit  Great  Britain,  eitlwr  Si  « 
realdenti  or  odierwise,  I  look  on  Mr.  MacgilllTray's  History  of  British 
Indigenous  and  Migratory,  as  the  best  work  on  British  Omilho 
science  with  which  lam  acquainted."— JoAn  J.  Audubon,  Feb.  10,  IK 

"  After  a  careful  inspection  of  the  work,  we  hare  no  hesitation  in  Mying, 
presents  a  much  more  complete  and  accurate  account  of  those  order 
any  other  work  in  exintence.  The  descriptions  are  not  derlted  fro 
works  of  other  naturalists,  but  from  perRonal  inspection.  The  Iddity 
this  has  giren  to  his  accounts,  both  of  the  organization  and  babUi ' 
Mrds,  is  wyond  all  price." — Chambers'  JeumaL 

**  Mr.  Macgillivray  is  the  first  who  has  applied  internal  Inveatisatioatoth 
of  birds  in  it«  fullest  extent.  If  he  conclude  his  task  with  the  same 
energy,  and  ability,  that  he  has  shewn  in  its  cororoencement,  he  may 
claim  a  place  amoug  the  first  ornithologists  of  any  aga  or  time*'*— m 
Gazette. 

"  This  work  unites  the  accuracy  of  scientific  arrangement  and  analoorieal 
tration,  with  a  freshness  and  felicity  of  description  that  msrk  the 
enthusiastic  observer."— 42«Mr<«r/y  Journal  of  AfrieuUure, 

'*  The  author  has  furnished,  not  merely  a  valuable  contribotion  to  Hm 
thologist's  library,  but,  to  the  lazier  and  leM  scientific  stsdsaC  of  aal 
most  agreeable  volume  of  summer  and  out-of-door  reading.  Ha  la  ai 
sant  a  companion,  that  we  are  sorry  to  part  company  with  him.**— JiAn 
Aug.  17,  1190. 

"  It  is  a  long  time  since  we  have  read  a  more  freshly  oricinal,  a  more  lartr 
or  a  more  valuable  work  of  the  kind  than  that  of  Mr.  MacsUliTray.  as 
il  has  g.)ne.»'— TA*  NaturaliH. 

**  Mr.  MacgiJiivray  has  not  confined  his  labours  to  the  atadf,  tke  Bsrio 
the  miMcom.  On  the  contrary,  be  has  followed  then  to  their  bmi 
has  observed  them  at  ail  seasons,  at  all  hoars,  and  in  all  wcatheis,  I 
slH>t  them,  he  has  meaanred,  he  has  dissected,  he  has  anatomtasd  tkaa 
now,  after  a  pleasing,  dioagh  toilsome  and  protracted,  laboar  of  I 
yt«rs,  he  haa  given  pairt  of  toe  rosults  to  the  world  in  a  first  volaaM, 
conialaa  four  orders.  The  accounts  of  the  haUta  of  blrda  ara  wfttai 
the  freahneM,  dVatiaetness,  and  form,  which  rharactaiiae  dM  orlgia 
aefTcr.  llie  cYMioten  on  PncUcai  Ornithology  have  a  dramstte  lar 
tiki  spirit  about  utem,  >kVi\c\&  T«vMtk<&%  xa  «f  laaak  Walton."- 


,  Webster,  and  Geary,  36,  Charterhoum  S^.utre.        S 

2AL0GICAL  AND  HKRALDIC  HISTORY 
S  EXTINCT  AND  DORMANT  BARONETCIES  OP 
ND.  By  John  Burke,  Ewq.,  Author  of  the  Peerage  and 
ige,  History  of  the  Commoners,  &c.,  and  John  Bernard 
Esq.,  of  the  Middle  Temple-  Lately  published,  in  on« 
lume,  medium  S^o.    Price  S2s. 

printed  to  correspond  predieW  with  the  last  edition  of  the  aadMM*** 
ry  of  the  Bxistingr  Peerage  and  Baronetage :  the  armorial  bearings 
aven  in  tlie  tiest  stjle.  and  are  incorporated  with  the  text,  as  In  tliat 
t  is  also  embellislied  witli  a  fine  portrait  of  King  Jasnes  I.,  tlie 
of  tlie  order,  and  a  splendidly  ilfnniinated  title-page^  after  the 
€  the  ancient  missals. 

el  J  interesting  woric,  not  merely  to  the  lorers  of  family  history^  bel 
at  deal  of  valaable  informarion  illustratiTe  of  erents,  and  or  the 
>f  the  times  during  the  seveutecntb  and  eighteenth  ceDtarles.**-* 
rr,  July  1838. 

VTHOLIC  SPIRIT  OF  TRUE  RELIGION, 
liahed,  in  post  8to.  Price  7s. 

irgnroent  of  this  work  is  to  prove,  that  not  an  outward  anUSonnily 
(as  th«  Church  of  Rome  contends  for),  but  a  unity  of  spirit  In 
f  forms  (as  in  the  Cburcttes  of  tlie  Reformation),  is  a  oonstltutloe 
Uhollc  Cbnrch,  answerabl;  to  the  light  of  reason,  of  sacred  Ustory, 
cripture."— Fr</ac«. 

H  NAVAL  BIOGRAPHY:  cooprising  the 
r  the  most  distinguished  Admirals,  from  Howard  to 
ton:  with  an  outline  of  the  Naval  History  of  England 
I  earliest  period  to  the  present  time.  Second  edition, 
(074  pages)  with  portrait  of  Codrington,  and  Vignette. 
.  in  cloth. 

4  everr  one  of  our  ntval  commanders  who  have  distingafshed  tbem- 
oring  these  diree  hundred  years  are  written  with  gnnt  talent  and 

is  exceedingly  well  written,  and  appears  to  have  been  compiled  with 
"S,  while  tlM  mass  of  interesting  iniormation  comj^ised  in  the  thick 
3lume  before  na  would  have  warranted,  had  mere  nook-making  bciw 
:t,  three  large  octavo  volumes  at  the  least.**— fFeeiUy  CArsNide. 

>ald  be  ignorant  of  the  Naval  History  of  his  country,  and  we  con- 
present  a  book  which  is  admirably  adapted  to  keep  alive  tbe  nan- 
It  of  our  countrymen,  as  well  as  to  tuiFuse  among  them  correct 
■  to  the  character  ana  actions  of  our  great  naval  lierocs.''— Cpis- 
Jttniml, 

NTS  OF  PHYSIOLOGY:  being  an  Account 
iws  and  Principles  of  the  Animal  Economy,  atpecially 
*ence  to  the  Constitution  of  Man.  By  Thomae  John- 
;kin,  M.D.,  Lecturer  on  Physiology  and  Materia  Medica, 
>f  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  Ediuhurgh,  &c.  dte. 
Ibhed,  in  one  rol.  ISmo.  with  Wood  Cuts.    Price  Os. 

temenl  of  anatomical  and  phyaioloclcal  fkcts,  diresled  of  the  lumber 

leal  phraik  oiotrjr ;  and  nicli  a  worK  an  a  studenl  wlin  prepares  to 

rational  examination  may  read  Miiti  advantage."— X>nAmi»  Mtdiea, 


r>ral>car  ^  Btek,  tmllhliril  br 


THE  ELEMEKTS  OF  PHVSICS.  By 
WdMtET,  M.A.  Df  Trioity  Galley*,  Cuubridge ;  Pello' 
C«mbnd^  Philosopblckl  Society,  ud  Btantary  to  1 
tulloD  ul  Cirfl  BnfinFen.  Tbi*  work  conutni,  I.  Inn 
OhicnaiioDi.  II.  Pnip«Riei  of  Bodi«a.  III.  Propoi 
Coniliiolioa  of  Solid*.  IV.  Uwt  at  Gqnilibriinn  and 
V.  GnTltT.  Tt.  HydnMitic^  Til.  CipilUir 
VIII.  JLtBOMbiM.  IX  Heat.  X.  Ojitia.  XI.  SL 
tJulvanian.ud  HigiHtinii.    XII.  Condi  " 


SCIENTIFIC  DIALOGUES,  intended  for  the  Iiu 

pl«i  of  Tfaltml  ana  EijitTlmnilal  PAItuspAjr  in 
pliintd.  R;  IhB  RcT.  J.  Joyct.  Complele  in  ona  i 
IM  Wmd'CuU,  ProntiipiKe  and  Vigoetu.  Prim,  I 


t,  tFebster,  and  Geary,  30,  Charterhouse  Square*        8 

OCR'S  SYSTEM   OF  NATURAL  PHILO- 

;  in  which  tha  Elements  of  that  Science  are  familiarly 

)dy  and    adapted    to   the   Comprehension   of    Youngs 

By  John  L.  Gomstock,  M.D.  A  new  •dition,  carefully 
and  enlarged  with  additions  on  the  Air  Pomp,  Steam 

Ac.  By  George  Lees,  M.A.  Lecturer  on  Natural 
»by»  &c.  Eidinbargb.  With  appropriate  Questions  on 
igt  tor  the  Examination  of  Scholars. 

isbed,  in   one  To1nme»    with   numerous    Wood-Cuts. 
Price  6s*  €d. 


IBotans. 

>UCTION  TO  PHYSIOLOGICAL  AND 
lATICAL  BOTANY.  By  Sir  James  Edward  Smith, 
R.S.,  late  President  of  the  Linnaean  Society^  A  new 
with  considerable  Additions,  by  William  MacgilHvray, 
R.S.E.,  &c..  Editor  of  the  new  edition  of  Withering's 
A  new  Edition,  in  one  vol.  12mo.  with  214  Figures* 
> 

r  of  this  work  hsi  been  Amply  evinced  by  the  naniber  of  edition* 
has  gone  tbrongb,  and  in  havinK  been  Tery  i^eneraliy  used  by  t(w;her» 
enoe  as  a  clMa-book.  The  expocition  of  tlie  Liniia>an  system,  which 
IB,  la  confessed  to  be  a  master-piece,  and  the  explanations  of  the 
ruaiif  with  refercDce  to  descripUTe  botany  are  clear  and  sufficiently 
ir  ordinary  purposes.  The  editor  lias  therefore  only  considered  it 
r  to  add  a  chapter  containintr  some  remarks  on  the  natural  system, 
lode  of  arrannnf  plana  by  which  it  is  attempted  to  exhibit  their 
etationB.*'^rA«  BtUtor, 

•EMATIC  ARRANGEMENT  OF  BRITISH 
3.  By  W.  Withering,  M.D.  Condensed  and  brought 
the  present  period.  Preceded  by  an  Introduction  to 
ly  of  Botany,  accompanied  with  155  Figures  and  one 
Plate.  By  William  Mangillivray,  A.M.,  F.R.S.E., 
itor  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  Edinburgh, 
rtb  Edition,  in  one  vol.  12mo.    Price,  bound  in  cloth. 


roprises  a  description  of  the  Plants  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
IS  Seen  the  especial  object  of  the  author  to  free  the  descriptions  as 
possible  of  foreign  words,  provided  it  could  be  done  without  sacrl- 
i  technical  terms,  which  are  in  every  science  necessary  for  prevent- 
osity,  and  Rivinfr  precision  and  perspicuity;  also,  by  givinir  the 
»ns  sufficiently  full,  so  as  to  enable  the  young  botaiiM  to  determine 
ides  that  might  come  in  his  way,  without  the  assistance  of  others. 
;>togamic  plants,  with  the  excepdon  of  the  Ferns,  have  been  omitted, 
fficult  for  the  student,  until  ne  has  rendered  tlta  w«st%  v.vmiMm% 
Iwriliw. 


«  Catmlogue  of  Books,  fmbiished  by 

parkes'S  chemical   catechism,    a  «■ 

Edition,  Beriied  throngfaont.  Corrected,  and  ooaiUenlll 
£nluv«J>  ^  William  Barker,  M.B.,  of  Trinity  Gdkfi 
Dublin.    In  one  toI.  12mo.    Price  ?<•  Gd. 


iMi  cdittoa  prppuvd  by  Mr.  Pvkes,  ihe  proent  EdUor,  ■  fcri 
i«al  wUh  reniniBf  the  chancier  and  ulaa  of  the  origlaii  ««* 
i  ■Dd  revbed  it  ikviwghMi,  so  m  to  adapl  It  to  Hm  piCMMtf 


A»  miDT  lapemat  cliaairei  ksvc  taken  place  fa  tibe  diifrreBi  hwcki* 
CkHBiiirr,  cHMcially  In  nonenclunre  a^  claMificBiion,  kinre  ikc  priM 
tlon  of  ihe  laM     "   "  ^  ^    ^     .^  .    _   ..^ 

«M  con«lkienl 
iiu  altered  and 
of  Ctaemlcal  Science. 

ON  THE  BEAUTIFUL,THE  PICTURESQUE,  AS 

THE  8UBUMB.    Bj  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Macvicar,  MJL 

Just  puUished,  in  crown  8to.,  with  Frontispiece.    Price  7i^ 

••  Thk  Tolame  prove*  Ihe  anthor  lo  be  an  elegant  and  reflncd  acholtf,  mi 
vnter  of  rewarch  aud  thonght.  Hb  rtvle  it  lodd  and  easj,  «Ueb  ifBli 
it  plearinf  k>  Uic  Kcnerd  reader,  and  Us  imporiance  will  cnhaaee  Ik  ^ 
lu  the  eyec  of  the  «cholar.  He  pati  hk  readera  in  pocseMloa  of  nottoa 
llie  kraatiful  and  tablime  at  once  clear  and  concise— ih  phyglnaad  pHta 
pli)  he  ruUjrUflplajt,and  for  the  entire  enJojaient  of  it  be,  la  easdaii 
■tri>af  Ij  incolcatea  tbe  neccHity  of  rellgioaa  aaeditatloB,  and  the  nMH 
cuuicniplailon  of  the  Godhead.**— Uferary  Gmzette, 

THE  ACTS  AifD  MONUMENTS  of  thf  CHURCI 
CouUining  the  History  <rf  the  Martyrs :  wherein  is  set  for 
at  large  the  whole  race  and  conne  of  the  Church  firom  t 
primitire  age  to  these  later  times.  With  a  Prelimkuaj  D 
sertation  on  the  Differences  between  the  Church  of  Rome  tb 
now  is,  and  the  Ancient  Church  of  Rome  that  then  was.  1 
John  Foxe:  with  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  his  Son- 
New  Edition,  with  fire  Appendices,  containing  Accounts  of  tl 
Massacres  in  France :  the  Destruction  of  the  Spanish  Armsdj 
the  Irish  Rebellion  in  the  Year  1641 :  the  Gunpowder  Treaioi 
and  a  Tract,  shewing  that  the  Executions  of  Papists  in  Qae< 
Klixabeth's  Reign  were  for  Treason  and  not  for  Heresy.  Tl 
whole  carefully  Revised,  Corrected,  and  Condensed,  by  tl 
Re^.  M.  Hobart  Seymour,  M.A.  In  one  large  Imperial  81 
with  Portrait  by  Cochrane.   Price  21e* 

It  i»  with  the  view  of  •trengtheaios  the  religious  principles  of  Protestanthn 
the  rontictiont  of  the  people  of  England,  and  of  exhibiting  follj  and  M 
fully  before  their  eyes  a  liTing  portraiture  of  the  Papacy,  that  thk  Fka 
E<htion  of  the  Acts  and  Monaments  of  Martyrs  has  hern  fmbllsh«d.  En 
eflTort  hai  been  made  to  render  this  edition  an  available  repftkluiryof  all  i 
wan  ralniiati^  to  •trengthen  the  religious  principles  of  the  Reforaatioa 
the  I'rotntants  of  England,  and  to  supply  them  vrith  as  much  as  pnssiblei 
would  arm  them  against  the  principles  and  practices  of  tlie  Chnivk 
Rome;  thus  making  this  edition  consist  of  all  the  infonnatlon  that  1 
valuable  in  the  original  work,  and  all  that  was  likely  to  be  availaMe  in 
coiitroTer»y  with  Rome. 

ETON  GREEK  GRAMMAR;  with  copious  Engli 
Notes,  iutended  to  explain  the  Principles  on  which  many 
the  Rules  were  established.  By  the  Rev.  P.  Homer,  B. 
Thirty  Years  a  Master  in  Rugby  School.  A  new  edition,  Ito 
bound.    Price  4a. 


Swttf  Webster t  and  Gearjft  SO,  Charterhouse  Square.        7 

RUBIE'S  BRITISH  CELESTIAL  ATLAS;  being 
a  complete  Guide  to  the  Attainment  of  a  Practical  Knowleds^e 
of  the  Heavenly  Bodies,  containing  Twelve  Royal  Qaaito 
Maps,  or  entire  Views  of  the  Starry  Heavens,  as  they  appear 
to  the  naked  eye ;  adapted  for  every  Night  throughout  the 
Year :  on  which  are  carefully  laid  down  all  the  Stars  visible 
in  the  British  Empire,  tram  the  first  to  the  fourth  mi&gnitude } 
with  the  boundaries  of  the  Constellations  accurately  defined. 
Also  three  moveable  plates,  and  a  plate  of  Diagrams,  to  eluci- 
date the  Motions  of  the  Earth  and  the  Celestial  Bodies. 
Accompanied  by  a  familiar  Treatise  on  Astronomy.  By  G. 
Kubie.    In  royal  quarto,  half-cloth.    Price  11.  Is. 

BURNET'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  REFORMATION 
OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  Revised  and  Corrected, 
with  additional  Notes,  and  a  Preface  calculated  tc  remove  cer- 
tain difilculties  attending  the  perusal  of  this  important  History. 
By  the  Rev.  E.  Nares,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modem  Hie> 
tory  in  the  University  c£  Oxford ;  and  Rector  of  Biddenden 
and  Newchurch,  Kent.  Handsomely  printed  in  4  thick  vols. 
8vo.  with  Twenty-three  Portraits.    Price  21.  2s.  in  cloth. 

M  Scarcely  anv  otho  book  of  equal  Importsoce,  perhaps,  ctandt  so  much  in  need 
of  preUmlnary  explanations,  as  thb  great  work  of  the  celebrated  writer 
whose  name  it  bears.  And  it  must  often,  we  should  think,  have  been  a  matter 
of  Just  surpri^  to  the  readers  of  this  history,  that,  in  the  Editions  hitherto 
paolished,  the  errors  in  the  First  and  Second  Volumes  have  been  reprinted, 
which  the  Author  himself  noticed  at  the  end  of  the  Third  Volume.  In  the 
present  Edition  the  Text  will  be  found  corrected  as  it  should  be,  and  many 
exphmatory  Notes  added  throughout  the  Work.**— &(i<or'«  Prtface, 

Dediealed  hy  permisrion  to  hit  Oraee  the  Archbishop  of  Cfan/erfritry. 

BURNET'S  EXPOSITION  OP  THE  THIRTY-NINK 
ARTICLES  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  With  an 
Appendix,  containing  the  Confession  of  Augsburg,  the  €)?'.'"'t 
of  Pope  Pius  IV.,  &c.  Revised  and  corrected,  with  copious 
Notes  and  additional  Scripture  References,  by  the  Rev.  Jtoies 
Robert  Page,  A.M.  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge,  Minister  of 
Carlisle  Chapel.  Lately  published,  in  1  vol.  8vo.  Price  9s*  1a 
cloth. 

•ii*  In  this  Edition  the  text  of  Burnet  has  been  preserved  with  strict  fidelity:  the 
numerous  references  to  the  Fathers,  Councils,  Ace.,  have  been  verified,  and. 
In  many  instances,  so  enlarged  and  corrected,  that  they  mav  be  found  without 
difficulty  :  many  Scripture  references  have  been  added :  the  most  Important 
Canons  and  Decrees  of  the  Councils  referred  to  have  been  given  In  the 
original ;  and,  tastly.  copious  Notes  have  been  added,  containing  an  account 
of  we  lives  and  opinions  of  the  principal  heretics  mentioned  by  Burnet,  and 
a  body  of  controversial  divinity,  chiefly  selected  from  the  most  eminent 
Divines  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries. 

»i  The  valuable  References,  Notes,  and  Indices,  which  accompany  your  edition, 
will  give  It  a  vast  superiority  over  every  othen^—TA*  Xiord  BUhop  of 
IVinekeiler, 

M  rhe  Editor  has  elven  to  our  clergy  and  our  students  In  theology  an  edition  of 
this  worli,  which  roust  necesMrily  supersede  every  other,  and  we  feel  he 
dfservM  well  at  the  liandx  of  the  Church  of  England,  which  hi  hai  «a 
materially  *.Tved."— rZ/wrrA  of  I'.i-rrl and  Quarterly  Review. 


t  Catutogue  (/  Bookt,  fuUished  bp 

BISHOP  BUTLER'S  WORKS.  CcnUiniiig  tlie  Ana< 
loffy  of  Religion >  *^^  Sermons  preached  at  the  BoUe'  Chapcli 
with  life  by  Dr.  Halifax,  Bishop  of  Gloocester.  Ctnnplete  it 
one  vdL  Syo,  with  Portrait.    Price  Os. 

•<  Whoever  wWiwto  know  the  inalocy  of  rdigkMi  to  die  eoBatHmloii  udcoem 
of  uature,  hm  no  wbere  elie  to  ko  to  bet  lo  Betler— w>  naa  bu  •tteBptt4 
in  carry  It  beyond  the  point  where  be  left  H.  file  work  standt  like  om  M 
tboM  vMt  pile*  of  nrcDltectare  comawooed  in  the  ahldle  ascs,  proolii  or 
ronMmaiale  iklll,  of  va«t  power,  of  amaiinf  wealth,  yet  in  toaic  reipccti 
Incomplete  or  dto|>roportioned,  bat  wUch  no  one  since  haa  dived  lo  rr 
mndel,  and  which  no  one,  perhapik  has  had  either  the  wealth,  power, « 
geala*,  la  aMha  Bore  eaniplete.'*-«Jlfarl  Amies. 


BUTLER'S  ANALOGY  OF  RELIGION,  and  Lifc^ 
by  Dr.  Halifax,    in  (me  roHune,  Sto.  Price  4s-  6d. 

BUTLER'S  SERMONS,  preached  at  the  Rolls*  Chapel 
In  one  Tolume,  8to.  Price  4^  Qd. 

HORNE'S  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PSALMS; 
In  which  their  literal  or  historical  sense,  as  they  rclats  ts 
KinpT  Darid,  and  the  People  of  Israel,  is  illustrated ;  and  ibcir 
application  to  Messiah,  to  the  Church,  and  to  Individnalf,  M 
members  thereof,  is  pointed  out.  Complete  in  one  Tohiae,8T0. 
with  Portrait,  Price  Os. 

<*  His  Cooiaienlary  on  tfie  Psalms  has  long  been  a  refreshinr  and  delirbtfU 
companion  In  the  Christian's  retlremeni— it  is  spiritual  and  daTotkumV"' 
BiekerttHh, 

PEARSON'S    EXPOSITION    OF    THE     CREED 
With  an  Appendix,  containing  the  principal  Greek  and  Latin 
Greeds.    Revised  and  corrected,  by  the  Rer.  W.  S.  Dobson, 
M.  A.,   Peterhouse,   Cambridge.    Complete  in   one  vd.  8vq. 
Price  lOs.  6d. 

Ii\.th{s  Bditloii  fTpat  care  tia*  been  taken  to  correct  the  anmeron*  ermrt  i»  tk 
refen^ces  to  the  texa  of  Scripture  which  had  crept  lo  by  reawta  of  ^  re- 
peated edition^  through  which  this  Mmlrable  Work  lias  paraed ;  and  tnny 
rpfVfi'nees,  as  will  be  seen  on  torninff  to  the  Index  of  Texts,  hate  bsts 
a<1ded. 

The  Quotations  In  the  Notes  have  been  almost  aniversally  identiflcd,  and  tke 
references  to  them  adjoined. 

The  principal  Symbols,  or  Creeds,  of  which  the  particu'ar  Article*  bate  !**■ 
cited  by  the  Author,  have  been  annexed ;  and  whereTer  the  orlfinal  wnu-n 
have  riven  the  Symbols  in  a  scattered  and  disjointed  manner,  the  detsrhtd 

?irtii  have  t>een  brought  into  a  successive  ami   connected  jioint  of  tirw. 
hese  have  been  added  in  chronolnyicai  onler  in  the  form  of  an  Appendix. 

**  An  excellent  work,  containlnjc  a  body  of  divini:y.**— JfieAerrlefA. 

BISHOP  HORSLEYS  SERMONS.  The  whole  of 
the  Three  Volumes  is  contained  in  this  Edition.  Complete  in 
one  volume,  Sro.  Price  9s. 

"  lii«  nower*  of  mind  were  of  a  hiirh  order :  lil*  Sermons  and  his  other  imcki 
will  render  a«sist«m:e  to  t^ie  student  chiefly  in  the  way  of  critldsn.**- 


Scotty  IVtbster,  ana  Geary,  S6,  Charterhouse  Square,       9 

-BISHOP    NEWTON'S   DISSERTATION   ON  THE 
^     PROPHECIES;  which  have  remarkably  been  fulfilled,  au<^ 

at  this  time  are  fulfilling,  in  the  world.     Edited  by  the  Rev. 

W.  S.  Dobson,  M.A..  Peterhouse,  Cambridge.    Complete  in  one 

Tolume,  8vD.  with  Portrait,  Price  da* 

^  The  great  value  of  this  celebrated  Diuertation  on  the  Prophecies,  both  to  the 

tmraed  and  to  the  geueral  reader  of  Scripture,  has  induced  the  Editor  to 

K        spare  no  pains  to  render  the  present  edition  correct.    For  this  purpose  thn 

ii         text  and  notes  have  been  closely  revised,  and  the  classical  quotations  and 

f         references  compared  with  the  original  authorities.    It  is  hoped,  therefore. 

that  this  ediUon  (which  has  been  stereotyped)  will  be  found  worthy  of 

public  attention  for  its  superior  correctness,  and  as  a  valuable  reprint  of 

one  of  the  most  enlightened  treatises  on  the  subject  of  prophecy,  which 

exists  in  the  language. 

AMBROSE    SERLE'S    HOR^    SOLITARIiE ;    or, 

Eaaaya  upon  some   remarkable   Names  and  Titles   of  Jesus 

Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  occurring  in  the  Old  and  New 

Testaments,  and  declaratire  of  their  essential   Divinity  and 

gracious  Offices  in  the  Salration  of  Man.    To  which  is  annexed, 

an  Essay,  chiefly  Historical,  upon  the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ; 

and  a  brief  Account  of  the  Heresies  relative  to  the  Doctrine  of 

the  Holy  Spirit  which  have  been  published  since  the  Christian 

Era. 

"  A  verv  devotional  and  experimental  work,  full  of  fine  (ee\lng,**—Bickertletk, 
<*  The  title  Horse  Solitariae  was  applied  to  these  papers  because  they  were  the 
employment  of  manv  Solitary  Hours  of  retreat  from  the  business  of  the 
world.  Tiie  two  series  of  Essays  beyond  the  particular  subject  of  each  con- 
cur in  one  common  design,  to  shew  that  the  doctrine  of  aTrinitv  of  Persons 
In  one  and  the  tame  Jehovah  is  essential  to  the  very  being  of  tne  Chrisiian 
religion;  and  that  the  practical  use  or  an  experience  of  this  truth,  uniting 
and  combining  all  the  other  principles  of  the  faith,  is  the  proper  consUtueut 
of  the  Chrutian  life."  ^        *"  »  v    v^ 

TAYLOR'S  (DR.  JEREMY)  HOLY  LIVING  AND 
DYING;  together  with  Prayers,  containing  the  whole  Duty 
of  a  Christian.    Royal  18mo.  Portrait,  Price  7s. 

A  SHORT  VIEW  OF  THE  WHOLE  SCRIPTURE 
HISTORY  ;  with  a  continuation  of  the  Jewish  Affairs  from  the 
Old  Testament  till  the  time  of  Christ,  and  an  Account  of  the 
chief  Prophecies  that  relate  to  Him  :  represented  in  a  way  of 
Question  and  Answer.  By  Isaac  Watts,  D.D.  A  new  Edition, 
plates,  l2mo.,  bound  in  sheep.  Price  3s.  6d. 

THE  MORAL  MUSE:  for  Young  Ladies.  Comprising 
Education  and  Manners — Virtues  and  the  Passions — Human 
Life — Nature  and  Time  —  Religion — Miscellanies.  By  Miss 
Emma  Price.  Secimd  Edition,  neatly  bound  in  silk,  with  gilt 
edges,  Price  38« 

The  Editor  has  been  careful  in  every  one  of  the  accoaipanylng  Selections,  not 
oniT  to  present  a  pleating  image  to  the  reader,  but  more  especially  to 
make  the  beauty  subaervieBt  to  the  production  of  a  nlntary  impression,  and 
to  convev  whatever  Is  adapted  to  embellish  the  manners  and  purify  th^ 
norals  of  the  rising  feneration. 


10 


C«rt olSpf  iM  of  BookM,  pubHsktd  hf 


CXSAV  BBXTXOMS  OF  8BXJICT   CLASSICS 

BeautifuUf  ffimted  In  royal  d9mo.  and  neatly  bound  in 

cloth  and  gilt  edges, 
Bacon*s  Enayi  .... 

B«attie's  Minstrel,  and  other  Poemi 

Blair's  Orate ;  Gray's  Elegy;  Porteui  in  Death ;  Dodd'i 

Prison  Thoughts  .  .  .  .  .0 

Bloomfleld's  Farmer*!  Boy,  Rural  Tales,  Wild  Flowers,  Ac      0 
Burke  on  the  Suhlime  and  Beautiful  .  .  .0 

Cecil's  life  of  Newton  .....       0 

Chapone  on  the  Improvement  of  the  Mind  .  0 

Chesterfield's  Principles  of  Politeness  .  .  .0 

Clarke's  Scripture  Promises  ...  .0 

Collins  and  Oray's  Poetical  Works  .  .  .0 

Cowper's  Poems,  with  Life  hy  Stebbing       .  .0 

Economy  of  Human  Life       ...  .  .       0 

Elizabeth,  or  the  Exiles  of  Siberia    ....       0 

Falconer's  Shipwreck  .....       0 

Goldsmith's  Poetical  Works  .  .  .  .       0 

Goldsmith's  Essays  ...  .  .       0 

Gregory's  Legacy)  and  Pennington's  Advice  .  .       0 

Kirke  White's  PoeUcal  Works        ....       0 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding  .  .0 

Mason  on  Self-Knowledge :  Melmoth's  Great  Importance        0 
Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  Life  and  Notes  by  Stebbing  .       0 

Milton's  Paradise  Regained,  Comus,  fta      .  .0 

More's  Sacred  Dramas,  Search  after  Happiness  0 

Paul  and  Virginia       ......       0 

Rasselas,  a  Tale,  by  Dr.  Johnson      .  .  .  .       0 

Scott's  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  and  Life  .  .       0 

Scotf  s  Force  of  Truth  .....       0 

Somervile's  Chase       ......        fl 

Thomson's  Seasons,  and  Life  .  .  .  .        0 

Vicar  of  Wakefield,  by  Dr.  Goldsmith         .  .  .        0 

Young  Man's  Own  Book         .....        0 

Young's  Night  ThoughU        .....       0 


£0  1 

0   i 


i 

i 
i 
i 

1 
1 
i 

1 
i 

1 
I 
1 
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
1 


THE    FEMALE    STUDENT;   or.  Lectures  to  Yoi 

Ladies  on  Female  Education.   For  the  use  of  Mothers, Teach 

and  Pupils.    By  Mrs.  Phelps,  late  Vice-Principal  of  Troy  Fen 

Seminary,  America.    In  one  volume,  18mo.  doth.  Price  4s 

"  An  admirable  work  on  Female  EducatloD,  intended  to  cooTey  genen 
ttruction  on  subjects  connected  with  litenturey  morals,  and  reUgkHi.''- 
Pre/ace, 

EVENINGS  AT  HOME:  consisting  of  a  Variet] 
Miscellaneous  Pieces  for  the  Instruction  and  Amasemen 
Young  Persons.  By  Dr.  Aikin  and  Mrs.  Barbaold.  1? 
Frontispiece  and  Vignette,  and  Twenty  Illuatrationg,  engn 
on  Steel.    In  one  vol.  12mo.  bound  in  cloth.  Price  6>« 

BARBAULD'S  LESSONS  FOR  CHILDREN;  y 
Ten  Plates.  Printed  in  a  large  type  and  on  thick  pi 
Price,  half-bound,^.  ^ 


S€9t»t  WelnfTt  ond  Gemry,  30,  C/^crJeraoasc  Square,       11 

THE  BLOSSOMS  OF  MORALITY.  Intended  for 
th«  Amnsement  and  Instmotion  of  Young  Ladies  and  Gentle- 
men.   Frontispiece  and  yig:nette,  half-bound.  Price  2s. 

THE  LOOKING-GLASS  FOR  THE  MIND;  or.  In- 
tellectual Mirror ;  beinsr  an  elegant  Collection  of  the  most 
delightful  Little  Stories  and  Interesting  Tales.  Frontispiece 
and  YignettCa  half-bound,  Price  28. 

MRS.  TRIMMER'S  EASY  INTRODUCTION  TO 
THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  NATURE,  and  Reading  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  Adapted  to  the  Capacities  of  Children.  Frontis- 
piece and  Vignette,  half  bound,  Price  2s. 

MRS.  TRIMMER'S  FABULOUS  HISTORIES;  or, 
the  History  of  the  Robins.  Designed  for  the  Instruction  of 
Children,  respecting  their  Treatment  of  Animals.  Illustrated 
with  TweWe  Plates,  half-bound.  Price  3s. 

THE  LIFE  OF  LORENZO  DE'  MEDICL  By  Wil- 
liam Roscoe,  Esq.  F.L.S.,  &c.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author, 
by  his  Son,  Thomas  Roscoe,  Esq.  In  one  volume,  foolscap  8to. 
with  Portrait.    Bound  in  cloth,  Price  8s.  ^0 

Im  the  preMDt  edition  the  text  has  been  preserved  entire,  and  the  editor  ms 
talccn  great  pains  to  correct  tiie  errors  of  former  editions ;  but  the  Appea- 
dix,  containing  the  Italian  and  Latin  Illustrations,  has  been  omitted  as  an 
unnecessary  encumbrance  to  the  work,  and  only  such  notes  liave  been  r»* 
tained  as  were  considered  necessary  to  the  understanding  of  the  text. 

OLNEY  HYMNS.  By  the  Rev.  John  Newton  and 
William  Cowper,  Esq.  In  a  small  32mo.  volume,  with  Portrait 
of  Newton,  and  Vignette,  bound  in  cloth  and  g^lt  edges,  Priee 
2s. ;  in  silk,  2s.  6d. ;  and  in  morocco,  3s.  6d. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  ENGLISH  POETS; 
from  Spenser  to  Beattie,  with  Twenty-five  lUastrations,  from 
Designs  by  H.  Corbould,  and  engraved  by  C.  Heath,  C.  Rolls, 
W.  Finden,  &c.  This  beautiful  volume  has  been  illustrated 
upon  the  plan  of  '  Rogers'  Italy,  and  Poems,*  and  the  '  Pilgrims 
of  the  Rhine.'  Price  12s.  bound  in  cloth,  or  handsomely 
bound  in  morocco,  16s. 

"  In  the  bcaaty  of  its  embellishments  this  rolume  deserves  to  be  classed  with  the 
Annuals;  while  In  it?  letter-press  it  is  as  undying  as  the  langoage  in  which 
It  is  written.  1q  the  selection  from  the  poets  a  sound  Judgment,  a  classical 
taste,  and  a  poeQc  fsncy,  have  been  exercised." — Tkt  Sum, 

'*  Great  cSre  has  been  excrdsed  in  selecting  nothing  unfit  for  the  eye  of  yoath  ; 
and  as  the  authors  are  arranged  in  chronological  order,  and  the  samples  or 
each  poet  stand  together,  it  presents  something  like  a  notion  of  the  pro- 

Sress  of  English  Poetry,  and  its  style  in  different  ages.    It  is  a  sort  of  en- 
uring Annual  that  may  be  presentM  at  all  tim«(s  and  seasons."— 5/»«c(a<or. 

"  Rlsrht  glad  are  we  to  find  that  the  sterling  English  Poeto  of  former  generb* 
tinns  are  not  quite  forgotten.    This  volume  is  one  of  the  most  pleasing 
remembrances  of  this  agreeable  fact  that  we  have  lately  seen."— Toft* 
Magazitif, 


IS  auatsius  t(f  Ba»kt,  pvblisUd  »y  Scoti  \  Co^ 

THE  SURPRISING  ADVENTURES  OF  ROBIN- 
SON CRUSOB.  Complete  Edition.  With  Life  of  De  Foe; 
with  Frontispiece  and  Yignette,  and  Twenty  Illoatratioiis.  In 
one  Tolnme,  Itmo.  bound  in  cl<Mh,  Price  (ib. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  SANDFORD  AND  MERTON 
By  Thomae  Day,  Eaq. ;  with  Frontispiece  and  Yi^ette,  txA 
Twenty  lUnstrations.  In  1  toI.  12nio.  bound  in  cloth.  Price  fit 


fLAVS    AND  POExMS   OP    SHAKSPEARE:  whh 

Dr.  Johnson's  Preface ;   a  Glossary ;  and  an  Account  of  each 

Play;  and  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  the  Rev.  W.  UarneUi 

M.A. ;  widi  Portrait,  drawn  from  the  Chandos  Picture,  and  beao* 

tifolly  engraved  by  Cochrane ;  and  Forty  Illustrations,  ei]4Taved 

in    the  best  manner,  by  C.  Heath,  C.  Rxills,  F.  Bacon.  &&, 

from  Drawings  by  Smirke,  Westall,  StephanofT,  Corbould,  and 

Wright.    In  one  rolume,  Hoyal  8to.,  bound  in  cloth.  Pries 

£1.  lis.  6d. 

ipbe  haotUomnt  edition  of  Shakapeare  tliat  liaa  ever  been  published  in  oae 
volume. 

PLAYS  AND  POEMS  OF  SHAKSPEARE:  with 
Johnson's  Preface,  Glossary,  fi^c;  and  a  Memoir  of  the  Author, 

'  by  the  Rer.  W.  Harness,  M.A.  With  Portrait  medium  8vo. 
Price  only  128* 

SHAKSPEARE'S  DRAMATIC  WORKS:  with  Me- 
moir,  by  Harness,  and  Portrait,  medium  8vo.  cloth.  Price  13a> 

THE  PORTRAIT  AND  FORTY  ILLUSTRATIONS 
OP  SHAKSPEARE,  to  illustrate  any  ediUon.    Royal  8vo.  2ls. 


THE  WISDOM  AND  GENIUS  of  SHAKSPEARE: 
comprising  Moral  Philosophy;  Delineations  of  Character; 
Paintings  of  Nature  and  the  Passions;  with  700  Aphorisms 
and  Miscellaneous  Pieces.  With  select  and  original  Notes, 
and  Scriptural  References.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Price,  Chap- 
lain in  Her  Majesty's  Convict  Establishment,  Woolwich. 

Lately  published,  in  one  vol.  foolscap  8vo.  Price  7s.  6d. 
"  A  b«ok  for  the  roost  critical,  as  well  sf  the  most  superficial  readf  r,*'•-il/b^ 
"  The  best  attempt  ever  made  to  index  SliaI(speare.'*~Aciui(qf  Times, 
*'Thts  is  no  common  or  common-place  compilation.    Tlie  world  is  indebted  In 
the  learned  Editor  for  havinft  condensed  so  mucU  exquisite  matter  into  so 
vmall  a  space.^— DttA/tn  Evening  Mail. 
"  Shakspenre  'cutout  in  little  stars,'— worth  its  weight  in  i^old.'* — Tait, 
«  T)ic  idea  of  this  volame  is  as  felicitous  as  the  execution  of  it  is  admirable;  it  it 
a  complete  text-book  of  qbotatiniis,  of  the  (greatest  beanty  and  highest  lone, 
bearinfc  upon  eTcry  point  of  philosophy  and  moralitr.  and  cootainiPf  ia- 
siruction  alike  for  the  statesman,  poe^  or  paiqter."— TACi^fe. 


aHOXiZSB  cxousszo  u: 


COMPRISING 

Tun  Standard  Autboks  dp  Gkkat  Britain:  embelliahed  with 
Frontiipiecea  and  Yignattet,  engraved  on  steel  by  C.  HbatUi 
W>  FiNDBM,  C.  Rolls,  Ac.    From  designs  by  Cokbould. 

This  series  of  cabinet  rolnmes  are  all  beautifully  printed  in  the 
meet  correct  manner,  and  on  the  finest  paper,  and  are,  from  theii 
KXTRBMB  CHBAPNBSS,  especially  adapted  for  touno  pkoflb,  and 
also  for  frbsbnts  and  school  prizks. 

They  are  sold  neatly  bound  in  cloth  at  the  annexed  prices,  and 
•re  handsomely  bound  in  embossed  leather,  with  gilt  edges,  at 
only  OH9  shUttng  extra,  and  also  in  the  best  Turkey  morocco,  at 
three  shUUngs  extra  on  the  boarded  prices. 


**  Book*  that  TOO  may  carry  tm  the  fire,  and  bold  readily  In  your  liand,  are  the 
moeC  aaeral  after  all ;  a  man  will  often  look  at  them  and  be  tempted  *o  go 
on,  when  be  woold  be  frifrhtened  at  books  of  a  larger  size,  and  of  a  more 
erudite  appearance."— I>r.  JoAitMii. 

H  Few  series  of  books  are  so  valuable  as  the  Engluh  Classic  lAbrmry,  for  it  pro- 
vides the  public  with  beautiful  editions  of  the  chief  authors  at  so  small  a 
price,  as  to  render  them  accessible  to  almost  every  one.  We  strongly  re- 
commend it  to  our  readers." — Court  Journal. 


Under  this  head  it  has  been  the  object  of  the  Publishers  to 
supply  beautiful  editions  of  the  chief  authors  at  so  small  a  price, 
and  in  so  convenient  a  form,  as  to  render  them  accessible  to 
every  one,  and  particularly  with  a  reference  to  creating  a  taste 
for  historical  reading  among  the  young. 

FP:RGUS0N'S    history  of  the   ROMAN   RE- 
PUBLIC (Abridged),  price  5s. 

The  abridireineot  of  Feripison  is  a  sisrnal  service  to  the  yonnr,  and  ou|;bt  to 
supersede  every  other  abridrement  of  Roman  History.  Itls  a  noble  work. 
Like  the  government  which  it  describes,  it  in  simple  and  strong.  It  is  one 
of  the  best  diirested  histories  that  ever  was  penned,— the  narrative  gliding 
along  easily,  beautifully,  and  niajesticallv,  in  one  rontiniious  strain.  Pure 
in  its  diction,  clear  in  iu  stvie,  copious  in  ia  illustrations,  consistent  In  its 
views,  felicitous  and  just  in*  its  discoveries  of  the  most  latent  springs  of 
action,  the  History  of  the  Roman  Republic  forms  a  perfect  mirror  of  the 
arena  which  It  portrays. 

GIBBON'S    DECLINE    AND  FALL  OF  THE  RO- 
MAN BMPIRB,abridged  by  the  late  Rer.  C.  Hereford.  Maps, 5s. 

*  This  edition  Is  valuable  for  thoae  who  have  neither  time  oorlncUaation  to  wade 

through  Gibbon's  voluminoas  work  :  the  brilliant  plan  of  his  history,  where 
the  decay  of  an  empire  appears  as  visible  as  that  of  the  human  frame,  is 
fiiiiy  pnnerved :  whatever  remarks  of  Gibbon  offer  offence  to  religion  have 
been  carefully  expunged,  while  his  eloquence  has  suffered  no  curtaiU 
menL" — LUerarp  Oatetie, 

*  The  history  before  us  preserves  all  the  chief  beautiea  of  the  original,  imt^rt- 

ing  at  the  Mme  time  much  of  the  information  of  its  elaborate  predecrs^xr, 
and  carefully  omitting  every  objectionable  pasfage."— f.'okrt  Journal. 


< 


RngtUk  ClaxtU:  Library, 

ROBERTSON'S  HISTORY  or  thk  DISCOVERY 
AND  GUNgUEST  OV  AMKKICA.  With  an  Aoconnt  of  hi* 
Uf«  and  Wrttingrs,  by  Dagrald  Stewart.    With  two  Maps,  5s. 

The  BKMt  iBiercsUag  wid  rmtdmllnr  wort  of  this  historian,  which  toiu  the 
wonden  of  ronaacc  and  the  most  exquisite  gne^  of  style  to  tbephilo- 
soph  J  of  history.  It  It  a  model  of  historical  excellence,  and  cannot  fail  to 
deUghi  and  Instraet ;  mod  there  Is,  perfaujs,  no  book  In  the  ianfruaire  belter 
adapted  for  the  porposes  of  private  toltlon,  or  as  a  class  book  in  esUdtliih- 
meat*  for  female  Mucatlnn. 

'*Thls  editloo  presents  as  with  the  connected  namUve  of  the  author  In  a 
sllchtly  abrUged  form,  avoidlnr  prolixity,  while  the  irraphic  descriptions  of 
Robertson,  where  all  stands  out,  as  In  a  lecture,  are  rnlly  presarred.**— 
LUtrmrg  OmMHU, 

ROBERTSON'S    HISTORY   OF  THE   REIGN   OF 

CHARLES  V.   EMPEROR   OP  GERMANY.    With  a  View 

of  the  Progress  of  Society  in  Europe,  from  the  Subversion  of  the 

.  Roman  Empirto  to  the  beginning  of  the  Sixteenth  Century,  5S' 

*'  One  of  the  most  pleasinf  and  instructive  accounts  of  the  middle  ases,  and  of 
the  rradual  rise  of  oar  present  European  polity  and  civiUxation,  is  to  be 
found  In  Robertaon*s  History  of  the  Rcig:n  of  Charles  V."— CAam6er«. 

**  The  perfect  composition,  the  nervous  lanffu&fre,  the  well-tamed  periods  of 
Robertson,  often  forced  me  to  close  the  volume  with  a  mlnrled  fecliiisr  ot 
deligrht  and  despair.**— GiUon. 

TYTLER'S  ELEMENTS  op  GENERAL  HISTORY, 
ANCIENT  AND  MODERN.  To  which  are  added, a  Compara- 
tive View  of  Ancient  and  Modem  Geography,  and  a  Table  of 
Chronology,  brought  down  to  the  present  time.  By  Alexander 
Fraser  Tyder,  Lord  Woodhouselie.  A  new  edition,  complete  iii 
one  volume,  and  carefully  corrected  and  revised.    Maps,  4s. 

ThU  work  contains  the  outlines  of  a  course  of  Lerturm  on  General  History, 
which  were  delivered  by  the  author  while  Professor  of  Civil  Hintory  and 
Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities  in  the  Universitv  of  Edinburgh.  1'he  ob- 
ject of  the  work  is  to  furnish  a  regular  plan  for  the  important  study  of 
liistory,  and  to  unite  with  the  detail  of  facts  so  much  of  reflection,  as  to  ait* 
the  mind  in  the  formation  of  rational  views  of  the  cause's  and  consequencei 
of  events,  as  well  as  the  policy  of  the  actors.  Tlie  author  has  also  endea* 
voured  to  give  a  due  share  of  attention  to  the  state  of  the  arts  aiid  sciences, 
the  religion,  laws,  government,  and  manners  of  nations,  which  he  lias 
treated  in  distinct  sections,  and  at  particular  periods. 


13io9rapf)C)  antr  Fogages  antr  ^rabels. 

BRUCE'S  TRAVELS   THROUGH    PART  OF  AF- 
RICA,  SYRIA,  EGYPT  AND  ARABIA,  INTO  ABYSSINIA, 

to  discover  the  Source  of  the  Nile ;  with  an  Account  of  his  Life. 

A  new  edition,  carefully  corrected  and  enlai^ed.    Price  8s. 

-  *  1  have  conversed  with  the  inhabitants  of  Abyssinia,  who  conarm  all  that  Bnire 
has  said  in  his  Travels,  which  proves,  beyond  doubt,  that  his  writings  are  not 
only  correct  as  to  the  observance  of  truth,  but  that  few  traveller  have 
wntten  with  more  veracity  than  he  has  done;  all  the  French  travellera  in 
Upper  Egypt  give  praise  and  credit  to  his  work,  lie  is  not  <Mily  accurate  la 
^eiu'ral  facts,  but  in  all  tiie  minute  circumsunces  deduced  froui  them.**~I>r. 
B.  D,  Clarke, 


Semt,  W^Mtr,  and  Gtaiy,  86,  Charterhouse  Square. 

flOURRIENNE»S     MEMOIRS     OF     NAPOLEON 

BONAPARTE,  abridged.    Price  6s. 
**  TbeM  Memoin  most  continue  to  the  latest  Ages  to  be  records  of  intalnable 
Interest"— 14<erary  Gaiette. 

BRITISH  NAVAL  BIOGRAPHY:  Comprising  the 
liTes  of  the  moet  distinguished  Admirals,  from  Howard  to 
Godrington ;  with  an  ontline  of  the  Naral  History  of  England, 
from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  time,  with  portrait  of 

Codrington.    Price  5s. 

This  volume  contains  the  lives  of  above  Jlftv  of  the  most  eminent  naval  com- 
manders, from  Howard  of  Effint^ham,  to  the  hero  of  Navarln;  written  in  such 
iangvaee  is  will  be  perfectly  understood  by  those  who  are  unacquainted  with 
nauttf^  technicalities,  and  yet  retaining:  such  professional  details  as  will 
make  It  highly  interesong  to  the  midshipman  ana  seaman. 

CECIL»S  LIFE  OP  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON; 

with  Remarks  on  his  Life,  Connections,  and  Character.  Price  2s. 

The  above  Mem<dr  was  written  to  enable  Christfaui  parents  to  supply  a  book  which 
mif  ht  amuse  their  families,  and  yet  tend  to  promote  rtheir  best  interests,  by 
exhibiting  the  power  of  Divine  f^race  in  reclaiming  from  a  course  of  pro- 
fligacy and  sin,  one,  who  afterwards  became  an  ornament  to  the  church  and  to 
the  christian  character. 

COOK'S  VOYAGES  ROUND  THE  WORLD.  With 
an  Account  of  his  Life,  during  the  previous  and  intervening 
periods,  by  Dr.  Kippis,  F.R.S.  &c.    Price  3s. 

A  fresh  interest  has  now  been  given  to  the  narrative  of  Cook,  by  the  remark- 
able success  which  has  hitely  attended  the  Missionary  exertions  in  the 
islands  which  he  discovered,  in  the  conversion  of  an  entire  people  from 
the  flercenesB  of  savage  heathens  to  the  mild  and  gentle  Influence  of 
Christianity. 

HOLCROFTS  LIFE  OF  BARON  FREDERICK 
TRENCK ;  containing  his  Adventures,  his  Cruel  and  Exces- 
sive Suffering^  during  Ten  Years'  Imprisonment  at  the  Fort- 
resa  of  Magdeburgh,  by  command  of  the  late  King  of  Prussia  ; 
also  Anecdotes,  Historical,  Political,  and  Personal.  Price  Ss.  6d. 

HUNTINGTON'S  (Mrs.  of  Boston)  MEMOIRS,  con- 
sisting of  Extracts  firom  her  Journals  and  Letters,  with  the 
Sermon  on  her  Death.    By  the  Rev.  B.  B.  Wisner.    Price  3s. 

"*  Her  religion  was  not  confined  to  her  closet,  and  the  sanctuary.  She  endea- 
voared  to  carry  It  with  her  into  all  the  business  and  circamstances  of  life. 
In  the  work  of  benevolence  she  has  left  her  sex  a  noble  example,  and  yet 
her  exertions  never  produced  any  neglect  of  domestic  duties,  or  any  trans- 
gression of  the  bounds  of  strict  propriet7.*'~rAtf  Rev,  B.  B,  Wisner, 

VOLTAIRE'S    HISTORY    OF    CHARLES    THE 

TWELFTH,  King  of  Sweden.  Price  2s.  6d. 

Almost  all  his  actions,  even  those  of  his  private  life,  border  on  the  marvellous. 
He  possessed  all  the  virtues  of  a  hero  and  a  conqueror ;  bu'  even  these  great 
qualities,  any  one  of  which  would  have  been  sufficient  to  immortalize  another 

Erince,  proved  pernicious  to  his  country.    From  the  history  of  his  life  it  may 
c  learned  that  a  quiet  and  happy  governuicnt  is  inflnltsly  preferable  lO  s> 
much  glory.  ^ 


€ 


RaglUh  Classic  IMrarg, 

VOLTAIRE'S  HISTORY  or  PETER  THE  GREAT. 

Emperor  of  Kutsia.    Price  ^ 

ITiH  b  the  Ufa  of  one  of  the  mort  extraordinary  cbaracten  IliAt  et«r  mppeaxtd 
in  the  world  In  any  %fi«  or  couiiir> -the  promoter  of  Utermture,  arts,  tad 
Kiencn,  yet  wliboiii  edocatlon  UmMlf ;  the  cbiltaer  of  his  people,  end  «m 
hliiitelf  a  Mvsfe— he  changed  the  maanen,  the  haMts,  the  laws  of  hto  people, 
and  the  wry  face  of  the  coantry,  and  was  the  founder,  not  of  a  dvnaaty,  boi 
of  an  emplK.  The  naefal  moral  to  be  derived  Arom  the  ttfe  of  Peter,  is  to 
shew  how  much  niixht  be  done  by  one  man,  within  the  period  of  his  own 
life.  In  proniotlne  the  happinett  of  a  large  portion  of  the  world :  eiay  his 
example  be  followed  by  those  who  call  themselTes  edocated  and  civiUxcd. 


BLAIR'S  GRAVE;  GRAY'S  ELEGY;  PORTEUS 

ON    DEATH;  and  DODD'S   PRISON   THOUGHTS.     WitK 

Memoirs  of  Blair  and  of  Dr.  Dodd.    Price  2^. 

**  The  popularity  of  the  '  Grave*  is  not  alone  dep«*ndent  upon  the  Ane  nofm 
tone  wliich  pervades  it.  it  aboundu  in  pieturet- -  origtoal,  striking,  and 
alwavs  ualiiral.  It  Is  a  volume  of  *  plulnres  to  the  ear,'  and  the  repre- 
neiitaUons  of  the  poet  are  as  vivid  as  If  they  were  oonreyed  to  as  on 
canvas."— 5.  C.  HalU 

BLOOM  FIELD'S     FARMER'S    BOY;     RURAL 

TALES;  BALLADS  and  SONGS;  and  WILD  FLOWERS,  or 

Pastoral  and   Local   Poetry.     With  a  Memoir  of  the   Author. 

IVice  2d. 

••  He  wrote  only  of  what  he  had  wen  or  felt  :— and  In  the  treatment  of  topics 
familiar  to  pcrtson*  of  his  ciais  —  the  humble  Ubourers  in  our  fields  or 
alioya— he  is,  we  thitik,  even  now  unequalled."-  S.  9.  Hall. 

BURNS'  COMPLETE  POETICAL  WORKS.    With 

Explanatory  and  Glossarial  Notes;  and  the  interesting^  account 
of  tUe  Life  of  the  Author  by  James  Currie^M.D.    Price  5i*. 

'V\\\*  i<  tiie  most  complete  edition  which  Yam  been  publuhed,  and  contains  lh« 
whole  of  tlie  poetry  ronipriwd  in  the  edition  lately  edited  by  Cuuninghani. 
a<  well  as  some  additional  pieces;  and  such  notes  hare  t>een  added  as  are 
ralculaletl  to  illustrate  the  manners  and  customs  of  Scotland,  so  as  to  ren> 
der  the  whole  more  intelligible  to  the  Englirh  reader. 

"  He  owes  nothi  ni^  to  the  poetry  of  other  lands — he  Is  the  offsprings  of  the  soil : 
he  is  us  natural  io  Scotland  as  the  heatii  is  to  her  hiUs— his  variety  is  equal 
to  his  originality ;  his  humour,  his  iraiety,  his  tenderness,  and  his  patlin«, 
come  all  In  a  breath  ;  they  come  freely,  for  they  come  of  their  oifru  accord  ; 
the  contrast  U  nevrr  offensive;  the  roniic  slides  easily  into  the  serioas,  the 
serious  into  the  tender,  ami  the  tender  into  the  pathetic.**— if/ioii  Cun- 
ningham. 

•'  No  iK>pt,  with  the  evcppfion  of  Sliakspearr,  ever  possewod  the  power  of  p\- 
citlni;   the  most    vi>rici|   aiul   disioiUant  emotions  with    such   rapid  trau 
sltlous."— Sir  W,  Scot:. 


Scott,  Webster,  and  Geary,  38,  Charterhouse  Square. 

COLLINS,    GRAY,  AND  BEATTIE'S  POETICAL 

WORKS,  with  Memoirs  of  the  Authors.    Price  2s.  6d. 

"The  poeilcal  prodnctioM of  CoHint  fill  bat  •  few  Mfet,  and  arc  clancd  amoog 
the  finect  and  most  perfect  productions  in  the  uui|ruage.  The  ni8fier-piec» 
of  Gray  will  be  reacf  and  loved  m  lonf  at  the  *  stni  sad  music  of  haKattity 
Tibrates  throoarh  the  hearts  of  men  ;-Hind  the  Minstrel  of  Seattle  may  be 
ctaMsed  amontr  the  most  popular  of  EngUsh  poems ;  the  language  U  extremely 
elegant,:  the  Tersiflcatlon  harmonious;  it  exhibits  the  richest  p6fetic  imagery, 
wltn  a  delightful  flow  of  the  most  sublime,  delicate,  and  pathetic  senti- 
ments ;  it  breathes  the  spirit  of  the  purest  Tirtne,  the  soundest  philosophy* 
and  the  most  exquisite  taste.**— &  C.  Hall, 

COWPER'S  COMPLETE  POETICAL  WORKS; 
inclttdingf  the  Hymns  and  Translations  from  Madame  Guion, 
Milton,  &c.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  the  Rer.  Henry 
Stebbing,  AM*  Price  5s. 

This  is  the  only  complete  edition  which  Is  printed  in  one  rolume* 

**  Morality  never  found  In  genius  a  more  devoted  advocate  than  Cowper^  nor 
has  moral  wisdom,  in  Its  plain  and  severe  precepts,  been  ever  more  snc- 
oessfuliy  combined  with  the  delicate  spirit  of  poetry,  than  in  his  works.  He 
was  enaowed  with  all  the  powers  which  a  poet  codld  want  who  was  to  be 
the  moralist  of  the  world— the  reprover,  but  not  the  natirist,  of  men— th« 
teacher  of  simple  truths,  which  were  td  be  rendered  gradous  without  en- 
dangering their  simplicity."— i5/el>6ing* 

COWPER'S  POEMS.  With  &  Memoii',  by  tho  Rev.  H. 
Stebbing,  A.M.   Price  a8.6d. 

COWPER'S  POEMS.  Part  IL  Containing  Hymns, 
Translations  from  Madame  Guion,  Translations  from  Milton, 
and  Minor  Poems.    Price  2s.  6d. 

The  poetry  in  this  volume  has  been  printed  as  a  supplement  to  oomplete  all  the 
previous  editions  in  the  classic  size. 

DODD'S  BEAUTIES  OF  SHAKSPEARE.  With 
s^  general  Index.    Price  Ss. 

*  I  greatly  dislike  beauties  and  selections  in  general ;  but  make  out  your  amplest 
catalogue  of  all  the  known  faculdes,  and  then  compare  with  Shakspeare 
rincfer  each  head  all  or  any  of  the  writers  in  prose  ami  verse  that  ever 
lived !    Who  tb^t  Is  competent  to  judge  doubts  the  result  V*T-Coleridge* 

DRTOEN'S  VIRGIL.   With  Life  by  Walsh,  Price  3s.  6d. 

**  The  most  noble  and  spirited  translation  that  I  know  in  any  language."- Po;>«i 

FALCONER'S  SHIPWRECK,  with  other  Poems :  and 
SOMERVILE'S  CHASE.  With  Lives  of  tlie  Authors.    Price  2s. 

**  The  '  Shipwreck '  Is  a  poem  that  stands  at  the  head  of  the  class  to  which  It 
belongs.  It  is  a  clear,  accurate,  and  able  deAcHptinn  of  the  peculiar  perils 
of  a  seaman's  lite,  the  duties  he  has  to  perform,  and  the  hopes  which  his 
situation  perpetually  excites— and  amply  merits  the  popularity  It  received 
and  retains.  The  *  Cliaae,'  besides  the  exceedinir  merit  of  its  composition, 
will  always  be,  as  it  always  has  been,  highly  popular.  The  iorial  huntoman, 
the  contemplative  angler,  alike  find  themselves  and  their  cnoicest  pleasurei 
portrayed  hy  oie  who  was  capable  of  understanding  and  appreciating 
both.**    5.  C%  HalU 


EitglUh  ClasJtic  LiOrttry, 

GOLDSMITHS  POEMS,  PLAYS,    AND  ESSAY& 

With  an  Acoonnt  of  hia  Ufa  and   Writinfrs,  and   a  Critical 

DiMertation  on  hia  Poetry,  by  Dr.  Aikin.    Price  Ss. 

**  He  tooched  «pon  ereri  kind  of  excellence,  and  thai  with  anch  Inlnitabie 
■race,  that  whepe  he  Ailed  of  orislDaUty  m<xt.  he  had  erer  a  freahoeM  and 
a  charm.  Id  this  ta  the  beaatj  oThls  poetry--his  TeraiAcation  ia  renMrkabl; 
elegaot  **^  aweet."— A  C.  HalL 

KIRKE     WHITE'S     POETICAL     WORKS     AND 

LBTTERS,  with  a  Sketch  of  hia  Life.    Price  28.  6d. 

*<  Ilia  poetry  la  pecaliarlj  adapted  for  popalarity,  since  It  chiefly  dncrUm 
fcellnfi,  paadoDs,  and  aMoeiations,  which  all  have  fvlt,  and  witti  which  Jl 
ran  syapathlae;  they  eaianatad  dinsct  from  hit  own  heart,  and  appeal  irre- 
sbUbly  to  that  of  his  reader.  It  is,  however,  in  hia  proae  worlu,  ami 
especially  in  his  correspondence,  that  die  Temtility  of  his  talenix,  his  ac- 
quireBBcnia,  his  poetry,  and  his  moral  excellence,  are  most  cons|iiciMMis.** 

MILTON'S  POETICAL  WORKS,  complete,  with  Ex- 

planatory  Notes,  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  by  tiie  Rer.  H. 

Stebbing,   A.  M.    Alao,  AN    ESSAY    ON    THE    POETICAL 

GENIUS  OP  MILTON,  by  Dr.  Channing.    Price  4». 

The  Latin  and  Italian  poems  are  included  ia  thia  edition. 

**  Mr.  Stebbiiif(*s  notes  will  be  found  venr  oseful  in  elucidatinr  the  irsrnfd 
allusions  with  which  the  text  mhonndii.  and  they  are  alao  valuable  Tor  the 
t-rtrrect  appreciation  with  which  the  writer  directs  attention  to  Uie  heaatka 
of  the  Author.*'— PrMin;  Machnu. 

MORE'S  (HANNAH)  POETICAL  WORKS,  com- 
plete, containing  Sacred  Dramas ;  Tragedies;  Poems;  Ballads; 
Hymns,  &c.  with  a  Memoir  of  the  Author.    Price  4s. 

"  Thin  iii  a  volume  that  OHf(ht  to  be  in  the  possession  of  every  lady  ;— the  object  <  f 
tlio  amiable  author  waa  ever  to  promote  the  love  of  pie^  and  virtue,  I  y 
piaclii?  them  in  broad  contrast  with  impiety  and  vice,  ana  to  bring  oni  in 
Hiruiig  relief  the  indwellings  beauty  of  a  Christian  lile.'' 

OSSIAN'S  POEMS:  translated  by  J.  Macpherson,  Esq. 

with  Ditfttertationn  concerning  the  Era  and  Poems  of  Ossian ; 

and  Dr.  Blair's  Critical  Dissertation.     Price  3s. 

**  Oxsian  \*  sublime  and  pathetic  in  an  eminent  decree— and  were  his  mrrit  in 
(itlicr  retiiecti  much  Icks  than  It  in,  this  alone  oueht  to  entitle  him  tu  birh 
rt'^ril,  tliat  his  writlnipi  are  reniarlcably  fuvonrable  to  virtue.  They  awaae 
the  tenderest  sympathies,  and  inspire  the  most  ^nerous  actions.  No  r«*ader 
can  rise  from  liim  without  i>eingr  warmed  with  the  sentiments  of  hananity, 
virtue,  and  honour,  and  we  mav  boldly  assign  him  a  place  amoiifr  those 
whose  worlis  are  to  last  for  ag-es."— />r.  Blair. 

POPE'S  HOMER'S  ILIAD.     With  Explanatory  Notes. 

and  Index  of  Persons ;  and  Essay  on  the  Life,  Genius,  and 

Writings,  of  Homer.    Price  4s. 

it  has  been  attempted  in  the  notes  to  supply  the  characten  of  all  the  heroes, 
and  to  convey  some  idea  of  the  machinery  made  u»e  of  bv  llooier.  The 
mytliology,  rites,  cuntoms,  6tc.  of  the  heroic  ajres  have  alto  been  explained, 
bo  far  as  tiic  cxtr-nt  of  the  notes  would  admit;  and  |>articular  care  has  been 
taken  to  direct  the  allentioii  of  the  youthful  reader  to  such  passafes  as 
lute  been  greatly  admired  in  all  acres. 

"  TliiH  deserves  to  be  recommi-nded  a«  the  best  Po<ket  Edition  of  Pop«>*s  fliaJ 
liiur  lia-.  uppeared."— Ptiwiing  Mack'we. 


Scott,  Webster,  end  Geary,  Sb,  Charterhouse  Square. 

POPE'S  HOMER'S  ODYSSEY.  With  Explanatory 
Notes  and  Index  of  Persons.    Price  8s. 

TMi  b  printed  uulform  with  the  Iliad,  and  the  wme  ot^t  ha*  been  kept  in 

▼lew  in  selecting  the  notes. 

SACRED  POETRY.  Selected  by  the  Rev.  H.  Siob- 
bing,  A«M.  New  Edition,  enlarged.    Price  Ss.  Qd. 

This  collection  has  been  drawn  from  the  works  of  the  most  admired  Poets  In 
the  linguaee;  the  present  edition  contains  upwards  of  lOO  additional  pages. 
and  the  Editor  earnestly  hopes  that  the  publication  may  tend  to  parity  an« 
elevate  the  thoughts  of  those  into  whose  hands  it  may  falU 

SCOTT'S  (Sir  Walter)  LAY  OF  THE  LAST  MIN- 
STREL; BALLADS,  AND  LYRICAL  PIECES.  With  Notes, 
and  a  Memoir  of  the  Author.    Price  28.  6d. 

THOMSON'S  SEASONS,  and  Castle  of  Indolence. 
With  a  Life  of  the  Author.    Price  28. 

**  His  descriptions  bring  before  us  the  whole  magnlAcence  of  Nature,  whetlwr 
pleatdng  or  dreadful.  The  gaiety  of  Spring:,  the  splendour  of  Summer,  the 
tranquiUity  of  Autumn,  and  the  horror  of  Winter,  take  in  their  torn  posses- 
sion of  the  mind.*'— Johnton* 

**  Place  the  '  Seasons*  in  any  li?ht  and  tlie  poem  appears  faultless— the  episodes 
are  delicious  stories— the  descriptions  so  accurate  as  to  bear  the  closest  test 
— the  versification  richly  harmonious,  yet  always  In  perfect  keeping  with 
the  subject— and  above  all,  the  sentiments  are  so  pure,  the  lessons  in  virtue 
so  attractive,  tiie  religion  so  natural,  graceful,  and  winning,  so  opposed  to 
biirotrv  and  suferBtition,  tliat  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  become  better  and 
wiser  by  the  perusal  of  that  which  produces  sensations  of  the  most  supreme 
pleasure.  The  '  Castle  of  Indolence'  is  the  most  highly  finished  of  all  his 
compositions.'*— 5.  C.  HoU, 

YOUNG'S  NIGHT  THOUGHTS  on  Life,  Death,  and 
luimortality.   Price  28. 6d. 

•Exhibits  a  very  wide  display  of  original  poetry,  variegated  with  deep  reflec- 
tions and  striking  allusfous,  a  wilderness  of  thought,ln  which  the  fertility  of 
fancy  scatters  flowers  of  every  hue  and  of  every  odoar.**-~  JoAnmn. 


lEUucation. 

CHAPONE  ON  THE  MIND;  DR.  GREGORY'S 
LEGACY,  AND  PENNINGTON'S  ADVICE  TO  HER 
DAUGHTERS.    Price  28.  6d. 

-  Mrs.  Chapone's  Letters  are  distinguished  by  sound  sense,  a  liberal  as  well  as  a 
warm  spirit  of  piety,  and  a  philosophy  applied  to  its  best  use— the  culture 
of  the  heart  and  aiTectiona;  and  are  the  most  iinexrcptionable  treatises  thai 
can  be  put  into  the  hands  of  female  vouth."— Af>».  Barbauld. 


SMglUk  Cluislc  Library. 

CHESTERFIKLD'S    PRINCIPLES    OF    POLITE- 
NESS,  and  THE  YOUNG  MAN'S  OWN  BOOK.  Pncc2s.6d. 


The  *  PrmeipU$  tf  PMttmet^  oomM  of  rach  telcrtloin  only  M  apply  to  food 
breediNr,  and  Ike  aaaMffB,  ewtiMM,  and  haMts,  of  geuenl  society ;  taJ 
*  Tk*  Vommg  Mmm*$  Omm  Book,*  which  te  now  aaded  aa  a  saiuble  coa|«nkja 
wat  lairiy  pahltahcd  ia  AaMrica:  tt  i^  chiefly  compiled  from  Paley,  Watu, 
and  otkcn  of  oar  own  writera,  bat  aiany  excellent  f>fasenratioii»  are  added, 
and  ihe  whole  arranfed  onder  dlatlnct  hcada,  aoaa  to  fonn  a  oaefal  niauHal. 


COMSTOCK'S  SYSTEM  OF  NATURAL  PHILO- 
SOPHY; in  which  the  Elementif  of  that  Science  are  familiarly 
explained,  and  adapted  to  the  Comprehension  of  Young  Pupils. 
By  John  L.  Comstock,  M.D.  A  new  edition,  carefully  revised, 
and  enlarged  with  additions  on  the  Air  Pamp,  Steam  Engine^ 
Arc  By  George  Leea,  BfJL  Lecturer  on  Natural  Philosc^y 
dec,  Edinbugh. 

Widk  numerous  Wood-Cuts,  and  appropriate  Questions  on  each 
page  for  the  Examination  of  Scholars.    Price 

EVENINGS  AT  HOME,  consisUng  of  a  Variety  of 
Miscellaneous  Pieces  for  the  Instruction  and  Amusement  of 
Young  Persona.    By  Dr.  Aikin  and  Mn.  Barbauld.  Price  3«> 

**Thls  is  one  of  the  beat  hooka  for  yoanr  people  from  aeven  to  lea  yean  old,  that 
has  yet  appeared  in  the  world ;  and  the  mixture  of  tdeatiflc  and  moral  Ich 
•ons  are  m  happily  blended  as  to  reiisve  the  atteoiion.**— if  ts*  Edgemortk, 

JOYCE'S    SCIENTIFIC  DIALOGUES,  intended  for 

the  Instruction  and  Entertainment  of  Young  People  ;  in  which 

the  first  Principles  of  Natural  and  Experimental  Philosophy 

are  fully  explained.    Complete  in  one  volume,  with  185  Wood 

Cuts.     Price  4fl« 

Thin  U  the  b»t  inlrodaction  to  these  snbject*  which  has  yet  been  pablixbed.  The 
object  of  the  author  haa  been  to  present  a  complete  compeodiam  of  nataral 
and  vxperimenul  philosophy,  not  only  adapted  to  the  undersLiDdiuri  of 
ToiiDK^  people,  but  well  calculated  also  to  convey  that  familiar  instruction 
which  is  necessary  before  they  caa  attend  public  lectures  with  advantage. 

SMELLIE'S  PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  HIS- 
TORY: with  an  Introduction,  and  various  additions  ai^l 
aherutions,  intended  to  adapt  it  to  the  present  state  of  KnoW' 
levl-e,  by  John  Ware,  M.D.    Price  3s. 

riic  r;!it<->r  bus  availed  himself  of  such  modem  discoTerfes  and  Improrements  ia 
pl>>>iology  and  natural  history  as  are  connected  with  the  suhjccta  of  which 
ilif  booli  treats;  and  in  the  Introduction  he  has  added  a  general  view  of 
niiinial  and  veu'etable  life,  and  a  brief  sketch  of  the  structure  and  claasiflcatioA 
of  ihe  wiiole  aniiual  kingdom,  which  he  trusU  will  be  found  of  great  askut- 
a  nee  to  young  persons  in  learning  the  elements  of  Natural  Histoiy. 

WATTS  ON  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE 
MIND.  With  a  Diseourse  on  the  Education  of  Children  and 
Youth.     Price  Ss. 

W»»ofrvrr  has  :hc  care  of  Vtv^XtvicWtvi  ovVvcrs  may  be  charged  with  daSeloncy  »a 
iiis  duty  If  this  book  U  tm>\  i«comtu«viAt*.'^— IK.  ^Wnsoik. 


ABBOTPS  VOUNG  CHRISTIAN;  or  a  Familiar  Hlut- 
InUoaitfUia  Principle!  of  ChriniuiDnty.    Price  2i.  6d. 

ccmlHID  in  el^cOAtlctfoD  Ibil  it  Dir^r  tfp  ba  pDEInro  Ihr  vtdcil  clrcqJa- 
liob.    few  wojfci  ipr»eql  m  Itm  ■  pro^don  af  fltraklDi  ■nd  pktureuua 

"  Vt  ■tnnffir  reeciHH&il  MUi  iwrfc  w  wa  of  Ibe  boM  iBitrncUTo,  ind  il  llkt 


^MiUafiH  !i£f  o*?^ 


ck««iLDK  bo  Lke  ban  ftflUnHk  h  U  Jnvt  uciied  In  bh  u  HriXHi  dokiv  uid 
pi^Br  la  Ood  l^i  It  bdr  H  Hori  gMpri^dr  direuljlM  mM  bM  HrbouilT 

nlllublicullu  tUI>  ittnctln  cIvUiinE.  llie  boaaiirafChrbuaiii>iifJrf«uiij]M 
iDlhpqiKl;  lluir  ion  connpltim,  tbdr  in-ilnu  dLllnHHoh,  Ibfllr  muttflt 
wnnpftlopr-in  ^ort,  octi  rlenifal  (rf  thnla£icU  projirliHJ  la  kiipl  In 

BAXTER'S    SAINTS'   EVERLASTING   REST;  or 

t,  Trentiit  at  the  BleHid  Sum  d(  the  Salnn,  Id  Odr  Mtiny' 
menl  of  God  in  UeiTtn.  Price  2e. 

'■  Ths  nuUml  Juawi;  aDTlbalv*  hli  conventeD  In  ■  smt  SBHin  to  Hw 

mdlnsr  of  the  'Balnfi  £*«l»Dnr  R»t,^  and  calli  II  'm  booli  thu  aq 

BUNYAN'S  PH.GRIM'S  PROGRESS.  Notes  and 
Lire  by  tbe  Hct.  Thmau  Sccu.    Price  3>- 

A«-tl»  peblk«tf«  ncnpU^  tad  atartiJ'—At  Pi^itcr. 


BUNYAN'S   GRACE   ABOUNDING;  WORLD  TO 
COHB,AND  BARBBN  FIG-TREI.    PriceSi- 


English  Classic  Library. 

BUTLERS  ANALOGY  OF  RELIGION,  Natural 
and  Revealed,  to  the  Constitation  and  Course  of  Nature;  with 
a  Preface  and  Life,  by  BUhop  Halifax.    Price  28.  6d. 

"  A  work  of  IncalcalaMe  yt\9e."—BiGkertteth, 

'<  I  have  derfTed  arreater  aid  from  the  views  and  rnaoningc  of  Butler,  than  I 

hare  been  able  to  And  besfclet  in  the  whole  range  of  our  exiatcnt  author 

ahlp.**-'/>r.  Ckalmers. 

CLARKE'S  SCRIPTURE  PROMISES,  ia  which  the 
Proraiaee  of  Scripture  are  arran£;ed  under  their  proper  headi, 
representing,  I.  The  Blessings  Promised.    II.  The  Duties  to 
which  Promises  are  made.    Price  Ss. 
la  this  edition  every  pamfe  of  Scrfplnre  ha*  been  compared  and  verifled. 
"  The  Tolunte  ia  Uke  an  arran^  ainaeaai  of  reoM,  and  p>«cioiu  atonea,  and 
pearia  o(  Inentiroable  value.    The  dliine  proailaea  comprehend  a  rich  an4 
endleaa  variety.**— Dr.  WardUno, 

DODDRIDGE'S  RISE    AND  PROGRESS  OF  RE- 

LI6I0N  IN  THB  SOUL.    Price  2s. 

"  1  wa»  recommended  to  read  the  '  Rise  and  Prorresa  of  Rellvion  in  the  Sool:' 
and  I  may  with  truth  aamire  yon.  that  I  nerer  waa  ao  deeply  afferied  with 
any  things  I  ever  met  with  aa  with  tliac  boolt ;  and  I  could  not  be  ewy  till  i 
had  frlven  one  to  every  aenrant  in  my  honae  who  appeared  to  be  of  a  aerioai 
turn  of  mind.**— rA«  Dueheu  <tf  S^menel  in  a  UlUr  to  the  Author^  1760. 

HERVEY'S  MEDITATIONS  AND  CONTEMPLA- 
TIONS ;  with  a  Sketch  of  the  Author'a  Life.    Price  3s. 

PALEY'S      EVIDENCES     OF     CHRISTIANITY. 

Price  28-  6d. 

"In  thin  Inminoua  and  comprehensiTe  work,  the  historical  evidence  for  the 
truth  of  our  Scriptures,  seleclcd  from  the  volumes  of  Dr.  lardnrr,  is 
arranfred  with  cirarnew,  and  ntated  to  the  reader  with  the  utmmit  force 
and  precision."— Her.  R.  Lynam,  M.A. 

PALEY'S  NATURAL  THEOLOGY.     Price 2s.  ^ 

"  lliftTh<>olory  may  be  clamed  among:  the  moat  interestiniT  boolu  of  tlie  EnTlinh 
lanena^fe.  and  contains  many  beautiful  illustrations  of  the  wisdom  ami  gund- 
ness  of  God  In  the  works  or  the  creation."— Arv.  R,  Lpnamf  M.A, 

SCOTT'S    (Rev.    Thomas)      FORCE    OF    TRUTH: 

CIIOWTH    IN    GRACB:    DISCOURSE    UPON     REPKNT- 

ANCE:    AND   SERMON    ON    FINAL    PERSEVERANCE. 

Price  2«.  6d. 

"  lie  was  an  eminently  useful  minlKter  of  the  Gospel,  and  his  soand.  jndirioiui, 
and  practical  writnifpi,  form  a  moiit  valuable  accession  to  thethooiory  of  nor 
rnuiitrv.  The  lessoni*  of  snch  a  life  and  such  an  experience  as  he  has 
honpstly  delineate*!,  are  hi^'hiy  instructive  to  every  class  of  Christians,  but 
to  die  sincere  inquirer  after  truth  we  would  especially  recommend  tftem.**— 
Dr.  Chalmtrs, 

STURM'S  RRFr.ECTIONS  ON  THE  WORKS  OF 

OOD,  and  of  His  Providence  throughout  all  Natmre.     Price  5>< 

"The  prc-sent  work  I  venture  to  recommend  to  younr  people,  with  a  iirm  con- 
fldfiire  in  ita  improving  the  mind  and  amelioratlnf  the  heart,  it  will  l>e 
particularly  useful  to  those  whose  rea<iin<r  Is  not  very  extensive,  as  coniain- 
Ing  nnu-h  u«cfMl  Information  in  natuml  history  and  natnrai  uhiloao|iliy. 
conicved   ill  lang\aga  \nlo\V\f\VAe  vo  ^i^wu^  chfldrea.*'     The  Tranttator 


Scoti,  JVebster,  and  Geary,  36,  Charterhouse  Square. 

WILBERFORCE'S  PRACTICAL  VIEW  OF  THE 
PRRVAILINO  RELIGIOUS  SYSTEM  of  profeMed  Chri» 
tjans,  in  the  higher  and  middle  GUusea  in  this  Country,  con- 
trasted with  real  Christianity.    Price  2*«  6d. 

'*  This  work  it  a  mo«t  noble  and  manly  stand  for  tiie  f  ospel ;  full  of  rood  sentie 
and  most  useful  nhm  rrnHii.  and  in  all  respects  fitted  for  usefulness ;  and 
cominiT  from  sucli  a  man.  It  will  probably  be  read  by  many  thousands,  who 
can  by  no  means  be  brought  to  attend  either  to  oar  preachiniT  or  writiiiirs. 
I  pray  God  to  do  much  good  by  iL"—Rtv»  T,  Seott,  umtkor  of  the  Contmen- 
Uarjf  on  tko  BibU, 

'*  The  attractive  character  of  the  work  Is  anirersally  allowed.  Lotc  is  stamped 
on  every  page.  It  is  not  a  dry  disputation,  a  systematic  treatise,  a  polemical 
discussion.  It  is  a  masterly,  benevolent,  tender  appeal  to  the  brrast  and 
conscience  on  the  most  important  of  ail  *ubject»»*^-—DanUl  ff'tisow,  b'uhop 
ofCmieutia, 


^teccllaneous. 

BARON  MUNCHAUSEN'S  SURPRISING  TRA- 
VELS  AND  ADVENTURES.    Price  2s. 

BURKE  ON  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  Price 
28. 6d. 

BURKE  ON  THE  SUBLIME  AND  BEAUTIFUL. 
Price  2s. 

CITIZEN  OF  THE  WORLD,  by  Oliver  Goldsmith. 
Price  3s. 

DEFOE'S  HISTORY  OF  THE  GREAT  PLAGUE 
OF  LONDON  in  the  year  1665,  with  an  Introduction  by  the 
Rev.  H.  Stebbing,  in  which  a  short  Account  is  given  of  the 
▼ariona  Tisitations  of  Pestilence  of  which  we  have  any  know- 
ledge.   Price  2s.  6d. 

ECONOMY  OF  HUMAN  LIFE,  by  Dodsley.   Price  28. 

FRANKLIN'S  WORKS,  consisting  of  Essays,  Hir- 
MOKOus,  Moral,  and  Litksary.  With  his  Life,  written  by 
Himself.    Price  2s.  6d. 

GULLIVER'S  TRAVELS  into  several  remote  Nations 
of  the  World,  by  Dean  Swift.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author. 
Price  9k  6d. 

JOE  MILLER'S  BUDGET  OF  ANECDOTE  AND 
WIT.    Price  3s.  6d. 

This  is  an  cntlreiy  new  selection  under  the  above  well-linown  title,  and  no 
j^e  of  improip^r  tendency  lias  been  admitted. 


Anitujt  Clattle  Uhrarj. 

LOCKE'S  CONDUCT  OF  THE  UNDERSTAND. 
ING.  AND  BACON'S  HORAl.,  ECONOHICAL,  AND  PO 
LITICAL  ESSAYS.    PilcgS>.6d. 

MASON  ON  SELF-KNOWLEDGE;   MELMOTHS 


?AUL    AND  VIRGINIA;    ELIZABETH,    oa    THE 
KXILES    OF   SIBERIA;    ud   THE    INDIAN    COTTAGK. 


ST.    PIERRE'S    STUDIES    OF   NATURE. 


VICAR  OF  WAKEFIELD.bjDr.  Goldsmitb.  Price  as. 
7.IMMERMAN  ON  SOLITUDE.     With  a  LLfe  of  lU 


■pi^  of  ■ppHnOon,  iDiich  tfalHEy  Id  Um  c 
ultpxItiT  tvr  Ihc  LnlercaB  at  ral^kpn,  hI 


|i  i'
