Request  of 

1Re\>.  1fx  <L  Scabbing,  2>* 

to  tbc  Xtbrars 
of  tbe 

of  Toronto 

1901 


THE 

WORKS 


OP 


PETER  PINDAR, 


VOLUME    II. 


COSTA1N1.10 

if.   Sir  Jofrph  Banks  and  the  Emperor  of  Morocco. 

19.  EpiO.le  to  .1  falling  M miller. 

*o.  Subjects  for  Painters.  . 

si.  Eipoftubtory  Odes. 

»2.  A  benevolent  EpiftJeto  Matter  John  Nichols. 

13.  A  Rowland  f<>r  an  Oliver. 

44.  AJvice  to  the  future  Laureat. 

25.  Ep.tUe  to  J.imrj  Biu^c,  ECq. 

26.  The  Rights  of  Kings. 
i~.  OJes  to  Mr.  P.iine. 

»3.  The  Rem  .nftrancc.  ^ 

29.  M«>:c  M  & 

30.  Odes  of  Importance.  O 

31.  The  Ttars  of  St.  Margaret.  \* 
3z.  A  pair  of  Lyric  Eytftles  to  Lord  Macartney, 

3J.  Odes  to  K.icn  Long. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  JOHN  WALKER,  No.  44,  Pater-noftcr  Rowr. 
J797- 


PR 

37^5 


SIR    JOSEPH    BANKS 


AND   THE 


EMPEROR  OF  MOROCCO. 

A     TALE. 


Ort  intellect  not  all  things  comprehends  : 

The  genius  form'd  for  weeds,  and  grubs,  and  flies, 

C^n't  have  for  ever  at  his  firper  ends 
What's  doing  cv'ry  roomer:  in  the 


VOL.  IT.  B 


THE   ARGUMENT. 

Perm  the  GREAT  fightcth  the  President's  battle--pro- 
rlirimcth  fomc  of  the  Prefident's  powers---viz.  his  pre- 
lerving,  tooth -and-nail  powers- --luj  ftomach  powers — 
hi*  face  powers- —his  hammer  powers^  triumphing  over 
the  powers  of  MORPHEUS,  and  tkt  his  courageous 
powers. 

PETER  beflinneththe  tale— -Sir  JOSEPH  proceedeth  to  hunt 
---but  nrft  ejaculateth---Thc  Virtuofo's  prayer-— Sir 
JOSEPH'S  infect  cnthufiafminduceth  him,  contrary  to  his 
general  piety,  to  pray  wickedly,  by  felfifhly  wilhing  to 
gratify  his  own  deures  at  the  expcnce  of  the  farmers—- 
Sir  JOSEPH  prayeth  for  PHARAOH'S  flies— condemneth 
PHARAOH'S  tafte---maketh  intereft  for  fhowers  of  flies, 
inftead  of  quails---prayeth  for  monlters,  and  promifeth 
them  the  honour  ot  his  name. 

Sir  JOSEPH,  in  a  pointer-like  manner,  antbulateth---he 
efpieth  the  EMPEROR  ot  MOROCCO---PETER  conjee* 
tureth  as  toSir  JOSEPH'S  joy  on  the  occafion-— compareth 
Sir  JOSEPH'S  joy  with  that  experienced  by  ARCHIMU 
DES,  hare-hunters,  outrageoufly- virtuous  old  maids,  the 
little  Duke  of  Piccadilly  a  pimp,  Mother  WINDSOR'S 
virgins,  and  Mother  WINDSOR  berJelf—Svc  JOSEPH'S 
purfuit— -'1  he  Prefident  tumbleih,  in  imitation  of  Mr. 
EDEN--- A  beautiful  companion  between  Sir  JOSEPH 
and  TAMERLANF,  a  butterfly  and  BAjAZET---Sir  JO 
SEPH  again  tumbleth— Sir  JOSEPH'S  hat  timibleth  with 
him-— Sir  JOSEPH  rifeth  and  boweth---he  is  gazed  at  by 
a  countryman---hc  dartcth  through  a  hedge  in  ptirfuit  ot 
the  EMPEROR,  and  tumbleth  into  a  lane— -he  getteth  up 
fpeedily,  and  putteth  a  oucftion  to  HOB— Hosanfwercth 
not,  but  pitieth  him---bir  JOSFPH  obtaineth  a  feconci 
view  of  the  EMPEROR-.-purfueth  his  Majefly  into  a 
garden---overfeiteth  the  gardener---trampleth  on  rare 
flowers-- -breaketh  many  bell-glafles— -overturncth  the 
fcarecrow- --P£TER  praifeth  the  fcarecrow---Sir  JO 
SEPH  overfetteth  a  hive  of  bees---!  he  bees  (urpi  ifed— 
they  attempt  a  revenge,  but  fucceed  not,  on  account  of 
the  hard  and  rough  materials  of  Sir  JOSEPH'S  headpiece 
— The  gardener,  quitting  his  horizontal  pofition,  pir- 
fuethSir  JOSEPH— -Sir  JOSEPH  purfueth  the  EMPEROR, 
and  the  EMPEROR  flies  away— The  gardener  collareth 
82  Sir 


ARGUMEN  T. 

Sir  JOSEPH,  and  expoftulafeth— Sir  JOSEPH heedeth  not 
the  gardener's  complaint,  being  deep  in  forrow  for  the 
lofs  of  the  EMPEROR— -The  gardener  quitteth  his  gripe 
in  Sir  JOSEPH,  and  putteth  him  down  for  a  lunatic- --the 
gardener  execrateth  Sir  JOSEPH'S  Keeper,  and  falleth 
into  a  panic-— flieth  off  unceremoniously,  and  leaveththe 
in  the  fituation  ot  a  celebrated  Prophet* 


PRO- 


(    5    ) 


P  R  O  E  M  I  U  M, 


PETRUS    LOQUITUR. 

OTNCE  Members,  loft  to  manners,  growl; 
^  Call  poor  Sir  Jos  tpHafs,  and  owl ; 
Nav,  oft  with  coarfer  epithet*  rerile ; 

1'hough  pitying  mucn  his  pigmy  merit* 

Let  me  (hfuUy  a  Chriftian  fpirit, 
And  try  to  lift  a  lame  dog  o'er  a  ftylc. 

Thoueh  not,  like  EKSKINE,  in  the  law  a  giant, 
I  muff  take  up  the  cudgels  for  my  client. 

Know  fy  (hffe  prcfents,  then,  ye  noify  crew, 
Who  at  his  bluming  honours  *  look  To  blue, 

That  though  Sir  JOSEPH  is  not  deep-difcerning  j, 
And  though,  as  all  the  world  well  knows, 
A  nutfhell  might  with  perfect  eafe  inclofe 

Three  quarters  of  his  fenfe,  and  ail  his  learning; 
Whofe  mode  ft  wifdom,  therefore  never  aims 
To  find  the  longitude,  or  burn  the  Thames ; 

Yet,  as  to  thines  he  fets  himfelf  about, 
With  tooth  ana  nail,  like  Hercules^  fo  flout, 

He  labours  for  his  wifli,  no  matter  what.— 
I  can't  fay  that  Sir  JOSEPH  lions  kills; 
Hugs  giants,  or  the  blood  of  hydras  fpills  5 

Hut  then  moft  manfully  he  cuts  a  bat ; 

*  EJufting  boneurs — The  author  undoubtedly  means  the  epithet 

••/  to   be  underlined   as  fynonymous  with  b'ocm:n%f  and  not  in  ft 

.il  fcnff.  God  forbid  that  the  friend  of  Sir  JoCcpli  ihould  mean 

I,-  ' 

Eats 


6  PROEMIUM. 

Eats  toads,  or  tough,  or  tender,  old,  or  young. 
As  in  the  fweeteft  ftrains  the  Mufe  hath  fung;* 
fit  with  the  hugheft  Hottentot  to  cope, 
Who  dines  on  raw  flefh-  at  the  Cape  of  Hope, 

Blejt  rn  a  phi'z,  he  bids  the  Members  .tremble  ! 

To  deathlike  filence  turns  the  direft  din ; 
And  where  fo  many  favages  alTemble, 

Like  hounds  they  want  a  proper  Whipper-inr 

Dare  Members  fleep,f  a  fet  of  fnoring  Goths,. 
Whilft  Blagden  reads  a  chapter  upon  moths  ?" 

Down  goes  the  hammer,   cloth'd  with  JOVE'S  own 

thunder ! 

Up  fpring  the  fnorers,  half  without  their  wigs ; 
Old  greybeards  grave,  and  pretty  fmock-fac'd  prigs, 

With  ell-wide  jaws  difplaying  ligns  of  wonder.- 

Lo !  perfeverance  is  the  foul  of  a&ion ! 
And  courage,  proper  to  oppofe  a  fa&iori ; 
Therefore  he  fits  with  wonderful  propriety," 
The  MONRO  of  a  mad  Society  : 
Arid  that  he  is  both  brave  and  perfevering, 
Witnefs  the  following  ftory  well  worth  hearing. 

*  See  Peter's  Prophecy.  ,- 

•}•  Frequently,  indeed,  are  the  Members  fent  to  the  land  of  fhadows 
by  the  Sociery's  fomniferpus  papers  ;  aflifted  in  a  great  meafure  in  their 
voyage  by  the  Dodor's  drowfy  manner  of  communicating  the  contents. 


SIR 


(    7    ) 

SIR    JOSEPH    BANKS 

AND    THE 

EMPEROR  OF  MOROCCO, 


A  PRESIDENT,  in  butterflies  profound, 
Of  whom  all  Infe&mongen  fing  the  praiies, 
Went  on  a  day  to  hunt  this  game  renown'u, 

On  vi'lcts,  dunghills,  nettletops,  and  dailies ! 
But  firft  (fo  pious  is  Sir  Jofeph's  nature  !) 
He  thus  addrefs'd  the  butterfly's  Creator. 

THE   VIRTUOSO'S    PRAYER. 

IjD  THOU,  whofe  wifdom  plann'd  the  ikies, 
And  form'd  the  wings  of  butterflies, 

Attend  my  humble  prav'r  ! 
"Like  Egypt,  as  in  days  of  yore, 
Let  earth  with  flies  be  <x>ver'd  o'er, 

And  darken'd  all  the  air. 

This,  Lord,  would  be  the  beft  of  news : 
Then  might  thy  fervant  pick  and  choofe 
!    For  fuch  a  glorious  heap  : 
Forth  to  the  world  I'd  boldly  rufh, 
Put  all  Mufxums  to  the  bluih, 
And  hold  them  all  dog  cheap. 

Pharaoh  had  not  one  grain  of  tafte ; 
tThe  flies  on  him  were  thrown  to  wafte, 

Nay, 


8  SIR    JOSEPH    BANKS    AND.  THE 

Nay,  met  with  ftrong  objection: 
But  had  thy  fervant,  Lord,  been  there^ 
I  fhould  have  made,  <5r  much  I  err, 

A  wonderful  collection ! 

O  Lord !  if  not  my  mem'ry  fails, 
Thou  once  didft  rain  on  people  quaili : 

Again  the  world  furprife; 
And  'ftead  of  fuch  a  trifling  bird, 
Rain  on  thy  fervant  JOSEPH,  Lord, 

Show'rs  of  rare  butterflies  ! 

Since  monfters  are  my  great  delight, 
With  monfters  charm  thy  fervant's  fight. 

Turn  feathers  into  hair : 
Make  legs  where  legs  were  never  feen, 
And  eyes,  no  bigger  than  a  pin, 

As  broad  as  faucers  ftare. 

The  reptiles  that  are  born  with  claws, 
Oh  !  let  thy  pow'r  fupply  with  paws, 

Adorn 'd  with  human  nails ; 
In  value  more  to  make  them  rife, 
Tranfplant  from  all  their  heads,  their  eyes, 

And  place  them  in  their  tails. 

And  if  thou  wifely  wouldft  contrive 
To  make  me  butterflies  alive, 

To  fly  without  a  head ; 
To  fkim  the  hedges  and  the  fields, 
Nay,  eat  the  meat. thy  bounty  yields ; 

Suck  wonders  were  indeed  ! 

Blagden  fhould  puff  them  at  our  meeting ; 

Members  would  prefs  around  me,  greeting ; 
The  Journals  (well  with  thanks ; 

And  more  to  magnify  their  fame, 

Thofe  headlefs  flies  mould  have  a  name— 
My  name— -SiR  JOSEPH  BANKS  !" 


THU 


£MP£JiOR    OF    MOROCCO. 


THUS  having  finifhVl,  forth  Sir  JO«PH  hies, 

e  in  his  heart,  and  cables  in  his  eyes ! 
lull  like  a  pointer,  quart'ripg  well  bis  ground, 
He  nimbly  trots  rhe  field  around  ! 
At  length,  to  Weft  his  hu.itin^  amhnlation, 
Up  role  a  native  of  the  flutr'ung  nation. 
'Broad  ftar'd  Sir  JOSEPH,  as  if  firuck  by  thunder, 
<For  much,  indeed,  are  eyes  enhrg'd  by  wonder) 
When  from  a  dab  of  dung,  orj.rtffuch  thing, 
An  KMP'ROR  OF  MOROCCO  rear'd  his  wing! 

Not  Arxliimefles,  'tis  my  firm  belief, 
Morebleft,  cry'd  "Eureka,  I've  nabb'd  the  thief  L" 
Nor  hunters,  when  a  hare,  to  fliun  foul  play. 
Steals. from  his  feat  fo  fly,  cry  "  Stole  away  !" 

(tale  old  nymphs,  by  raging  virtue  fa-ay 'cl, 
Roar  on  a  frail-one,  "  Kill  the  wicked  jade'!" 
Than  roar'd  Sir  JOSEPH  on  the  Verdant  fod, 
**  MOROCCO'S  EMP'ROR,  by  the  living  God!" 

Not  with  more  joy,  nor  rapture-fpeaking  look, 
The  little gamefome  PICCADILLY  DUKE 

s  a  nice  TIT,  treili  bunch'd  upon  the  town; 
\vltli  more  pleafure  Cupid's  truftv  crimp, 
By  mouths  of  vulgar  people  chriilen'o!  pimfa 
Stares  on  his  honourable  fee,  a  crown ; 

Nor  King^-place  nymphs,  on  greenhorns  In  their  powV ; 

Who  (fliamelcfs  rafcals,  wanting  not  a  wife) 
Hire  love,  like  hackney  -coaches,  by  the  hour, 

Damning  the  love  fo  true  that  lafts  for  life; 
Xor  witbcr'd  WINDSOR  on  the  funplq  maid, 
.1  fcenes  of  niral  innocence  betray 'd  ; 

Forc'd  todifpofeof  NATURE'S  fwecteft  cha: 
DoomM  for  a  meal  to  fink  a  beauteous  wreck ; 
To  lend  to  man  flie  loathes,  her  lip,  her  neck, 

,\  ml,  weeping,  act  the  wantoji  in  hi$  arms ; 

VOL.  II.  C  Tlfc* 


IO  SIR    JOSEPH    BANKS    AND    THE 

Than  did  the  doughty  Hero  of  my  fong, 
Survey  the  EMP'ROR^S  he  rriov'df  along. 

Not  with  more  glee  a  hen-peck'd  hufband  fpies 
Death  {hutting  up  his  wife's  two  cat-like  eyes, 

Accuftom'd  on  him  oft  and  fierce  to  roll ; 
•Juft  like  a  galley  flave,  poor.- fellow,  treated, 
Or  thofe  poor  Britons  at  Calcutta  fweated, 

Stuff 'd  in  the  old  Black  Hole  ; 

And  yet,  a  neater  fimile  to  ufe, 

Not  with  more  true  delight  a  lover  views 

The  blufhing  orient  leading  on  the  day 
That  gives  a  bloom i  ng  partner  to  his  arms, 
In  virtues  rich,  and  rich  in  youthful  'charm*, 

To  bid  the  hours  with  rapture  glide  away: 

Sad  anxious  fwain,  who  now  in  bed,  now  out, 
Toft  like  the  lea,  with  thundering  thoughts,  about; 

Curfing  with  hearty  pray'rs  the  lingering  night; 
Now  trying  hard  to  fleep  away  the  time ; 
Now  flaring  on  the  dark,  like  bards  for  rhyme, 

To  catch  the  fmalieft  happy  glimie  of  light ; 
Afraid  that  frolic  Phoebus  means  foul  play, 
And,  bent  to  fpite  him,  lie  a-bed  all  day  ; 

And,  fond  fide,  not  of  rapture  fuller, 

Thurlow,  the  Seal  and  Royal  Conscience  keeper, 
Sees  his  prime  fav'rite,  Mifter  Juftice  Buller, 

High  thron'd  in  Chancery,  grieve  the  poor  Sir  Pepper, 
Than  did  the  Prefident  fo  keen  efpy 
The  butterfly  ! 

Lightly  with  winnowing  wing,  amid  the  land, 
His  MOORISH  MAJESTY  in  circles  flew  ! 

With  fturdy  ftriding  legs,  and  outftretch'd  hand, 
The  Virtuofo  did  his  prey  purfue. 

He  ftrikes — he  mifles — ftrikes  again — he  grins, 

And  fees  in  thought  the  monarch  fix'd  with  pins; 

Sees  him  on  paper  giving  up  the  ghoft, 

Nail'd  like  a  hawk  or  martyr  to  a  poft. 

4  Ofr 


TKROR    OF    MOROCCO.  H 

Oft  fell  Sir  JOSEPH  on  the  flipp'ry  plain, 
L\ks  patriot  EDEN  —  fell  to  rile  again; 
The  EMP'ROR,  finiling,  iuorted  on  before. 

Like  Phoebus  courting  Daphne  was  the  chace; 

But  not  fo  was  the  meaning  of  the  race  ; 
Sir  JOSEPH  ran  to  kill,  not  kifs  the  MOOR  ; 

To  hold  him  pris'ncr  in  a  glafs  for  fhow, 

Like  Tamerlane  (redoubtable  his  rage) 
Wlio  kept  poor  Bajazet,  his  vanquifli'd  foe, 

Juft  like  an  owl  or  magpye  in  a  cage. 


Again  to  earth  Sir  [OSBPH  fell  fo 

Flat  as  the  flatreft  of  the  flounder  race  ! 
Down  with  Sir  JOSEPH  dropp'd  hii  three-cock'd  hat, 

Mod  nobly  (baring  in  his  friend's  difgrace. 
Again  he  fprines,  with  hope  and  ardour  pale, 
And  blowing  like  the  nfh  baptiz'd  a  whale  ; 

Darting  his  arms  now  here,  now  there,  fo  wild, 
With  all  the  eager  raptures  of  a  child, 
Who  with  broad  anxious  eye  a  bauble  views, 
And,  capering  legs  and  hands,  the  toy  purfues. 

A  Countryman,  who,  from  a  lane, 

Had  mark  'd  Sir  JOSEPH,  running,  tumbling,  fweatmg, 
Stretching  his  hands  and  arms,  like  one  in  fane, 

And  with  thofe  arms  the  air  around  him  beating, 
To  no  particular  opinion  leaning, 
Of  fuch  manoeuvre  could  not  guefs  the  meaning. 

At  length  the  Prefident,  all  foam  and  muck, 

Quite  out  of  breath,  and  out  of  luck, 

Purfu'd  the  flying  Monarch  to  the  place 

Where  tfood  this  Countryman,  with  marv'ling  face, 

Now  through  the  hedge,  exaftly  like  a  horfe, 
Wild  plung'd  the  Prefident  with  all  his  force, 

His  brow  in  fweat,  his  foul  in  perturbation  ; 
MimHefs  of  trees,  and  bu  flies,  and  the  brambles, 
Head  over  heels  into  the  lane  he  fcrambles, 

Where  HOB  ftood  loft  in  wide  mouth'd  fpeculation! 

C  2.  **  Speak/' 


^3-  SIR    JOSEPH    BANKS    AND    T'KE 

*  Speak,"  roar'd  the  Prefident,  "  this  inftant— faf , 
Haft  feen,  haft  feen,  my  lad,  this  way, 
;  TheEMp'ROR  OF  MOROCCO  pafs?" — 
HOB  to  the  infecVhunter  nought  reply 'd, 
But  Ihook  his  head,  and  fvmpathifmor  figh'd, 

"  Alas! 

"  Poor  gentleman,  I'm  forry  for  ye  j 
"*'  And  pity  much  your  upper ftory  /" 

Xo !  down  the  lane  alert  theEMp'ROR  flew, 

And  ftruck  once  more  Sir  JOSEPH'S  hawk-like  vieWj 

And  now  he  mounted  o'er  a  garden  wall ! 
Jn  rulh'd  SIR  JOSEPH  at  the  garden  door, 
Knock'd  down  the  Card  'ner — what  could  mando  more?—- 

And  left  him,  as  he  chofe,  to  rife  or  fprawL 

O'er  pcerlefs  hyacinths  our  hero  rufh'd  ; 
Through  tulips  and  anemonies  pufti'd, 

Breaking  a  hundred  necks  at  ev'ry  fpring  r 
On  bright  carnations,  blufhing  on  their  banks, 
With,  defp'rate  hoof  he  trod,  and  mow'd  down  ranjfe, 

Such  vaft  ambition  urg'd  to  feize  the  King ! 

Bell  glafles,  all  fo  thick,  were  tumbled  o'er ; 
And,   lo !  the  cries,  fo  ftirill,  of  many  a  fcore, 
.     A  fad  and  fatal  ftroke  proclaim 'd  ; 
The  fcarecrow,  all  fo  red,  was  overturn 'd; 
His  vanim'd  hat,  and  wig,  and  head,  he  mourned, 
And  much,  indeed,  the  man  of  ftraw  was  maini'd  ! 

Juft  guardian  of  the  facred  fpot, 

With  face  (b  fierce,  and  pointed  gun,        N 

Who  threaten'd  all  the  birds  with  fhot ; 
To  kill  of  fparrows  ev'ry  mother's  fon  : 

Fierce  as  thofe  fcarlet  minifters  of  fate, 

The  warlike  guardians  of  St.  James's  Gate  I 

Yet,  not  content  with  feats  like  thefe, 

He  tumbled  o'er  a  hive  of  bees ; 

Out  rufh'd  the  hoft,  and  wonder'd  from  their  fouls, 

Wiiat  dev'l  dar'd  dam  their  houfe  about  their  polls. 

Like 


EMPEROR    OF    MOROCCO. 

Lfke.  the  erand  Lou  is,*  whofe  fierce  heart  was  fuchr 
As  made  him  like  a  football  kick  the  Dutch  ! 

But  foon  the  fmall,  heroic,  injur'd  nation 
Defcry'd  the  author  of  their  obligation ; 

And,  to  rejwy  it,  round  him  rufliM  the  fwarm : 
Prodigious  was  the  h  iz  "about  his  ears ! 
With  all  their  venom  did  they  pufli  their  fpears ; 

But,  lo  !  thf.  him  not  one  grain  of  harm  I 

Yet  did  no  god  notgodiing  intervene, 
By  way  of  force  u  ! 


The  happy  head  their  pointed  fpears  defy'd, 

Strong,  like  old  Homer's  (hit-Ms,  in  tough  bull  hide,. 

And  brafs  weH-temperM,  to  fupport  the  (hock  ! 
The  bees -their  diftpj  jointed  vengeance  mourn'd, 
And  from  their  fierce  attack,  futivni'd,  return'd, 

Believing  they  had  ftomVd  a  barber's  block. 

What  was  thonghr  der.rh  nnd  trrturcs  l>y  the  clan,. 
Was  only  ue  great  r, 

round  bi^  Aj^x  rag'd  the  Tro;:ui  hoft, 
.niglu  as  well,  iiulcal,  have  drubb'd  a  pofl. 

The  Gard'ner  now  for  juft  revenge  up  fprung, 
O'erwlielnyd  with  wonderment  jaid  clung, 

And  fiercely  in  his  turn  purfuM  the  Knight ! 
From  bed  to  bed,  full  tilt  the  champions  mc'd, 
This  chas'd  the  ANIGHT,   the  KMGHT  the 
chas'd, 

Who  fcal'd  the  walls,  ala&l  and  vanidi'd  out  of  figkt ; 
To  find  the.  Emprefs,  p'rhaps,  and  tell  her  GRACE 

The  merry  hiltory  ot  the  chafe. 

At  length  the  Gard'ner,  fwell'd  with  rage  and  dolour 
Overtaking,  grafps  Sir  JOSEPH  by  the  collar, 

*  Louis  XIV. 


J4  SIR  JOSEPH  BANKS  AND  THE 

And  bleft  with  fav'rite  oaths,  abundance  fliow'rs  : 
<4  Villain,"  he  cry'd,  44  beyond  example  ! 
44  Juft  like  a  cnrt-horfe  on  my  beds  to  trample! 

44  Mdre  than  your  foul  is  worth,  to  kill  my  flow'rs  ! 
*4  See  how  your  two  vile  hoofs  have  made  a  wreck— 
*4  Look,  rafcal,  at  each  beauty's  broken  neck  ! 

Mindlefs  of  humbled  flow'rs,  fo  freely  kill'd, 

Although  fuperior  to  his  foul  declar'd, 
And  vegetable  biood  profufely  fpill'd, 

Superior,  too,  to  al)  reward ; 
.  Mindlefs  of  all  the  Gard'ner's  plaintive  drains, 
The  EMP'ROR'S  form  monopoliz'd  his  brains. 

At  length  he  fpoke,  in  fad  defpairing  tones, 

41  Gone !  by  the  God  that  made  me  ! — D-mn  his  bones ! 

44  O  Lord  !  no  difappoinrment  mine  furpafles ! 

*•  Poh  !  what  are  paltry  flowers  and  broken  glafles, 

44  A  tumbled  fcarecrow,  bees,  the  idle  whim  ? 

44  Zounds !  what  a  fet  of  mifcreants  to  him  ! 

4t  Gone  is  my  foul's  defire,  for  ever  gone !" 
44  Who's  gone  ?  the  Gard'ner  ftrait  reply'd  •, 
*4  The  EMP'ROR,  Sir,"  with  tears,  Sir  JOSEPH  cry'd.; 

"•  The  EMP'ROR  OF  MOROCCO — thought  my  own-', 
44  To  unknown  fields  behold  the  Monarch  fly  ! 
44  Zounds  !  not  to  catch  him,  what  an  afs  was  I  \" 

His  eyes  the  Gard'ner,  full  of  horror,  ftretch'd, 
.  And  then  a  groan,  a  monftrous groan  he  fetch'd. 

Contemplating  around  his  ruin'd  wares  ; 
And  now  he  let  Sir  JOSE  PR'S  collar  go; 
And  now  he  bray'd  aioud  with  bittereft  woe, 

44  Mad,  madder  than  the  maddeftof  March  hares! 

"  A  p-x  confound  the  fellow's  Bedlam  rigs  ! 
44  Oh  !  he  hath  done  the  work  of  fifty  pigs ! 
44  The  devil  take  his  keeper,  a  damn'd  goofe, 
44  For  letting  his  wild  beaft  get  loofe  I" 

Bat  now  the  Gard'ner,  terrified,  began 
To  think  himfelf  too  near  a  man 

In 


EMPEROR    OF    MOROCCO.  15 

In  fo  PEG-NICHOLSON  a  fituation; 
And,  happy  from  a  madman  to  efcape, 
He  left  him  without  bow,  or  nod,  or  fcrapc, 

Like  JEREMIAH  'midft  his  Lamentation. 

Such  is  the  tale — if  readers  figh  for  more, 
Sir  JOSEPH'S  wallet  holdeth  many  a  fcore. 


A  POE- 


POETICAL    £PISTLB 

TO  A 

[    FALLING    MINISTER. 

' 

ALIO 

AN    IMITATION 

or  THB 
TWELTH   ODE   OF  HORACE, 


Hie 


Huic  tn  Rjin JfM  caycto i 


(     '9    •) 

A 

A    POETICAL     EPISTLE 

TO    A 

FALLING      MINISTER. 


TM.IXD  to  an  artful  BOY'S  infiHi  •:     vilrs, 

•*-*  Why  reft*  the  Genius  of  the  QTKIN  OF  IILES?    ; 

Whilfl  LIBERTY  in  irons  founds  th'  u.irm, 

Why  hangs  fufpence  0:1  VIRTUE'S  coward  arm? 

Whilft  TYRANNY  prepares  her  jails  ami  thongs, 

Why  deeps  the  f\vord  of  Ji-strci:  o'er  our  wron^ 

Oh!  mc-inly  founding  on  a  Father's  fame, 

To  Britain's  higheft  feat  a  daring  claim ; 

Oil !  if  thy  race  one  blulli  could  everboaft, 

And  that  lorn  fign  of  Virtue  be  not  loft ; 

Now  on  thy  viia^e  let  the  ftranger  burn, 

And  glow  for  deeds  that  bid  an  empire  mourn. 

:i  from.a  garret  by  the  ROYAL  Si 
Warm'd  like  the  viper  by  his  friendly  fire, 
hath  thy  aratitude'y«^//mr/v  done? 
I-'ix'd,  like  the  fnake,  thy  fang  upon  the  Son  * 

Yes — thou  moft  grateful  youth,  thy  hoftile  art, 

lodg'd  a  pois'nous  (haft  in  BRITAIN'S  heart ! 
Thy  arm  hath  dragg'd  the  column  to  the  ground, 
The  fac'red  wonder  of  the  realms  around  ! 
To  nmke  fnug  comfortable  habitations 
I'Vr  riiec  and  all  thrpititul  relations. 

Ba  barian* 


£0  A    POETICAL    EPISTLE 

Barbarian-like — how  like  thofe  fons  of  fpoil, 
Whofe  impious  hands  on  hallow'd  ftrufture's  toil— • 
Bafe  throng,  that  through  PALMYRA'S  Temple  digs,, 
To  form  a  lodging  for  themfelves  and  pi^s ! 

Oh  !  if  Ambition  prompts  thy  foaring  foul 
To  live  the  theme  of  future  times  with  ROLLE ; 
Thrice  happy  Youth,  like  his  fhall  fliine  thy  name, 
Who  gave  th'  Ephefian  wonder  to  the  flame  ! 

Sick  at  the  name  of  R  (to  thee  though  dear) 

'The  name  abhorr'd  by  HONOUR'S  fhrinking  ear, 
I  draw  reluctant  from  thy  venal  throng, 
And  give  it  mention,  though  it  blafts  my  fong. 

How  couldft  thou  bid  that  ROLLE,  defpis'd  by  all, 

On  helplefs  beauty  like  a  maftiff  fall ; 

Then  meanly  to  correel  the  brute  pretend, 

.And claim  the  merit  of  the  *  FAIR-ONE'S  Friend? 

Art  thou  the  YOUTH   on  whom  the  Virtues  fmile? 
The  boafted  Saviour  of  cair  finking  Ifle! 
O'erfwch,  OBLIVION,  be  thy  wing  difplay'd  ! 
Oh  !  waft  them  from  the  gibbet  to  thy  fhade  ! 

Yet  what  expert  from  tlee,  whofe  icy  breaft 
A  ftranger  to  their  charm,  the  LOVE-S  detcft? — 
Thee^  o'er  whofe  heart  their  fafcinating  pow'r 
Ne'er  knew  the  triumph  of  one  ibfteri'd  hour? 
To  give  thy  flinty  foul  the  tender  figh, 
Vain  is  the  radiance  of  the  brighteft  eye ! 
In  vain,  for  thee,  of  beauty  blooms  the  rofe  : 
In  vain  the  fwelling  bofom  fpreads  its  fnows — 
,A  Jofepli  thou,  againft  the  fex  to  ftrive ; 
Dead  to  thofe  charms  that  keep  the  world  alive'! 

In  vain  thy  malice  pou-rS  its  frothy  tide ; 

In  vain,  -the"v.irtues  of  thy  PRINCE  to  hide, 

*  A  moft  wanton  and   illiberal  attack  made   by  this  man  on  Mrt. 
jF— h-- — t,  in  the  Houfe  of  Commoas,  exceeds  all  precedent, 

Thoo 


TO    A    FALLING    JrmSTttt. 

and  thy  imps,  to  dim  his  rifiog  my, 
Urge  clouds  on  clouds  to  thwart  the  golden  -day  ! 
Mad  toil  !  I  fee  his  O*B  fnperior  pa&, 
That  finiles  triumplianr  on  the  fable  mafs. 

O  PITT  !  a  Sifter  Kingdom  damns  thy  deeds, 

Ami  pities  hapU-fs  Britain  as  fhe  bleeds. 

Hi  BERN!  A  (corns  each  meanly  trcach'rous  art 

Hatch'd  by  the  bafe  r-b-  -  n  of  thy  heart, 

That  crawls  an  Afpic  bloated  black  with  fate, 

To  pour  a  dire  contagion  through  the  State. 

Stfr,  with  an  honeft  voice,  her  PRINCE  approve^ 

And  nobly  trufts  the  virtues  that  (he  loves  ; 
Detefts  a  hangman's  unremitting  toil 
To  break  upon  (he  wheel  a  happy  Ifle  ; 
Who  yet,  to  pud  the  guilt  ami  folly  further, 
Suborns  Addrcfles  to  applaud  the  murther  ! 

Who  but  mull  laugh  to  fee  thy  boaflcd  friends, 
On  whofe  poor  rotten  trunks  thy  all  depends  1 
See  BUTE'S  mean  parafite,  thy  fpaniel,  creep, 
Whofe  Argus'  eyes  of  av'rice  never  flcep  ; 
A  clofe  State-leech,  who,  iHcking  to  the  nation, 
As  adders  deaf  to  Honour's  execration, 
Sucks  from  its  throat  the  blood  by  i  day, 

Nor,  till  the  State  expires,  will  drop  nway. 

Yet  fee  another  FIEKD,  with  fcow  ling  eye, 

•  draws  from  NATURE'S  ibul  her  deeped  figh  ; 
m'd  her  hand  Hiould  uftierinto  light 

•ii<l  whelni  naffing  night  ! 


Loft  by  his  arts,  behold  the  beauteous  MAID,* 
Whom  INNOCENCE  herfelf  could  ne'er  upbraid, 
Sunk  a  pale  victim  to  the  gaping  tomb  ; 
Whihl  all  but  ke  with  griet  furvey'd  her  doom, 

"  THc  melancholy  circumftanct  illudcd  to  Ucrc>  the  family  of  Dr. 
Lynch,  of  Canterbury,  caa  fccft  «xj  lain. 

VOL.  1  7  D  Whofe 


*V  A    FOETICAL    SPISTL2 

Whofe  heart  difdain'd  to  feel— whofe  eye  feverc, 
Compaflion  never  melted  with  a  tear  ! 

Yet,  left  in  filence  to  himfelf  alone, 

Aghaft  he  heaves  the  confcience-wounded  groan  ! 

At  ev'ry  found  how  horror  heaves  the  figh  ! 

How  dangers  thicken  on  his  flraii.iing  eye ! 

He  fees  her  Phantom,  form'd  by  treach'rous  Love, 

Droop  in  the  grot,  and  pine  amid  the  grove  : 

He  marks  her  mien  of  woe,  her  cheek  fo  pale, 

And  trembles  lat  her  flirieks  that  pierce  the  gale  ! 

At  nighf  s  deep  noon  what  fears  his  foul  invade  ! 
How  wild  he  fforts  amidft  the  fpe&er'd  fhade  ! 
And  dreading  ev'ry  hopelefs  hour  the  laft, 
He  hears  the  call  of  DEATH  in  ev'ry  blaft  ! 

-Such  are  thy  Colleagues,*  O  tltou  patriot  boy  ! 
Whole  heads  and  hearts  thy  virtues  dare  employ  ; 
Who  crouching  at  thy  heels,  like  bloodhounds  wait 
To.  fatten  on  the  vitals  of  the  State! 
Such  are  the  mifcreants  who  would  rule  the  realm  1 
Such  the  black  pirates  that  would  feize  the  helm ! 

Had  not  I  known  thee,  ,  the  Mufe  had  fworn, 

That,  bleft  to  fee  the  State  to  atoms  torn, 

Hell  with  her  hoft  had  'drawn  each  damned  plan, 

And  for  the  murder  nuts Jd  thy  dark  Divan. 

Speak— -hath  thy  heart,  with  mad  ambition  fird, 

Like  _CROM  WELL'S,  hot  for  powY,  to  thrones  a fpir'd? 

Then  may  that  young,  old  traitorous  bofom  feel 

The  rapid  vengeance  of-  fome  virtuous  fteel ! 

Or  what,  to  bofoms  not  quite  flint,  is  worfe, 

May  Heav'n  with  hoary  age  a  Rebel  curfe; 

Prom  fweet  fociety  behold  him  torn, 

Condemned,  like  CAI'N,  to  walk  the  world  forlorn! 

*  We  muft  not  forget,  however,  Meflieurs  their  Graces  of  R.  and 
CM'  Harry  D.,  cum  pluriniis  atiis,  though  'they  have  net  the-  honour  of 
being  mentioned  in  our  poetical  caknuar, 

2  Thus 


I'lllj     All    .      ill     vain    A     ttiiu  vnv.    uiv-innjj    »i 

To  plant  a  fcorpion's  fting  in  ev'ry  limr. 

PRUDENCE  gently  pull'd  the  Poet's  ear, 
And  thus  the  daughter  of  the  HLUE-EY'D  MAID,* 
In  Klatt'ry's  foothing  founds,  divinely  faid, 

44  O  PETER  !  eUleft-born  of  PHCEBUS,  hear  — 

'•  \Vhofe  vcrfe  could  ravifti  Kings,  relax  the  claw 
"  Of  that  gaunt,  hungry  favage,  chriften'd  LAW  — 
44  Indeed  thou  wanteft  worldly  wifdom,  I*ETER, 
44  To  mix  a  little  oft'ner  with  thy  metre. 
44  Lo!  if  thine  eye  DAMK.  FORTUNE'S  fmile-purfue^ 
4*  To  oily  adulation  prompt  the  Muss. 

k>  (jive  for  the  future  all  thy  rhymes  to  praife; 

"  Strike  to  the  glorious  I'ITI*  thy  founding  lyre: 
44  Thy  head  may  then  be  crown'd  with  WAR  TON'S  bayi, 

:J  nuittoii  twirl  with  fpirit  at  the  fire." 
**  PRTJDKNCE/'  quoth  Ir  "indeed  —  indeed  I  can't: 
44  Don't  afit  me  to  nirn.rogurand  fycophaiit  !" 

Now  with  a  finite,  firft  coufin  to  a  ^riut 

DAME  PE.UDENCE  anfwer'd,  bridling  up  her  chin  — 

4*  Sweet,  harmlefs,  pretty,  confcicntious  pigeon  1 
44  Ah  !  PETBR,  well  I  ween  thou  art  not  r: 
4;  Know  that  thoul't  die,  like  beggars,  in  a  ditch  ; 

44  Knew,  too,  that  hunger  is  oTno  religion. 

44  Sit  down,  an(f  make  a  Horace  imitation, 
44  Like  POPE  ;  and  let  the  ftanza  glow 
44  \Vi_hnraife  of  Mtfltturs  PITT  and  Co. 

"  The  prelent  worthy  Rulers  of  the  Nation." 

With  purs  u-up,   pmiiauii  u* 


Thus  fpoke  DAME  PRUDENCE  ta  the  BARD  of  Whim; 

Minerva, 

D  &  Who 


24  A    POETICAL    EPISTLE 

Who,  with  politenefs  feldom  running  o'er, 
For  inspiration  fcratch'd  his  tuneful  fconce, 
Topleafe  DAME  ORACLE,  for  once — 

A  DAME,  fome  fay,  he  never  law  before* 


IMITATION      OF      HORACE, 

(ODE    XII.— BOOK    I.) 
ON  MESSIEURS    PITT    AND    CO. 


MUSE,  having  dropp'd  Sir  JOSEPH  and  the  KING, 
"What  fort  of  gentry  fhall  we  deign  to  fing  ? 

What  high  and  mighty  name,  that  all  adore  ? 
What  rniriifterial  wight  that  bribes  each  Ci.r, 
Wolf-like  to  howl  for  homage  to  KING  PITT, 

And  fet  each  fmoky  alehoufe  in  a  roar  ; 
That  fends  to  counties,  borough- towns,  his  crimps, 
Alias  his  vote-feducing  pimps, 

To  bribe  the  mob  with  brandy,  beer,  and  fong, 
To  put  their  greafy  fifts  to  Court  Addrefles, 
Full  of  profeflions  kind,  and  fweet  carefles, 
>     And  with  a  fiddle  lead  the  logs  along  ? 

Shall  DOR  N  FORD,  king  of  wine,  and  mum-,,  and  perry, 
Be  crown'd  with  lyric  bays,  with  Mailer  MERRY  ; 
Two  fages  who,  in  different  places  born, 
CHICK  LANE  and  BLACK-BOY  .ALLEY   did  adorn? 
Or,  Mule,  iuppofe  we  fing  KINO  PITT  nimfeif, 

'WHoTcfriveth,  jEHu-like,  the  CHURCH  and  STATE; 
And,   next  to  Royal  PITT,  we'll  fing  the  DAME, 
Of  open,  gen'rou?,  charitable  fame, 

Lamenting  fad  a.  MONARCH'S  haplefsfate; 

Who, 


T(T   A    FALLIXO    MINISTER.  2$ 

Who,  though  transfix 'd  by  Sorrow's  dart  fo  cnieJ, 
So  prudent,  numbers  each  bank-note  and  jewel  ? 

Nor  (hall  we  by  old  Bacchus  WEVMOUTH  pafs, 
A  jolly  fellow  o'er  his  glafs. 

Nor,  SCKWELLENBERG,  flialt  thou a  flirimp  appear, 
Whofe  palate  loves  a  dainty  di(h, 
Whofe  treth  in  combat  mine  with  flefh  and  fifli, 

Whofe  Strelkz  ftomach  holds  a  butt  of  beer ; 
Who  foou  (halt  keep  a  falefhop  for  good  places. 

For  which  fo  oft  the  people  fquabble, 
From  eaping  Cobblers  to  their  gaping  Graces, 

And  thus  provide  for  great  and  little  rabble. 

I'll  fing  how  calmly  C— -N  takes  the  bit, 
And  trots  fo  mildly  under  MASTER  PITT: 

And  TH w,  too,  who  none  but  PITT  could  tame, 

Who,  bleft  with  Matter  BILLY'S  fineft  faddie, 
No  longer  makes  our  brains  with  neighing  addle — 

No  longer  now  JOB'S  war-horfe  fnorting  flame  j 
But  tliat  flow  brute  whom  few  or  none  revere, 
Fam'd  for  his  fine  bafe  voice  and  length  of  ear. 

Yet  now  fo  gentle,  you  may  fmooth  his  nofe  ; 

Poor  CH-C-LLOR*  will  make  no  riot : 
Calm  in  his  flail  his  aged  limbs  repofe, 

And  pleas'd  he  rats  his  oats  and  hay  in  qujet  ! 

This  Pair,  fo  tame,  amid  the  courtier  throng, 
Shall  drag  their  Mafter  WILLI  A'JI'S  coach  along, 

And  raife  the  wonder  of  the  million  J 
Tuft  like  two  bull-dogs  in  a  country  town, 
Tint  gallop  in  their  harnefs  up  and  down, 

With  MONSIEUR  MONKET  for  poflillion. 

We'll  fing  the  Brothers  of  our  loving  Queen, 
.TV,  hearty  youths  as  e'er  were  feen  r 

*  The  pamc  of  the  horfc, 

D  3 


26  .      A    POETICAL    EPISTLE 

Who,  if  oncetry'd,  would  mine,  I  make  no  doubt: 
And  chiefly  he  who  merits  high  rewards, 
Who,  wriggling  to  the  Hanoverian  guards, 
"Keptthepoor  PRINCE  of  BRUNSWICK  out, 
Although  fo  brave  a  Prince,  and  fpilt  his  olood 
So  freely  for  the  King  of  England's  *  good. 

We'll  fmg,  too,  Mafter  ROLLE,  who,  fond  of  fame, 
High-daring,  from  the  land  of  dumplings  came, 

To  bear  the  MINISTER — to  be  his  afs— 
LikeConj'ror  BALAAM'S  reas'ning  hrufe, 
Thatcarry'd  BAAL-AM,  BALAK  to  falute, 

And  curie  the  Ifraelites,  alas ! 

And,  lo !  as  did  the  Lord — 

Who  op'd  the  mouth  of  BALAAM'S  beaft ; 
So  hath  our  Lord,  'Squire  PITT,  upon  my  word, 

Op'd  Mafter  ROLLE'S  to  give  the  houfe  a  feaft  ! 

'Yet,  rjangit!  DF.V'NSHIRE  is  by  ARAM|  beat— - 
A  circuniftance  that  wrings  the  Poet's  foul ; 

for  BALAAM'S  Jack-afs  made  a  fpeech  quite  neat, 
Which  never  yet  was  done  by  PITT'S  poor  R — . 

Orfhall  I  fing  old  CORNWALL'S  death, 
Or  fierce  Sir  Bu LLF  A CE,  \vhq  refign'd  his  breath 
With  brother  CORNWALL,  in  the  fe If- fame  year— » 

A  downright  bear ! 

Who  bade  a  MONARCH,  like  a  boy  at  fchool, 
Not^penjd  his  money  like  a  f-~  ? 
We  too  'might  fing  tlie  King  of  Swine, 
Sir  JOSEPH  peerlefs  in  the  fatt'ning  line. 

We  tco  may  BRUDENEIL  fing,  who,  forne  time  ilnce./ 
^Vdmir'd  and  lov'd,  ador'd  and  prais'd  his  PRINCE  j 

*  This  is  fcarccly  credible,  but  it  is  nevcrthclefs  true. — The  Prince 
«>f  Brurfwick's  genius  was  forced  to  yield  to  the  fupcrior  one  of  the 
Queen's  broiher. 

•j-  Balaam's  country  (catt 

Folio  w'd 


TO    A     PALLING.    lilNISTER. 

Follow'd  him,  fpamcl-like,  alx>ut  ; 
Swore  himfelf  black,  poor  fellow,  in  the  face,. 
That  he  would  rather  lofe  his  place 

Than  leave  him  —  vlevout 

'.i-  hen  it  tame  to  pafs  hU  HIGHNESS  try'd 
Tim  :  ,  TtTBR-iike)  deny'd  him! 


We'll  (ing  Lord  GALLOWAY,  a  nun  of  note, 
Who  turu'd  his  taylor,  much  enrag'd,  away, 

Becaufe  he  llitth'd  a  flar  upon  his  u>.u 
So  1'mall,  it  llarcely  threw  a  ray  : 

Yd  a  pl.iiwt  huge  to  flamev 

To  put  the  moon's  full  orb  to  Ihame  ; 

He  wanted  one  fo  large,  with  rays  fo  ihick, 
r  JOHN   DICK  ! 

Sir  JOHN,  who  got  his  ftarfo  bright  ami  itout, 

For  makiiig  fupcr-excelleut  /out  i/<»r.* 

Or,  INIufe,  fuppofe  we  fing  tlie  SP-KE»'S  wig, 

In  w  hi*  h,   'tis  fi.'ul,  a  world  of  wiftiom  lies; 
\\'!)ich  to  a  he:  ircely  worth  a  fig, 

Imfxmance  gives  that  greatly  doth  furprife, 
When  through  the  chaos  of  the  houfe  he  ba\vls 
For  ORDER,  trrat  oft  flies  St.  Stephen's  walls; 
Driv'n  by  a  hoft  ot  ;aid  liawks,  and  hums, 

And  blowing  uofes,  that  didradt  her  drums. 

For,  Mufc,  wecaj»*l  well  fing  poor  G—  —  LLE'S  head, 
Becaufe  it  wanteth  eyes  —  imperfect  creature  ! 

Again  —  ks  lining  happ'neth  to  be  lead  -- 
Such  are  the  whimficalities  of  Nature: 

And  thus  this  fpeaking  head-piece  is,  no  doubt, 

As  dark  within  as  cnttf  'tis  without  ! 

Vet  was  this  Youth  proclaim  M  a  pretty  fprig  ; 
A  very  promifing,  a  thriving  twig, 

s  honour  of  the  Star  was  rrnlly  conferred  on  him  by  the  EM- 
FRKSS  OF  RUSSIA  for  furni  thing  the  RiUuan  fleet,  in  tl»c  Mcdilcrra- 
Tio.ui,  with  the  abo\r  ..aufailure,  Cw  Jfc.vptu  their  cui. 

a  BiTifacrc  of  the  poor  Tu 

That 


ft8  A    POETICAL    EPISTLE 

That  by  his  parents  dear  was  fa  id  would  be, 

In  time,  a.  very  comely  tree ; 

And,  what  thofe  parents  dear  would  alfo  fuit, 

Produce  enormous  quantities  of  fruit, 

By  God's  good  grace,  and  much  good  looking  after- 

A  thought  that  now  convulfeth  us  with  laughter  ! 

Suppofe  we  chaunt  old  WILLIS  and  his  whip, 

At  which  the  human  hide  revolts ; 
.Who  bids,  like  grafshoppers,  his  pupils  (kip,    . 

And  breaks  mad  gentlemen  like  colts  ; 
Or  trains  them,  like  a  pointer,  to  his  hand  : 
And  fuch  the  mighty  Conjuror's  command, 
He,  by  the  magic  of  fticks,  ropes,  and  eyes, 
Commands  wild  FOLLY  to'be  tame  and  wife. 
Or  grant  we  throw  away  a  verfe  or  two 

Upon  the  BEDCHAMBER'S  moft  idle  IMPS; 
Thofe  Lords  of  gingerbread — a  gaudy  crew, 

Sticking  together  juft  like  focial  fhrimps ; 
Rcgardlefs  who  the  State-coach  drives, 
So  they  may  lead  good  merry,  lazy  lives ; 
Pleas'd  e'en  from  devils  to  receive  their  pay, 
So  they,  like  moths,  may  flutter  life  away  ! 

PITT  {halt  the  Houfe  of  Commons  rule, 
And  eke  of  poor  INCURABLES  the  fchool; 
And  pour  on  fuch  the  vengeance  of  his  fpleen 

As  meanly  think  of  HASTINGS  and  the  ! 

On  di'monds  PITT  and  Co.  fhali  largely  feaft, 
Knock  down  the  Nabobs,  and  exhauft  the  Eaft ! 

O  LADY !  whofe  great  wifdom  thinketh  fit 
To  fpread  thy  petticoat  o'er  WILLIAM  PITT  ! 
This  WILLIAM  PITT  and  Thou,  without  a  joke,. 
Will  turn  out  mod  extraordinary  folk  ! 

PITT  and  the  PETTICOAT  mail  rule  tog-ether, 

Each  with  the  other  vaftly  taken ; 
Make,  when  they  choofe,  or  fair  or  filthy  weather, 

And  cut  up  kingdoms  juft  like  bacon  I 


THUS 


TO    A    FALLIXG    MINISTER. 


THUS  having  finifli'd,  PRUDENCE,  witha  flare, 
Exclaim'd,  u  Hank  irony  !  thou  wicked  Poet." — 
little  Preibyterian  fair, 
i  know  it."— 

tioth  the  Dame  again,  with  lifted  eyes, 
his  ftut  id  world  be  wilt- 

!  had  die  PRINCE  his  proper  int'reft  fr'r, 
,  ii'.c  HrcEFHAj.vs  the  tamous,  kndt 
r>ER  on  his  back, 

44  He  might  have  ambled  prettily  along, 
"  And  very  rarely  felt  his  rider's  thong — 

ift  now  and  then  a  gende  fmack, 
"  T'  inform  his  royal  colt  what  BRING  rode  him, 
"  And  with  fuch  dignity  bcftrode  him. 

««  Yes — had  his  HIGHNESS  but  vouchdf'd  to  /loo 
;•«  With  Jifav'n-farn  PITT  he  might  have  eat  his 
f"  Joy'd  in  the  full  pcflcflion  of  his  wiH.es, 

I  with  liib  fervant  fliar'd  d^e  loaves  and  fiflies!** 


ODE   Xn.    LIB.  I.     AD  AUGUSTUM. 

« 

••»«•  «*t  kero*  hra  tW  acri 
Tibia  fumes  ctltbrarf)   Clio  ? 
Qitftn  Jcum  ?  cvjus  recinet  joeofa 


Aut  in  wn&rrfa  Hfliconis  t 

J  -i  i  f  u  per  Pindo,  geliJtve  m  Htfrto  ? 

k  • 


ifrquUl 

Jrtt 


JO  A    POETICAL    EPISTLE 

Arie  materna  rapidos  morantem 
Flumlnum  lapfus,  celerefque  ventcs, 
Blandum  &  auritas  fidibus  canoris. 
Ducere  quercus. 

Quid  prius  dicamfolitis  Parentis 
Laudibus  ?   qui  res  Jiominum  ac  deorum^ 
Qui  wavt  &  terras,  -vartifq.ue  mundum 
Temper  at  horis  ? 

Unde  nil  majus  generatur  ipfo, 
"Nee  viget  quldquam  Jimile  aut  fecundiim 
Proximos  illi  tamen  occupavit 
Pallas  honcres. 

Pr^eliis  audax  neque  ie  filclo 
Liber,   &  ftevis  in i mica  virgo 
Belluis  :  nee  te  metuende  certa^, 
Phoebe,  fagitta* 

Dicam  £?*  Alcelden  ;  piterofque  Led^. 
Hunc  eqids^  ilium  fuperare  pugnis 
Nolfilem  :  quorum  Jimul  alba  nautis 
Stella  reful/it. 

Deftmt  faxis  agitatus  humor : 
Concidunt  venti,  fugiuntque  nubes  ! 
~Et  minax9  quod  fee  valuere,  ponto 
Unda  recumbit. 

Romulum  poft  hos  prius,  an  quietuni 
Pompilt  regnum  memorem,  an  fuperbos 
Tarquini  fafces,  dubitoy  an,  Catonis 
Nobile  lethum. 

Rcgulunt,  &  Scauros,  anlmaequc  mfignte- 
*Prodigum  Paulum,  fuperante  PcenOj 
Grains  injigni  referam 
Fabriciumque* 


TO    A    FALLING    MINISTER.  Jt 

J7«//t-,  £2*  iiicotnttis  Cwium  capillis^ 
Unlem  bctto  tulit,   &  CamiUmm 
S<tva  Pauper  tat)  &  avitvs  apto 
Cum 


•Crefcit  tcculto  vclut  arfcr  *vo 
Fama  MarceUi  :  mi  fat  itttrr  omnes 
Jul'rum  Jittujj  vftirt  inter  ignts 
Lu*a  minores. 

is  human*  patrt  atyt/f  cujtos, 
Ortt  StituniOi  tiki  cura  magni 
C<ff*risfatis  data  ;  ttt  fccunjo 
Caejarc 


Illefcu  Partftos  Lmtio  immincntcs 
F.gcrit  jufto  domites  ti  ittmpJioy 
Sive  fubjfflw  Oricntis  or  is 
Set  as 


T$  miner  latum  reget  <equm  orlem  ? 
7*  gravi  curru  quaties  Ol 
Tu  par  urn  caftis  intnfica  mitt+t 
FuJmina  iucJt. 


SUBJECTS 


syBJECTS 


FOR 


PAINTERS. 


veut  pcinJrc  pour  I'lmaortalit*, 
Sou." 


YOL.II.  E  TO 


TO    THE    READER. 

'THE  rage  for  hiftorical  Pictures  in  this  kingdom,  fo 
nobly  rewarded  by  Meifrs.  BOYDELL  and  MACKLIN, 
hath,  with  the  great  encouragement  of  two  or  three  of 
the  principal  Mufes,  tempted  me  to  offer  fubjecls  to  the 
labourers  in  the  graphic  vineyard.  When  Shakefpeare  and 
Milton  are  exhaufted,  I  may  prefume  that  the  following 
Odes,  Tales,  and  Hints,  in  preference  to  the  labours  of 
any  other  of  our  Britifli  Bards,  may  be  adopted  by  the 
brufh  of  Genius.  Had  I  not  thus  flepped  forward  as  the 
champion  of  my  own  merit,  which  is  deemed  fo  neceflary 
now-a-days  for  the  obtention  of  public  notice,  not  only 
by  authors,  but  by  tete-makers,  perfumers,  elaftic  trufs 
and  parliament  fpeech  makers,  &c.  who,  in  the  daily 
newfpapers,  are  the  heralds"  of  their  own  fplendid  abili 
ties,  I  might  poflibly  be  pafled  by  without  obfervation, 
.and  thus  a  great  part  of  a  poetical  immortality  be  facri- 
ficed  to  a  pitiful  mwuaife  honte. 


SUB- 


(     35     > 
SUBJECTS 

FOR. 

PAINTERS. 


SCENE,  THE  ROYAL  ACADEMY. 

PEACE  and  good-will  to  this  fair  meeting! 
I  conic  not  with  hoftiiity,  but  greeang; 
Not  eagle-iike  iofcrcam^  but  dove-like  coo  it : 
I  come  not  with  the  fword  of  vengeance,  rhyme, 
To  flam,  and  aft  as  jour  leyman  to  Ti  M  t — 
The  GOD  himfelf  is  jull  arriv'd  to  do  it. 

To  make  each  feeble  figure  a  poor  corfe, 
I  come  not  wirh  the  shafts  of  i";i:ire  fronting ; 

Then  view  me  not  like  Stubby's  flaring  hone, 
With  terror  on  th'  approaching  li  >n  Inorting: 

J  come  to  bid  the  hatchet's  labours  ceafe, 

And  fmoke  with  friends  the  calumet  of  peace. 

Knight  of  the  jx>Iar  ftar,  or  bear,  don't  ftart, 

And,  like  fome  long-ear'd  creatures,  bray,  "  What  art !" 

Sir  WILLIAM,  (hut  your  eil- wide  mouth  of  terror ; 
I  come  not  here,  believe  me,  to  complain 
Of  luch  as  dar'd  employ  thy  building  brain. 

And  criticife  an  economic  error.* 

*  A  lirgr  portion  of  the  Royal  Academy,  raifed  at  an  extraordiiiary 
et pence,  fell  to  the  ground  laiely  ;  but  as' the  Knight  is  a  favourite  at 
Court,  no  harm  is  done.  The  nation  is  able  to  rear  it  again,  which 
will  be  a  benefit  ticket  in  Sir  William's  way. 

E  a  I  come 


36  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

I  come  not  here  to  call  thee  knave  or  fool, 
And  bid  thee  feek  again  Palladio^s  fchool; 
Or  copy  Heav'n,  who  form'd  thy  head  fo  thick, 
To  give  liability  to  ftone  and  brick : 
No — 'twould  be  cruel  now  to  make  a  rout ; 
The  very  ftones  already  have  cry'd  out. 

1  come  not  here,  indeed,  new  cracks  to  fpy, 
And  call  thee  for  the  workmanfhip  hard  names  j 

To. point  which  wing  fhall  next  forfake  the  Iky, 
And  tumble  in  the  Strand,  or  in  the  Thames. 

Nor  come  I  here  to  cover  thee  with  fhanje, 
For  putting  clever  Academic  men,* 
Like  calves  or  pigs,,  into  a  pen, 

To  fee  the  King  of  England  and  his  dame, 

'Midft  carts  and  coaches,  golden  horfe  and  foot  5 
'Midft  peopl'd  windows,  chimnies  and  old  walls ; 

'Midft  marrowbones  and 'cleavers,  fife  and  flute, 
Paffing  in  pious  pilgrimagesto  Paul's : 

Where,  as  the  (how  of  gingerbread  went  by, 
The  rain,  as  if  in  mockery  from  the  fky, 
Dribbled  on  ev'ry  academic  nob, 
And  wauYd  each  pigtail  fmart,  and  powder'd  bob ; 

Wafh'd  many  a  vifage,  black,  and  brown,  and  fair, 
Giving  to  each*  fo  piclurefque  an  air — 
JRefembling  that  of  drooping,  rain-foak'd  fowls, 
Or,  what's  a  better  pifture,  parboil'd  owls  ; 
Whiift  thou,  great  JOVE  upon  Olympus,  aping, 
Didft  (it  majeltic,  from  a  window  gaping. 


*  Sir  William  a£lually  gave  orders  for  the  non-admifiion  oft  he  Royal 
Academicians  into  the  Academy,  to  fee  the  Royal  proceffion  to  Sr. 
Paul's,  as  he  had  fome  women  and  children  of  his  acquaintance  who 
wilhed  to  fee  the  jhow.  Half  a  dozen  boards  were  confequently  or 
dered  to  te  put  together  on  the  outfide  of  the  building  for  their  re 
ception. 

O  WEST! 


SUBJECTS'  F01    PAINTERS.  57 

0  WEST  !  that  nVd  and  jealous  eye  forbear, 
Which  fcowliog  marks  the  bard  with  doubt  and  fear : 

Thy  forms  are  facred  from  my  wrath  divine; 
'Twere  cruel  to  attack  lucii  crippled  creatures, 
So  very,  very  feeble  in  their  natures, 

Already  gafping  ia  a  deep  dcclii. 
\ 

1  feek  them  not  with  fcalping  thoughts,  indeed! 
Too  great  my  foul  to  bid  }hc  figures  bleed  : 
May  peace  and  happiness  attend  'em  ! 
Where'er  they  go,  poor  imps,  God  meiul  'em ! 

I  come  not  to  impart  to  thee  the  crime 
Of  over-dealing  m  fhe  trtie  fublime ; 

I  fcorn  with  malice  thus  thy  tame  to  wound  ; ' 
Nor  cruel  to  declare,  and  hurt  thy  trade, 
That  too  divine  effecls  of  light  and  fhade 

Were  ever  'mid ft  thy  labours  to  be  found. 

Nor  fwear,  to  blaft  one  atom  of  thy  merit, 

That  elegance,  expreffion,  fpirit, 

Too  ftrongly  from  the  canvafs  blaze, 

And  damn  thee  thus  with  RAPHAEL'S  praife: 

Befides,  againft  the  ftrcam  I  fcorn  to  rufh; 

The  world  ne'er  laid,  nor  thought  it  of  thy  brufh. 

Were  I  to  write  thy  epitaph,  I'd  fay, 
**  Here  lies  below  a  painter's  clay,  " 

"  \Vho  work'd  away  moft  furioufly  for  Kings ; 
"  And  prov'oVtlut  fire  of  indinatun 
'*  I  or  pirating  the  great  Ruler  of  a  Nation, 

44  And  fire  of  geniu^  arc-two,  dirt'  'rent  thing;. '* 

Nor  come  I  here  tcr  inform  fbme  men  fo  wife, 

Who  fhine  not  yet  upon  the 'R.  A.  lift, 
Th?t  limbs  in  fpafmv  and  crack'd,  and  goggling  eyes, 

With  grandeur  cannot  well  exiuV 
Nay,  let  it  be  recorded  in  my  rhyme, 
Convulsions  cannot  give  the  true  fublime. 

E  3  Saint 


38  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

Saint  VITUS  might  be  virtuous  to  Romance- 
Peace  to  the  manes  of  that  capering  Saint ! 
Yet  let  me  tell  the  fons  of  paint, 

Sublimity  adorneth  not  his  dance. 

Wide  faucer  eyes,  and  dire  diftortiort, 
Will  only  make  ,a  good  abortion. 

Ye  landfcape-painters,  may  your  gold  flreams  fleep— 
Sleep,  golden,  flqes  and  bulls,  and  golden  cows, 

And  golden  groves  and  vales,  and  golden  fheep, 
And  golden  goats,  the  golden  grafs  that  browze, 

Which  with  fuch  golden  luftre  flame, 

As  beat  the  very-golden  frame. 

Peace  to  the  fcenes  of  Birmingham's  bright  fchool  \ 
Peace  to  the  brighter  fcenes  of  Pontypool ! 

Aw'd  I  approach,  ye  fov 'reigns  of  the  brufh, 
With  MODESTY'S  companion  fweet,  a  blufh, 

And  hesitation  nat'ral  to  her  tongue ; 
And  eye  fo  diffident,  with  beam  fo  mild, 
Like  Eve's  when  Adam  on  her  beauties  fmil'd, 

And  led  tier  bluming,  nothing  loath,  along, 
To  give  the  lady  a  green  gown  fo  fweet, 
On  beds  of  rofes,  LOVE'S  delicious  feat: 

Yes,  foberjtrembling,  Quaker-like,  I  come 
To  this  great  DOME, 

To  offer  fubjefts  to  the  fons  of  paint: 
Accept  the  pleafant  tales  and  hints  I  bring, 
Of  Knight  and  Lord,  and  Commoner  and  King, 

Sweeter  than  hifl'ry  of  embowell'd  faint ; 
Or  mar.tyr,  beat  like  Shrovetide  cocks  with  bats, 
And  fir'd  like  turpentin'd  poor  roafling  roats. 

Inimical  as  dogs  to  pigs, 

Or  wind  and  rain  to  powder'd  wigs, 

Or 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTE1S.  3$ 

Or  mud  from  kennels  to  a  milk-white  flocking; 
Hoftile  to  PETEI'S  phiz  as  if  a  peft, 
Why  fprings  the  man  of  hift'ry,  Milter  WEST, 

And  cries, "  Off,  off!  your  tales  and  hints  are  ihocking ; 

44  Inventions— fabrications— lies— damn 'd  lies ! 

44  Kings,  and  the  world  bcfides,  thy  fpite  defpife. 

"'Sir,  you're  a  liar,  ev'ry  body  knows  it, 
44  Sir,  every  ftupid  ftanza  (hows  it : 

44  Sir,  you  know  nothing  of  a  King  and  Queen ; 
"  In  fpheres  too  high  their  orbs  fupcrior  roll, 
"  By  thy  poor  little  grov'ling,  mole-ey'd  foul, 

44  Thou  outcafl  of  Parnaffiis,  to  be  feen, 

"  Sir,  they  do  honour  to  their  god -like  ftation, 
44  The  two  firft  luminaries  of  the  nation, 

44  So  meek,  good,  gen'rous,  virtuous,  humble,  wife  ; 
"  Whilft  thou,  a  favage,  a  great  foot  fo  fat,  \. 

"  Curs'd  with  a  confcience  blacker  than  my  hat, 

"  Art  rival  to  that  fiend  the  Prince  of  Lies. 

"  Go,  pour  thy  venom  on  my  LBAR  * —  .  • 

"  A  whifper,  Hopkins,  Sternhold,  in  thy  ear: 

"  King  LEAE,  to  mortify  thee,  goes' 
44  Where  MAJBSTY  delights  with  WEST  to  prate, 
44  Much  more  than  Mimfters  of  State — 

"  Where  thou  (halt  never,  never  fhow  thy  nofe ! 

44  Where  Pages  fancy  it  a  heinous  crime, 

44  Thou  foul-mouth'd  fellow,  to  repeat  thy  f  rhyme; 

44  Where  ev'ry  cook,  it  is  my  firm  beUef, 
44  Would  nobly  'make  it  a  religious  point, 
44  Rather  than  put  thy  trafli  upon  a  joint, 

44  To  let  die  fire  confuming  burn  the  beef. 

*  A  pretty  iron-ftaring  flcetch  now  in  the  Exhibition, 
f  Here  Mr.  Weft  is  miftakcn.     The  works  of  the  Lytie  Hard, 
handfomely  bound  in  morocco  leather,  are  now  in  the  Library  at  the 
Queen's  Palace  :  his  Majetty  has  done  more — he  has  written  notes  en 
the  Odes,    Happy  Poet,  to  have  a  King  for  a  cwnnwitater! 

44  There's 


4-C  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

"  There's  not  a-fhopkeeper  in:  Wind  for  town 
"  That   would  not  hang  thee,    ihoot  thee,    ftab  thee, 
"  drown; 

"  That  doth  not  damn  thy  fluff,  thy  odes  and  tales ; 
"  That  d6th  not  think  thy  works  wotald  give  difeafe 
"  To  eVry  thing  they  wrapp'd— to  bread,  to  cheefe ; 

"  Nay,  give  contagion  to  a  bag  of  nails. 

"  The  very  Windfor  dogs  and  cats,v 

"  The  very  Winfor  owls  and  bats, 
«  Would  howl  and  fquall,  and  hoot  and  fliriek,  to  meet' 
"  Like  thee  a  ragamuffin  in  the  ftreet. 

"  The  fervant  maids  of  *  Windfor,  from  each "fh op, 
"  Some  pointing  brooms,  and  fome  a  fcornful  mop, 
"  Their  loyal  fentiments  would  difembogue, 
"  And  taunting  cry,,  *  There  goes  a  lying  rogue/ 

• 
"  Behold,  rank  impudence  thy  rhymes  infpire; 

'**  Confummate  infolence  thy  verfe  provoke  ! 
"  Fool !  to  believe  thy  mufe  a  mufe  of  fire ! 

"  A  chimney-fweeper's  drab,  a  mufe  of  fmoke. 

44  The  very  bellman's  rhymes  poffefs  more  merit. 

44  Nay,  f  Nichols"magazine  exceeds  in  fpirit : 

"  A  printer's  devil,  with  conceit  fo  drunk, , 

"  Who  publifiies  for  gentleman  and  trunk  • 

"  Who  fets  up  author  on  old  Bowyer's  icraps ; 
"  Bowyer,  whofe  pen  recorded  alt  the  raps 
**  That  hungry  authors  gave  to  Bowyer's  door,, 
"  To  fvveli  the  curious  literary  ftore  ; 

*  Neither  is  this  true  :  the  works  of  the  fufeli me  Bard  are  fold  ptb- 
Ikly  at  Windfor. 

f  Mifter  Weft  is  not  a  judge.  John's  Magazine  is  a  fad  Jan  ago, 
jpoffefling,  however,  the  merit  of  being  more  in  quantity  than  other  ma 
gazines  :  as  for  the  quality t  John,  w-ho  is  a  mofi  txcdlcnt  tradcfrnan, 
deemeth.  it  of  no  importantc. 

"  Who 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTBIS. 

**  Who  on  a  purblind  *  antiquarian's  back, 
•'  A  founder'd,  broken-winded  hack, 

"  Rides  out  to  find  old  farthings,  nails,  and  bones; 
44  On  darkeft  coins  the  brightefi  legend  reads, 
"  On  tracelefs  copper  fees  imperial  heads, 

"  And  makes  inicriptions  older  than  the  (lones. 

1  Too  bids,  to  give  his  cuflomers  furprife, 

"  A  Druid  altar" from  a  pigftye  rife. 

*  Yes,  NICHOLS,  aping  wifdom  thro*  his  Bla 

"  Thee,  thec  APOLLO'S  fcavcnger,  furpaitcs. 

"  Soon  (hall  we  fee  the  Fleet  thy  carcafe  wring, 
"  Mean  thro'  the  prifon  grate  for  farthings  angling, 

M  Suspending  feet  of  (lockings  bv  a  firing, 

'*  Or  glove  or  nightcap  for  ou/bounty  dangling ; 

"  Whilft,  ifluing  from  thy  mouth  begrim'd  with  beard) 

'  Thy  pale  nofe  poking  through  thy  prifon  hole, 
M  The  hollow  voice  of  mis'ry  will  be  heard, 

**  '  Kind  ge'mman,  pity  a  poor  hungry  foul : 
"  '  Have  pit v  on  a  pris'ncr's  cafe  fo  (hocking— 
"  *  Good  lady,  put  a  farthing  in  the  (locking !' 

"  What  impudence  thus  bold  a  face  to  pufli, 
"  Arm'd  with  a  winking  light  of  paltry  nifli, 

"  As  if  with  TRUTH'S  bnght  torch,  into  our  room; 
14  To  dart  on  ignorance  the  fancy'd.  rays— 
**  To  bid  of  barbarifm  the  empire  blaze, 

44  And  kind  illumine  EB  ROR'S  midnight  gloom  ! 

"  Get  out,  and  pertly  don't- come  troubling  ma 
**  A  Jog  is  better  company  than  // 

Thus  cries  the  King's  great  PAINTER  to  the  BARD  1 
Such  is  of  ptcrlefs  OJes  the  bafe  reward  ! 

*  Whit  a  virulent  attack  on  the  penetrating  and  laborious  Mr.  Gougfi, 
of  Enfield  !  Can  any  thing  be  more  bitter  apainft  an  antiquarian  hero  of 
the  firft  fame,  for  ever  at  fifticuffs  with  Time,  to  make  him  difgorge 
(he  gxd  thing i  he  has  been,  for  fuch  a  Icrics  of  ages,  devouring  ! 

I  thank 


.42  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

>. 

J  thank  ye— much  oblig'd  t'ye,  Mifter  WEST, 
For  thoughts  fo  kind,  and  prettily  expreft : 

Yet  won't  \  be  refus'd,  I  won't  indeed ; 
You  muft,  you  Jhall  have  tale,  and  ode,  and  hint  j 
This  memory  of  mine  contains  a  mint : 

And  thus,  in  bold  defiance,  I  proceed. 

Yet  mind  me,  as  to  our  bright  KING  and  QUEEN, 
Their  names  are  facred  from  the  Poet's  fpleen— 

Peace  to  their  reign !  they  feel  no  more  my  jokes, 
Whether  to  Hanover  they  wifely  roam, 
Or  full  as  wifely  count  their  calh  at  home : 

My  fatire  fhallnot  hurt  the  gen  fief oth. 

-Pleas'd  in  a  hut  to  brail  my  mutton  bone, 
I  figh  not  for  the  veti'fon  of  a  throne : 

Nay,  flavery  doth  not  with  my  pride  agree  j 
A  toad-eater's  an  imp  I  don't  admire ; 
Nor  royal  fmall-talk  doth  my  foul  defire : 

I've  feen  my  Sov'reigns — that's  enough  for  me* 


A  THOUSAND  themes  for  canvas  I  could  name, 
To  give  the  artift  beef  and  fame : 

Lo  !   *  Hodfell  in  his  country  feat  fo  fine, 
Where,  'midft  his  tulips,  grin  ilone  apes  with  parrots; 
Where  Neptune  foams  along  a  bed  of  carrots, 

Inftead  of  cleaving  through  his  native  brine ; 

Where  PHCBBUS  ftrikes  to  cabbages  his  firings; 
Where  LOVE  o'er  garlick  waves  his  purple  wings ; 

Where  MARS,  to  vanquifh  beets,  heroic  leans; 
And,  arm'd  with  lightnings,  with  terrific  eyes, 
The  great  and  mighty  RULER  of  the  ikies ' 

Sublimely  thunders  through  a  bed  of  beans ; 

*  A  merchant  of  tajls, 

Ciofe 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS.  4$> 

Clofc  by  whofe  fide  the  haymakers  are  mating, 
And  Dutchmen  to  their  knees  in  onions  fkaiting. 


A  MIGHT*  WARRIOR  in  the  Houfe  of  Lords, 

Swallowing,  alas !  a  bitter,  bitter  pill ; 
Eating,  poor  man,  his  own  fad  words, 

Exceedingly  againft  his  noble  will ; 

Whilft  RAWDON  by  his  fide,  with  martial  face, 
Commandeth  him  to  fwallow  with  a  grace ; 
Would  make  an  interefting  fceue,  indeed, 
And  (how  the  courage  of  Kjng  Charles's  breed ! 

How  like  a  Doctor,  forcing  doxvn  the  throat 

Of  fome  poor  puling  child  a  dofe  of  (alts, 

At  which  its  little  foul  revolts. 
With  wriggling  limbs,  wry  mouths,  and  piteous  note ; 
Yet  forc'dto  take  the  formidable  puree, 
Or  tafte  a  bitt'rer  dofe,  the  threaten'd  fcourge ! 

Or  RICHMOND,*  watchful  of  the  State's  falvation, 
Sprinkling  his  ravelins  o'er  the  pale-nos'd  nation  j 
Now  buying  leathern  boxes  up  by  tuns ; 
Improving  thus  the  bodies  of  great  guns ; 
Guns  bleit  with  double  natures,  mild  and  rough, 
To  give  a  broadlide,  or  a  pinch  of  (huff. 
Or  RICHMOND^  at  th'  enormous  reck'ning  ftruck, 
At  Portfmouth  battling  hard  about  a  duck. 

A  cer- 


*  The  Duke  abfolutely  ordered  cannon  to  be  mide  of  leather,  from 
a  fnuff-box-makcr,  which,  at  Woolwich!  on  Saturday  the  fecond  day 
of  May,  1789,  were  feriouAy  tried,  and,  like  many  a  nobleman, 
fouaJ  too/y>. 

f  At  Portfmouth  his  Grace,  not  long  fince,  befpoke  a  dinner  for  a 
lew  friends;  and  becaufe  no  fork  had  entered  a  roaftcd  duck,  Charles 
Lenox,  Duke  of  Richmond,  Earl  of  March,  Matter  General  of  the 
Ordaance,  Lord  Lieutenant  and  Cuftos  Rotulorum  of  the  county- of 

Suflex, 


44  SUBJECTS  FOR  PAINTERS. 

A  certain  high  and, mighty  Duchefs, 
Hugging  her  hufband  in  her  cat-like  clutches, 

Biting  and  tearing  him  with  brandy  zeal ; 
Whofe  flax  in  heaps  is  feen  to  fly  around, 
Whilft  he,  pale  wight,  emits  a  plaintive  found, 

Like  animals  that  furnifh  man  with  veal ; 

Would  make  another  pleafing  fcene, 
-Showing  the  mettle  of  an  arrant  Quean ; 
Longing  to  ftiine  a  firft-rate  ftar  at  Court, 
For  fatire's  pen,  a  fubjed  of  rare  fport ; 
Longing  to  purify  a  lucklefs  blood, 
Deep-ftain'd,  and  fmelHng  of  its  native  mud. 

The  valiant  GLOSTER  at  the  army's  head, 
Drawn  as  the  glorious  Macedonian  youth, 

In  battle  galloping  o'er  hills  of  dead, 
Would  glow  with  fuch  ari  air  of  truth  ! — 

Not  on  a  Jackafs  mounted,  but  a  Heed 

Of  old  Bucephalus'*  breedv 


SALISB'RY  examining  the  iron  hands 

Of  FAME'S  and  fweet  St.  Giles's  blackguard  bands, 

That  clap  jour  Kings  to.Parlianient  and  Play— 
Salifb'ry,  too,  gauging  all  their  gaping  throats, 
Excifeman-like,  to  find  the  beft  for  notes, 

That  money  mayn't  be  thrown  away  : 

Refolv'd  from  thofe  fame  legions  of  vulgarity, 
To  get  full  pennyworths  of  popularity  ; 
Refolv'd  his  mafter  mail  be  fairly  treated, 
And  not,  as  ufual,  by  his  fervants,  cheated. 

Suflex,  Duke  of  Lenox  in  Scotland,  and  Aub'igny  in  France,  Knight 
of  the  Moft  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  &c.  thought  it  a  grievous 
impofition,  and  ordered  the  landlord  of  the  inn  to  deducl  the  eighteen 
pence,  the  price  of  the  dixk,  froxa  the  bill,  which  was  done  accord! oglj. 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS.  4$ 

Suppofe,  to  give  this  humour-loving  ifle 
A  pretty  opportunity  to  fmile, 

You  paiut  the  Solomon  of  yon  fam'd  place,* 
Where  fair  PHILOSOPHY,  the  heav'nly  dame, 
By  barb'rous  ufage  cover'd  deep  \viih  (home, 

'  No  longer  (hows  her  exil'd  race ; 
Where  cent,  per  cent,  in  value  rife, 
Toads,  tadpoles,  grafshoppers,  and  flie^? 

Snppofe  you  paint  Sir  JOSEPH  afl  fo  bleft, 
With  many  a  parafitical  dear  gueft, 

S wol'n  by  their  flatt'ries  as  a  bladder  big, 
Throwing  away  of  learning  futh  a  walte, 
And  proving  his  fuperior  claflic  taite, 

By  fwallowing  tlie  fumcn  of  a  pig  ? 


PITT  trying  to  unclench  Bin  5  ft, 

Imploring  money  for -a  King;' 
Telling  mou  mournful  talcs  of  •  'vi!  lift, 

The  Lady's  tender  heart  to  wring ; 
Tales  of  expence,  tli'effeft  of  Doftors'  bills, 
High  |)rice  of  blifters,  bolufes,  and  pills; 
Long  journey  to  St.  Paul's,  t'  oblige  the  nation, 
And  give  God  humble  thanks  for  reftoratioa  : 
.  •  BRITANNIA,  with  arch  look,  die  while, 
Partaking  itrongly  of  a  l 

'i'ointing  to  that  huge  dome,f  the  nation's  wealth, 
Where  fettle  fonWimes  place  their  cafli  by  ftealth, 
And,  all  lo  moJeft  with  their  fecret  ftore, 
Inform  the  world  they're  poor,  yes,  very  poor. 

*  The  .Royal  Society.  f  The  Baak.  of 


VoL.IL 


46  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 


SYMONDS  *  with  each  other  vying, 
Sweet  youths'!  for  little  NORMAN'S  f  favours  fighing, 

A  pifturefque  effect  would  form  : 
Tliat  hugging  mother  for  the  daughter's  charms ; 
Tills )  with  the  yielding  damfel  in  his  arms, 

Taking  the  citadel  by  ftorm  : 
That,  running  with  the  girl  in  triumph  off; 
This  with  the  dog,  the  mother,  and  the  muff. 


A  GRKAT  Law  Chief,  whom  God  nor  Demon  fcares, 
£OIT  pell'd  to  kneel  and  pray,!  who/wore  His  pray'rs  j 

The  dev'l  behind  him,  pleased  arid  grinning, 
Patting  the  angry  lawyer  on  the  moulder, 
Declaring  nought  was  ever  bolder, 

Admiring  fuch  a  novel  mode  of  finning : 

Like  this,  a  fubjec~r  would  be  reckoned  rare, 
Which  proves  what  blood-game  infidels  can  dare ; 
Which  to  my  mem'ry  brings  a  fa#, 
Which  nothing  but  an  Englifh  tar  would  a<?r. 

In  fhips  of  war,  on  Sunday,  pray'rs  are  giv'n ; 
For,  though  fo  wicked,  failors  think  of  Heav'n, 

Particularly  in  a  ftorm ; 
Wherq,  if  the/  fiud  no  brandy -to  get  drunk, 
Their  fouls  are'  in  a  miierabie  funk  ; 

Then  vow  they  to  th'  Almighty  to  /eform, 
If  in  his  goodnefb  only  once,  once  more, 
He'll  fuffer  him  to  clap  one  foot  on  more. 

*  Lord  P.  and  Sir  Richard  S.'s,  conteft  for  the  charming  \ rize  is  well 
Jctv>'AW  t  >  -.he  Opcra-Houfe. 

f  A  pren^  black-eyed  Figurante  ar  the  Opera. 
J  On  the  thankfjiving  day  at  St.  Paul's. 

•    >   •  >  In 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS.  47 

In  calms,  indeed,  or  gentle  airs, 

Tht-y  IK  Vr  -,n  wee  .r  Heav'n  witli  pray'rs  ; 

For  'tis  am  >ng(t  the  Jacks  a  common  lay  ing,' 

"  Where  there's  no  danger,  there's  no  need  of  praying.*' 

One  Sunday  morning  all  were  met, 

To  hear  t'ie  parfon  preach  and  prr.y, 
All  but  a  boy,  who,  willing  to  forget 

That  pray':;,  were  handing  out,  had  flol'ii  away ; 
And,  thinking  praying  but  a  u folds  talk, 
Had  ciuwi'd,  to  talic  a  nap,  i:ivo  a  calk. 

The  micher  was  found  miffing  ;  and  full  Toon 
The  boatfvain's  cat  fagacious  fmelt  him  out ; 

Gave  him  a  clawing  to  feme  tune — 
This  cat's  a  couun  Germain  to  the  Knout.41 

u  Come  out,  you  fculkine  dog,*'  the  boatfwain  cry'd, 
44  And  lave  your  damn'a  young  finful  foul :'' 

He  then  the  moral-mending  cat  apply 'd, 
And  turn'd  him  like  a  badger  from  his  hole. 

Sulky,  the  boy  march'd  on,  nor  fecm'd  to  mind  him, 
Although  the  boatfwain  flogging  kept  behind  him, 
"  Flog,"  cry'd  the  boy,  "  flog— curfe  me,  flog  an  ay ; 
"  ril^t—but  mind— God  d-mn  me  if  I'll  pray." 

A  common  punirtrncni  in  Ruftia. 


1 


TUB 


4  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

I 

THE 

KING    OF     SPAIN 

AND     THE 

HORSE. 

IN  fev'nteen  hundred  fev'nty -eight, 

The  .rich,  the  proud,  the  potent  King  of  Spain, 
Whofe  anceftors  lent  forth  their  troops  to  fmite 

The  peaceful  natives  of  the  weftern  main,  " 
With  faggots  and  the  blood-delighting  fword, 
To  play  the  devil,  to  oblige  the  Lord  ! 

For  hunting,  roafting  heretics,  and  boiling, 
Baking  and  barbecuing,  frying,  broiling, 

Was  thought  Heav'n's  caufe  amazingly  to  further ; 
For  which  moil  pious  reafon,  hard  to  work 
They  went,  with  gun  and  dagger,  knife  and  fork, 

To  charm  the  God  of  mercy  with  their  murther  ! 

J  fay,  this  King  in  fev'nty-eight  furvey'd, 
In  tapefhy  fo  rich  pourtray'd, 

A  horfe  with  ftirrups,  crupper,  bridle,  faddle  : 
Within  the  ftirrup,  lo!  the  Monarch  try 'd 
To  fix-his  foot,  thepalfry  to  beftride; 

In  vain  ! — -he  could  not  o'er  the  palfry  ftraddle  ! 

Stiff  as  a  Turk  the  bead  of  yarn  remain'd, 

And  ev'ry  effort  of  the  King  difdain'd, 

Who  'midft  his  labours  to  the  ground  was  tumbled, 

And  greatly  mortified  as  well  as  humbled. 

Prodigious  was  the  ftruggle  of  the  day : 
The  horfe  attempted  not  to  run  away  ; 

At  which  the  poor  chaf  M  Monarch  now  'gan  grin, 
And  fwore  by  ev'ry  faint  and  holy  martyr, 
He  would  not  yield  the  traitor  quarter, 

Until  he  got  pofleffion  of  his'  fldn. 

Not 


SUBJECTS    FOR  ^AlKTEtS.  49 

Not  fiercer  fam'd  La  Marietta's  knight, 

Hight  QUIXOTE,  at  a  puppet  (how, 
Did  wjth  more  valour  ftoutly  fight, 

And  terrify  each  little  faueaking  foe  ; 
\Vhen  bold  he  pierc'd  the  lines,  immortal  fray  ; 
And  broke  their  pafteboard  bones,   and    ftabb'd   their 
hearts  of  liay. 

Not  with  more  energy  and  funr 
The  beauteous  ftreet-  walker  of  Dniry 

Attacks  a  fitter  of  the  fmuegling  trade, 
Whofe  winks,  and  nods,  and  fweet  rcfiftlefs  fmile, 
Ah,  me  !  her  paramour  beguile, 

And  to  her  bed  of  healthy  ftraw  perfuade  ; 
Where  mice  with  mufic  charm,  ana  vermin  crawl, 
And  fnails  with  filver  traces  deck  die  wall. 

And  now  a  cane,  and  now  a  whip  he  us'd  ; 
And  now  he  kick'd,  and  fore  the  palfry  bruis'd  ; 
Yet,  lo  !  the  horfe  feem'd  patient  at  each  kick, 
And  bore  with  Chriftian  fpirit  whip  and  (lick  ; 
And  what  excelHvely  provok'd  this  Prince, 
The  horfe  fo  ftubborn  fcorn'd  ev'a  once  to 


Now  rufli'd  the  Monarch  or  a  bow  and  arrow, 
To  (hoot  the  rebel  like  a  fparrow  ; 
And,  lo  !  with  (hafts  well  fteel'd,  with  all  his  force, 
Juft  like  a  pincufliion,  he  (luck  the  horfe  ! 

Now  with  the  fury  of  the  chaf  'd  wild  boar, 
Wfrh  nails  and  teeth  the  wounded  horfe  he  tore  ; 

Now  to  the  floor  he  brought  the  ftubborn 
Now  o'er  the  vanquifli'd  horfe  that  dar'd  rebel, 
Moft  Indian-like,  die  Monarch  gave  a  yell, 

Pleas'd  on  the  quadruped  his  eyes  to  feaft  ; 
Bleft  as  ACHILLES,  when  with  fatal  wound 
He  brought  the  mighty  HKCTOX.  to  the  grouud. 


Yet 


^O  SUBJECTS'!* OR    PAINTERS. 

Yet  more  to  gratify  his  godlike  ire, 
He  vengeful  flung  the  palfry  in  the  fire'! 
Showing  his  pages  round,  poor  trembling  things. 
How  dang'rous  to  refift  the  will  of  Jvings. 


LORD  BRUDENELL  AND  THE  EUNUCH, 

A  LORD,  moft  mufically  mad, 
Yet  with  a  tafte  fiiperlatively  bad, 

Afk'd  a  fqueal  eunuch  to  his  houfe  one  day ; 
A  poor  old  femivir,  whofe  throat 
Had  loft  its  love-refoimding  note,          {  ^ 

Which  ART  had  giv'n,  and  TIME  hacl  ftol'n  away. 

**  Signor  SQUALINI,"  with  a  folemn  air, 
The  LORD  began,  grave  rifing  from  his  chair, 

Taking  SQUALINI  kindly  by  the  hand — 
"  Signor  SQUALINI,  much  I  fear, 
a  I've  got  a  moft  unlucky  ear, 

."  And  that  'tis  known  to  all  the  mu  fie  band. 

*'  Fond  of  abufe,  each  fiddling  coxcomb  carps  ; 
**  And,  true  it  is,  I  don't  know  flats  from  fljarps: 

"  Indeed,  Signor  SQUALINI,  'tis  no  hum  ; 
<c  So  ill  doth  mufic  with  my  organs  fuit, 
"  I  fcarcely  know  a  fiddle  from  a  flute, 

"  The  hautbois  from  the  double  drum. 

"  Now  though  with  Lords,  a  number,  of  this  nation, 
"  I  go  to  Op'ras,  more  through  fafliion 

u  Than  for  the  love  of  mufic,  I  could,  wifli 
44  The  world  might  think  I  had  foine  little  tafter 
**  That  thofe  two  ears  were  tolerably  chafte ; 

M  But,  Sir,  I  am  as  ftupid  as  a  fifli.. 

"  Get  me  the  credit  of  a  Cognofcente, 

w  Gold  flia'n't  be  waiitin?  to  content  ye.5t 


SUBJECTS    FOR    f  \TWTItS.  $«• 

"  BraviJ/mo  !  my  Lor,"  reply 'd  SQUAHNI, 
With  acquiefcent  bow*  aj>d  (mile  of  fuavir 
*'  De  nobleman  mufs  never  look  de  ninny." — 

True,"     Brunts  the   noble   Lord,    with    German 
gravity. 

**  My  Lor,  ven  men  vaitt  money  in  tier  purfe, 
44  Dey  do  no  vant  de  vorld  to  tink  dem  poor  ; 

14  Becaufe,  rrty  Lor,  dat  be  von  fliabby  curie; 
44  Dis  all  fame  ting  wid  ignorance,  my  Lor." 

44  Right,"  cry'd  his  Lordfliip  m  a  grumbling  tone, 
Much  like  a  mart  iff  jealous  of  his  bone. 

"  But  firft  I  want  forae  technicals  Signor.'  — 
Bowing,  the  Eunuch  anfwer'd — u  I  is,  my], or; 

44  I  tea(h  your  l^rclfliipquwkly,  quetk'jy,  aU — 
**  Dere  vat  be  call  de  fofte /tuto  note, 
44  Dat  be  ven  finger  oj>pen  vide  de  tmat, 

44  And  den  for  long  time  make  de  fqiiawl,  fquawL 

«  fquawl ; 

"  Mufli  long,  long  note,  dat  do  continue  while 
41  A  man,  my  Lor,  can  valfc  a  mile. 

44  My  Lor,  der  likewife  be  de  cromatiyue,  ^ 

4<  As  if  de  finger  vas  in  greef,  or  Gck, 

44  And  had  de  colick— ^at  be  ver,  ver  fine% 
44  De  high,  oh,  dat  inufician  nil  fopraw ; 
44  De  love  voice,  baJT* ;  de  fofF  note,  piano— 

44  Bravoura,  queek,  bold — here  Marchefi 

"  Dis  Mara,  too,  and  Billington,  do  know— 
44  Allegro,  quick ;  Adagio^  be  de  How  ; 

44  PompcfO)  dat  be  manner  make  de  roar  : 
<4  Matftyo,  dat  be  flow,  grand,  nobel  ting, 
44  Mufli  like  de  Voice  of  Emperor,  or  deKing; 

44  Or  vw.  my 

44  When  in  de  Honfc  you  make  de  grand  oration, 
44  For  fave,  my  Lor,  de  noble  Englis  nation. 


Zjfc  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

"  Da  Capo,  dat's,  my  Lor,  begin  again, 
"  And  end,  my  Lor,  wid  de  firft  flrain." 

Thus  having  giv'n  his  leflbn,  and  a  bow, 
With  high  complacency  his  Lordfhip  fmil'd  : 

Unravell'd  was  his  Lordfhip's  pucker'd  brow, 
His  fcowling  eye,  like  LUNA'S  beams,  fo  mild  : 

Such  is  th'  effeft,.  when  flatt'nes  fweet  cajole 
.That  praife- admiring  wight yclep'd  the  foul ; 
And  from  the  days  of  Adam  'tis  the  cafe, 
That  great's  the  fympathy  'twixt  foul  and  face. 

•*  Signer  SQUALINI,"  cry'd'the  happy  Lord,. 

46  The  Op'ra  is  begun,  upon  my  word — 

"  Allons,  Signor,  and  hear  me — mind, 

"  As  foon  as  ever  you  (hall  find 

"  A  finger's  voice  above  or  under  pitch, 

**  Juft  touch  my  toe,  or  give  my  arm  a  twitch."' 

**  Ifs,  ifs,  my  Lor  (the  Eunuch  ftrait  reply'd) 

"  My  Lor,  I  flieet  clofe  by  your  Lordflnp  fide ; 

'*  And  den,  accordin  to  your  Lorfliip  wifh, 

"  I  give  your  Lorfliip  elbow  littel  twifh." 

Now  to  the  Opera,  munVs  founds  to  hearv 
The  old  Caftrato  and  the  noble  Peer 

Proceeded — Near  the  orcheftra  they  fat, 
Before  the  portals  of  the  fingers'  throats ! 
The  critic  couple  moufing  for  bad  notes 

With  all  the  keennefs  of  a  hungry  cat; 

Now  came  an  out-of-tunijb  note— 
The  Eunuch  tvvitch'd  his  Lordfhip's  coat : 

Full-mouth'd  at  once  his  Lordfhip  roar'd  out  "  Filial"' 
Sudden  the  orcheftra,  amaz'd,  turn  round 
To  find  from  whence  arofe  the  critic  found, 

When,  lo>!  they  heard  the  Lord,  and  law  ! 

The  Eunuch  kept  mofrflily  twitching  ; 

,  tlis  frowning  Lordfhip  all  the  while,. 

(Not  in  the  cream  of  courtly  ftyle) 

i..  Be- 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 


Re-Jogging  this  poor  finger,  that 

ig,  too,  a  hoft  of  damning/w, 

Reap'd  a  moft  plenteous  harvtft  of  applaufe  ; 

Grew  from  that  hour  a  Lord  of  tuneful  (kill, 

though  the  Eunuch's  dead,  remains  fo  frill. 


TO    THE    ACADEMICIAN'S. 

OUPPOSE  you  paint  the  Dev'l,  with  fmiling  imen, 
^   Whifp'ring  deceit  to  any  King  or  Queen, 

'Tis  what  the  prince  of  loot  hath  often  done : 
For,  lo  !  \\  ith  many  a  King  and  many  a  Queen, 
In  clofe  nnfub  the  gentleman  is  leen —  iXl£ 

With/ircA  iiath  Satan  oft  a  world  of  fun; 
More  fun,  or  diadems  cure  much  bei\  \1, 
Than  all  the  little  under-world  btfide  I ' 

The  Dev'l's  a  fellow  of  much  fterling  humour, 
If  we  mav  credit  public  rumour; 

And  all  fo  civil  in  each  a&  and  look, 
That,  whenfoever  we  incline 
On  fome  rare  diih  of  fin  to  dine, 

We  can't  employ  a  readier,  nicer  cook. 

Who,  too,  fo  generous  difdains 
To  take  a  fixpence  for  his  pains — 

Nay,  at  our  money  would  be  vext : 
Happy  to  pleafe  U5  gratis  with  his  art, 
Provided,  when  from  this  world  we  depart, 

We  join  his  firc-Jide  in  the  next. 

Like  GLOUCESTER,  who  fpr  pay  can  leave  his  party 
Some  years  ago  I  join'd  his  corps  fo  hearty, 

Thinking  the  Prince  of  Erebite  ill  treated  : 
Fir'd  by  the  fubjeft,  In  my  rhyming  mode, 
I  c  omplimented  Satan  with  an  Ode, 

Which,  for  the  bniflimen's  fake,  (hall  be  repeated. 

;  ODE 


54  SUBJECTS    FOB,    PAlNTEEf, 

ODE    TO    THE    DEVIL. 

INGRATUM    GDI. 

PRINCE  of  the  dark  abodes  1  I  ween, 
Your  Highnefs  ne'er  till  now  hath  feen 

Yourfelf  in  metre  fhine ; 
Ne'er  hear  a  fong  with  praife  fincere, 
Sweet  warbled  on  your  fmutty  ear, 

.Before  this  ode  of  mine. 

Perhaps  the  reafon  is  toa  plain, 
Thou  try 'ft  to  ftarve  the  tuneful  train, 

Of  potent  verfe  afraid ; 
And  yet  I  vow,  in  all  my  time, 
I've  not  beheld  a  fingle  rhyme 

That  ever  fpoil'd  thy  trade. 

I've  often  read  thofe  pious  whims— 
JOHN  WESLEY'S  fweet  damnation  hymns, 

That  chant  of  heav'nly  riches. 
What  have  they  done  ? — thofe  heav'nly  flrains^ 
Devoutly  fqtieezM  from  canting  brains, 

But  fill'd  JOHN'S  earthly  breeches? 

There's  not  a  ihoeblack  in  the  land, 
So  humbly  at  the  world's  command, 

As  thy  old  cloven  foot; 
Like  lightning  doft  thou  fly,  when  call'd, 
And  yet  no  pickpocket's  fo  maul'd 

As  thou,  O-  Prince  of  Soot  f 

What  thousands,  hourly  bent  on  fin, 
With-  fupplication  call  thfee  in, 

To  aid  them  to  purfue  it ! 
Yet,  when  dete£ted,  with  a  He 
Ripe  at  their  fingers'  ends,  they  cry, 

"  The  Devil  made  me  do  it**1 


Behold 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS.  £ 

Behold  the  fortunes  that  are  made, 

By  men  through  rcguilh  tricks  in  trade ! 

Yet  all  to  thee  are  oxving — 
And  though  we  meet  it  ev'ry  day, 
The  fneaking  rafcals  dare  not  fayf 

This  is  the  Drvil's  doing. 

As  to  thy  company,  I'm  furr, 
No  man  can  fhun  thee  on  that  Icore; 

The  very  beft  is  thine : 
With  Kings,  Queens,  Minifters  of  State, 
Lords,  Ladies,  I  have  feen  thee  great, 

And  many  a  grave  Divine. 

I'm  forely  griev'd  at  times  to  find, 
The  very  inftant  thou  art  kind, 

Some  people  fo  uncivil, 
When  aught  offend*,  with  face  awry, 
-With  bafe  ingratitude  I  cry, 

"  I  wi(h  it  to  the  deviL" 

Hath  fome  poor  blockhead  got  a  wife,  • 
To  be  the  torment  of  his  liie, 

By  one  eternal  yell ; 

The  fellow  cries  out  coarfdv,  "  Zoumls! 
"  I'd  give  this  m<vnent  twenty  pounds 

"  To  fee  the  jade  in  hell" 

Should  Heav'n  their  pray'rs  fo  ardent  grant, 
Thou  never  company  w'ouldft  want 

To  make  thee  downright  mad ; 
For  mind  me,  in  their  wiihing  mood, 
They  never  offer  thee  'vhnt's  good, 

But  ev'ry  thing  that's  bad. 

My  honeft  anger  boils,  to 

A  fmiffling,  long-fec'd,  canting  crew, 

So  much  thy  hnrnb'e  tlebt> 
RuHiiug,  «  ;  fays,  one  MVI  all. 

With  defp'rat:  pray'rs  thv  head  to  maul, 

And  thus  abufe  their  betters. 

To 


£<>  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS,    , 

To  feize  one  day  in  ev'ry  week, 
On  thee  their  black  abuie  to  wreak, 

By  whom  their  fouls  are  fed 
Each  minute  of  the  other  fix, 
With  ev'ry  joy  that  heart  can  fix, 

Is  impudence  indeed.! 
i 

Blufhing,  I  own  thy  pleafing  art 
Hath  oft  feduc'd  my  vagrant  heart, 

And  led  my  fteps  to  joy — 
The  charms  of  beauty  have  been  mine ; 
And  let  me  call  the  merit  thine, 

Who  brought'fl  the  lovely  toy-. 

No,  Satan — if  I  afk  thy  aid, 

To  give  my  arms  the  blooming  maid, 

I  will  not,  through  the  nation  all, 
Proclaim  thee  (like  a  gracelefs  imp) 
A  vile  old  good-for-nothing  pimp, 


But  fay,  "  'tis  thy  vocation 


mp, 
,  Hal." 


Since  truth  mufl  out  —  I  feldom  knew 
What  'twas  high  pleafure  to  purfue, 

Till  thou  hadft  won  my  heart  : 
So  focial  were  we  both  together, 
And  beat  the  hoof  in  ev'ry  weather, 

I  never  wifli'd  to'  part. 

Yet  when  a  child—  good  Lord  !  I  thought 
That  thou  a  pair  of  horns  hadfl  got, 

With  eyes  like  faucers  flaring  ! 
And  then  a  pair  of  ears  fo  flout, 
A  monflrous  tail  and  hairy  fnout, 

With  claws  beyond  comparing. 

Taught  to  avoid  the  paths  of  evil, 
By  day  I  us'd  to  dread  the  Devil  ; 

And  trembling  when  'twas  night, 
Methought  I  faw  thy  horns  and  ears, 
Then  fuug  or  whiflled  to  my  fears, 

And  ran  to  chafe  my  fright. 

And 


SUBJECTS    rot    TAINTt*S.  57 

And  ev'ry  night  I  went  to  bed, 
And  fweated  with  a  conftant  dread, 

And  crept  beneath  the  rug ; 
There,  panting,  thought  that  in  my  fleep 
Thou  flily  in  the  dark  wouldft  cretp, 

And  eat  me,  though  fo  fnug« 

A  haberdaftier's  (hop  is  thine, 

With  fins  of  all  forts,  coarfe  and  fine, 

To  fuit  both  man  and  maid : 
Thy  wares  they  buy,  with  open  eyes ; 
How  cruel  then,  with  conftant  cries, 

To  vilify  thy  trade  ! 

To  fpeak  the  truth,  indeed,  Pm  loath — 
Life's  deem'd  a  mawkifli  difli  of  broth, 

Without  thy  aid,  old  Sweeper: 
So  mawkifti,  few  will  put  it  down, 
E'en  from  the  cottage  to  the  crown, 

Without  thy  fait  and  pepper. 

O  Satan,  whatfoever  geer 

Thy  Proteus  form  fliall  choofe  to  wear,        , 

Black,  red,  or  blue,  orvellow; 
\Vhateverhypocrites  may  (ay, 
They  think' thee  (truft  my  honeft  lay) 

A  moft  bewitching  fellow. 

'Tis  order'd  (to  deaf  mrs,  alas  ') 

To  praife  the  bridge  o'er  which  we  pafs; 

Yet  often  I  difcover 
A  numerous  band  who  daily  make 
An  eafy  bridge  of  thy  poor'back, 

And  damn  it  when  they're  over. 

Why  art  thou  then,  with  cap  in  hand, 
Oblequious  to  a  graceleft  band, 

Whofe  fouls  are  fcarcc  worth  raking  * 
O  Prince,  purfue  but  my  advice, 
I'll  teach  your  Highnefs  in  a  trice 

To  fet  them  all  a  quak: 
VOL.  II.  <r  *%r 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

Plays,  op'ras,  mafquerades,  deftroy, 
Lock  up  each  charming^"//?  de  joie  ; 

Give  race-horfes  the  glander — 
The  dice-box  break,  and  burn  each  card- 
jLet  virtue  be  its  own  reward, 

And  gag  the  mouth  of  flander : 

In  one  week's  time,  I'll  lay  my  life, 
There's  not  a  man,  nor  maid,  nor  wife, 

That  will  not  glad  agree, 
If  thou  wilt  charm  'em  as  before, 
To  fhow  their  nofe  at  church  no  more, 

But  quit  their  God  for  thee. 

>fHs  now  full  Jtime  my  Ode  mould  end  ; 
And  now  I  tell  thee  like  a  friend, 

Howe'er  the  world  may  fcoutrthee, 
Thy  ways  are  all  fo  wondrous  winning, 
And  folks  fo  very  fond  of  finning, 

They  cannot  do  without  thee. 


THE   TENDER    HUSBAND- 

T  O,  to  the  cruel  hand  of  FATE, 

J-J  My  poor  dear  GRIZZLE,  meek-foul'd  mate, 

Refigns  hej, tuneful  breath — 
^Though  dropp'd  her  jaw,  her  lip  though  pale, 
And  blue  each.harmlefs  finger  nail, 

She's  beautiful  in  death. 

As  o'er  her  lovely  limbs  I  weep, 
I  fcarce  can  think  her  but  afleep-— 

How  wonderfully  tame ! 
And  yet  her  voice  is  really  gone, 
And  dim  thofe  eyes  that  lately  fhoiie 

With  all  the  lightning's  flame. 

3  Death 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAlVTls.  ff 

Death  was,  indeed,  a  daring  wight, 
To  take  it  in  his  he-id  to  : 

To  lift  his  ilar:  to  hit  her  ; 
For  as  (he  was  fo  y,r 
And  car'd  a  fin 

I  thought  he  tear  V.  !>er. 


Still  is  that  voice,  of  Lite  fo 
That  many  a  fweet  Caprido  fung, 

And  beat  in  founds  the  fphere  .. 
No  longer  mud  thofe  fingers  piny 
*«  Britons  flri  ,'  that  ninny  a  Jay 

Have  footh'd  my  raviihM  ears  ? 

Ah  me  !  indeed  I'm  much  inclin'd 
To  think  I  now  might  fpeak  my  mind, 

Nor  hurt  her  dear  repofe  ; 
Nor  think  I  now  with  rage  (he'd  roar, 
Were  I  to  put  my  fingers  o'er, 

And  touch  her  precious  nofe. 

Here  let  me  philofophic  psufe— 
How  wonderful  are  Nature's  laws  ! 

When  lady's  breath  retires, 
Its  fate  the  flaming  paffions  (hare^ 
Supported  by  a  little  air, 

Like  culinary  fires  ! 

Whene'er  I  hear  the  bagipe's  note, 
Shall  FANCY  fix  on  GRIZZLE'S  throat, 

And  loud  inftruftive  lungs  ? 
O  Death,  in  her,  though  only  one, 
Are  loft  a  thoufand  charms  unknown, 

At  leaft  a  thoufand  tongues. 

Soon  as  I  heard  her  laft  fweet  figh, 
And  faw  her  gently  -clofing  eve, 

How  great  was  my  furprife  ! 
Yel  have  I  not,  with  impious  breatli, 
Accus'd  the  hard  decrees  of  death, 

Nor  blam'd  the  righteous  ikies. 

Ga  Why 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

Why  do  I  groan  in  deep  defpair, 
Since  fhe'll  be  foon  an  angel  fair  ? 

Ah  !  why  my  bofom  fmite  ? 
Could  grief  my  GRIZZLE'S  life  reftore ! — 
But  let  me  give  fuch  ravings  o'er- — 

Whatever  is,  is  right. 

Oh,  Doftor !  you  are  come  too  late ; 
No  more  of  phyfic's  virtues  prate, 

That  could  not  fave  my  lamb : 
Not  one  more  bolus  fhall  be  giv'n— 
You  mall  not  ope  her  mouth,  by  heav'n, 

And  GRIZZLE'S  gitllet  cram. 

Eoough  of  bolufes,  poor  heart, 
And  pills,  fhettook,  to  load  a  cart, 

Before  me  clos'dher  eyes;] 
But  now  my  word  is  here  a  law, 
Zounds  I  with  a  bolus  in  her  jaw, 

She  fhall  not  feek  the  Ikies. 

Good  Sir,  good  Doctor,  go  away ; 
To  hear  my  <6gns  you  mnft  not  nay, 

For  this  my  poor  loft  treafure  : 
I  thank  you  for  your  pains  and  (kill ; 
When  next  you  come,  pray  bring  your  bill  f 

I'll  pay  it,  Sir,  with  pleafure. 

Ye  friends  who  come  to  mourn  her  doom, 
For  God's  fake  gently  tread  the  room, 

Nor  call  h^r  from  the  bleft : 
In  fofteft  filence  drop  the  tear, 
In  whifpers  breathe  the  fervent  pray'r, 

To  bid  her  fpirit  reft. 

Reprefs  the  fad,  the  wounding  fcream ; 

I  cannot  bear  of  grief  extreme- 
Enough  one  little  figh — 

Befides,  the  loud  alarm  of  grief, 

In  many  a  mind  may  ftart  belief, 
Our  noife  is  all  a  He- 

Gco 


SUBJECTS 

Good  nurfes,  fhroud  my  lamb  with  care  ; 
Her  limbs,  with  gentleft  fingers,  fpare; 

Her  mouth,  ah!   ilowly  clofe; 
Her  mouth,  a  magic  totif.uc  that  held, 
Whofe  fofteft  tone,  at  times,  compcll'd, 

To  peace,  my  louckfl.  woes. 

And,  carpenter,  for  my  fad  fake, 
Of  ftouteft  oak  her  coffin  make — 

I'd  not  be  ftingy,  fure  : 
Procure  of  fteel  the  ftrongeft  fcrews ; 
For  who  would  paltry  pence  refufe, 

To  lodge  his  wife  fecure  ? 

Ye  people  who  the  corpfe  convey, 
With  caution  tread  the  doleful  way, 

Nor  (hake  her  precious  head  ; 
Since  FAME  reports,  a  coffin  toft 
With  carelefs  fwingagainftn  poft, 

Did  oncedifturb  the  dead. 

Farewell,  my  love,  for  ever  loft  ! 
Ne'er  troubled  be  thy  gentle  ghoft, 

That  I  again  will  woo — 
Bt  all  our  paft  delights,  my  dear, 
No  more  the  marriage  chain  I'M  wear, 

P— «  take  me  if  I  do! 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS, 

THE     SOLDIER 

AND    THE 

VIRGIN       MARY. 

A      TALE. 


A    SOLDIER  at  Loretto's  wond'rous  chapel, 
•**•     To  parry  from  his  foul  the  wrath  divine, 
That  follow'd  mother  Eve's  unlucky  apple, 

Did  vifit  oft  the  Virgin  Mary's  fhrine  j 
Who  ev'ry  day  is  gorgeoufly  deck'd  out, 

In  filks,  or  velvets,  jewels,  great  and  fmall* 
Juft  like  a  fine  young  lady  for  a  rout, 

A  concert,  opera,  wedding,  or  a  ball. 

At  firfl  the  Soldier  at  a  diflance  kept, 
Begging  her  vote  and  intereft  in  heav'n : 

With  ieeming  bitternefs  the  finner  wept, 

Wrung  his  two  hands,  and  hop'd  to  be  forgiv'nj 

Dinn'd  her  two  years  with  Ave-Mary  flummery; 
Declar'd  what  miracles  the  dame  could  do, 
Ev'n  with  her  garter,  flocking,  or  her  fhoe, 

And  fuch  like  wonder-working  mummery. 

Whatanfwer  MARY  gave  the  wheedling  finner, 
Who  nearly,  and  more  nearly  mov'd  to  win  her, 
The  mufly  mouth  of  Hifl'ry  doth  not  mention ; 
And  therefore  I  can't  tell  but  by  invention. 

One  day  as  he  was  making  love  and  praying, 
And  pio\is  Aves,  thick  as  herrings,  faying, 


And 


SUBJ8CTS    FOR    PAINTBK.S.  63 

And  damned  (ins  fo  manifold  confeHing, 
He  drew,  as  if  to  whifpcr,  very  near, 
And  twitch'd  a  pretty  diamond  from  her  ear, 

Inflead  of  taking  the  good  lady's  bklling. 

Then  off  he  fet  with  nimble  (hanks 

Nor  once  turn'd  back  to  give  her  thanks : 

A  hue  and  cry  the  thief  purfu'd, 

Who,  to  his  coft,  foon  underftood 

That  he  was  not  arriv'd  beyond  the  paw 

Of  that  fame  long-legg'd  riger,  chriften'd  LAW. 

With  horror  did  his  Judges  quake : 

As  for  the  tender- con icienc'd  Jury, 
They  doom'd  him  quickly  to  the  ftake,. 

Such  was  their  dcv'liih  pious  fury. 

However,  after  calling  him  hard  names, 
They  afk'd  if  ought  he  had  in  vindication, 

To  fave  his  wretched  body  from  the  flames, 
And  fiaful  foul  from  terrible  damnation  r 

The  Soldier  anfwer'd  them  with  much  fang-froiJ, 
Which  feem'd  to  (how,  of  fin,  a  confcience  void, 

That  if  they  meant  to  kill  him,  they  might  kill : 
As  for  the  di'mond  which  they  found  about  him, 
He  hop'd  their  Worthips  would  by  no  means  doubt  him, 

That  Madam  gave  it  him  fronrt  pure  good  will. 

The  anfwer  turn'd  both  Judge  and  Jury  pale : 

The  punifliment  was  for  a  time  deferr'd, 
Until  his  Holinefs  mould  hear  the  tale, 

And  his  infallibility  be  heard. 

The  Pope  to  all  his  Counfellors  made  known 
This  ftrange  affair — *o  Cardinals  and  Friars, 

Good  pious  gentlemen,  who  ne'er  were  known 
To  aft  like  hypocrites,  and  thieves,  and  liars, 

Tiic 


64  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS, 

The  queftlon  new  was  banded  to  and  fro, 
If  MARY  had  the  pow'r  to  give,  or  no  ?' 

That  MARY  could  not  give  it,  was  to  fay, 

The  wonder-working  Lady  wanted  pow'r — 
This  was  a  {tumbling  block  that  ftopp'd  the  way- 

This  made  Pope,  Cardinals,  and  Friars  low'r. 
/'  -V,  ^ 

To  fave  the  Virgin's  credit,  lo  ! 

And  keep  fecure  the  di'monds  that^were  left; 
They  faid,  fhe  might,  indeed,  the  gem  beftowj 

And  consequently  it  might  be  no  theft: 

But  then  they  pafs'd  immediately  an  Aft, 

That  ev'ry  one  difcover'd  in  the  fad 

Of  taking  prefents  from  the  Virgin's  hand, 

Or  from  the  Saints  of  any  landj 

Should  know  no  mercy,  but  be  led  to  Slaughter, 

Flay'd  here,  and  fry'd  eternally  hereafter. 

Ladies,  I  deem  the  moral  much  too-  clear 

To  need  poetical  affi  fiance; 
Which  bids  you  not  let  men  approach  too  near, 

But  .keep  the  faucy  fellows  at  a  diftance ; 
Since  men  you  find,  fo  bold,  are  apt  to  feize 
Jewels  from  ladies,  ev'n  upon  their  knee* ! 


SUBJECTS    FOR    FAINTtKft.  6j 

AN     ODE     TO     EIGHT     CATS, 

BCLONO1XO    TO 

ISRAEL    MENDEZ,    A  JEW. 

SCENE,  the  Strtttina  Country  Town. 
Tkt  TIME,  MiJ»igkt—Th<  Poet  -/  tit  CLmbtr  lt'i»J*u>,  i*  L'n 


O INGERS  of  tfrael,  O  ye  fingers  fwctt, 

Who,  xvith  your  gentle  mouths  from  ear  to  «arr 
Pour  forth  rich  fymphonies  from  ftreetto  ftreet, 
And  to  the  flecplcfs  wretch  the  night  endear.  I 

Lo!  in  my  fhirt,  on  you  thcfe  eyes  I  fir, 
Admiring  much  the  quaintnefs  of  vour  tricks » 

Your  frifldngs,  crawlings,  fqualls,  I  much  approve; 
Your  fpittings  pawings,  high-rau'd  rumps, 
Swell 'a  tails,  and  merry  -andrew  jumps, 

With  the  wild  minitrelfy  of  rapt'rous  love* 

How  fweetly  roll  your  goofeb'rry  eyes, 
As  loud  you  tune  your  am'rous  cries, 

And,  loving,  (cratch  each  other  black  and  blue ! 
No  boys  in  wantonnefs  now  bang  your  backs  ; 

No  curs»  no  fiercer  maftitfs,  tear  your  flax ; 

But  all  the  moon -light  world  feenis  made  for  you. 

Singers  of  Ifrael,  ye  no  parforxs  want 
To  tie  the  matrimonial  cord  j 

Ye  call  the  matrimonial  fervice,  cant- 
Like  our  firft  parents  take  each  other's  word : 

On  no  one  ceremony  plcas'd  to  fix — 

To  jump  not  even  o'er  two  (licks. 


You 


66  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS, 

You  want  no  furniture,  alas  ! 

Spit,  fpoon,  difh,  frying-pan,  nor  ladle; 
No  iron,  pewter,  copper,  tin,  nor  brafs; 

No  nurfes,  wet  or  dry,  nor  cradle, 
(Which  cuflom,  for  our  Chriftian  babes,  enjoins) 
To  rock  the  ftaring  offspring  of  your  loins. 

Nor  of  the  lawyers  have  you  need, 

Ye  males,  before  ye  feek  your  bed, 
To  fettle  pin-money  on  Madam  : 
.     No  fears  of  cuckoldom,  heav'u  blefs  ye, 

Are  ever  harbour'd  to  diftrefs  ye, 
Tormenting  people  iince  the  days  of  Adam. 

No  fchools  ye  want  for  fine  behaving; 

No  powdering,  painting,  waftiing,  fhaving; 
No-  nightcaps  fnug — no  trouble  in  undrefiing 

Before  ye  feek  your  ft  raw  y  neft, 

Pleas'd'in  each  other's  arms  to  reft, 
To  feaft  on  lufcious  Love,  heav'n's  greateft  blefling. 

Good  gods  !  ye  fweet  love-chanting  rams 

How  nimble  are  ye  with  your  hams 
To  mount  a  houfe,  to  fcale  a  chimney-top; 

And,  peeping  down  that  chimney's  hole,- 

Pour,  in  a  tuneful  cry,  th'  impaffion'd  foul, 
Inviting  Mifs  GRIMALKIN  to  come  up: 

Who,  fweet  obliging  female,  far  from  coy, 
Anfwers  your  invitation  note  with  joy ; 

And  fcorning  'midft  the  afries  more  to  mope, 
Lo  !   borne  on  LOVE'S  all-daring  wing, 
She  mou  nteth  with  a  pickle-herring  fpring, 

Without  th'  afiiftance  of  a  rope. 

Pear  monfmg  tribe,  my  limbs  are  waxing  cold— » 
Singers  of  Ifrael,  fweet,  adieu,  adieu  ! 

J  do  fuppofe  you  need  not  now  be  fold 
How  much  I  wilh  that  J  was  one  of  you. 


SONG 


SUBJECTS    FOB.    PAINTERS.  67 

SONG      TO      DELIA. 

PORLORN  I  feek  the  filent  fcene. 
A       To  keep  the  image  of  my  fair ; 
Pale  o'er  the  fountain's  brink  I  lean, 
And  view  the  fpc&re  of  defpair. 

Wlw  (hoiild  my  heart  forget  its  woe  ? 

The  virgin  would  have  mourn'd  for  me.— 
O  nymph,  th'  eternal  tear  fhall  flow ; 

The  (igh  unceafing  breathe  of  //vr. 

Forgetful  of  the  parted  maid, 

Too  many  an  unfeeling  fwain 
Forfakes  of  fojitude  the  made, 

For  PLEASURE'S  gay  and  wanton  train. 

Yet,  yet  of  conftancy  they  boaft ! 

Their  eafy  hearts  their  tongues  belie — 
(Who  loves,  reveres  the  fair-one's  ghoft, 

And  feeks  a  pleafure  in  a-figh. 


SIR      JOSEPH      BANKS 


THE     TH  IFF- TAKERS. 

[IR  JOSEPH,  fa v 'rite  of  great  Queens  and  Kings, 

Whofe  wifdom,  weed  and  infeft  hunter  fingb ; 
And  ladies  fair  applaud,  with  fmile  fo  dimpling ; 
rent  forth  one  day,  amidft  the.  laughing  fields, 
fhere  NATURE  fuch  exhauftlefs  trealure  yields, 
A  fimpling ! 


68  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

It  happened  on  the  felf-fame  morn  fo  bright, 
The  nimble  -pupils  of  Sir  SAMPSON  WRIGHT, 
A  fimpling  too,  for  plants  call'd  Thieves,  proceeded ; 
Of  which  the  nation's  field  fhould  oft  be  weeded. 

Now  did  a  thief-taker,  fo  fly, 
Peep  o'er  a  hedge^with  cunning  eye, 

And  quick  efpy'd  the  Knight  with  folemn  air, 
Deep  in  a  ditch  where  watercrefles  grow; 
On  which  he  to  his  comrades  cry'd,  "  See,  ho !" 

Then  jump'd,  (unfportfman-like)  upon  his  hare. 

Hare-like  Sir  JOSEPH  did  not  fqueak,  butbawl'd, 
With  dread  prodigioufly  appall'd. 

The  thief-takers  no  ceremony  us'd  ? 
But  taking  poor  Sir  JOSEPH  by  the  neck, 
They  bade  him  fpeak ; 

But  firft  with  names  their  captive  Knight  abus'd. 

(t  Sir,  what  d'ye  take  me  for?"  the  Knight  exclaim'd. 

"  A  thief,"  reply'd  the  runners,  with  a  curfe  : 
"  And  now,  Sir,  let  us  fearch  you,  and  be  damn'd" — 

And  then  they  fearch'd  his  pockets,  fobs,  and  purfe : 

But,  'Head  of  piftol  dire,  and  death-like  crape, 

A  pocket  handkerchief  they  caft  their  eye  on, 
Containing  frogs  and  toads  of  various  {hape, 
Dock,  daify,  nettletop,  and  dandelion, 
To  entertain,  with  great  propriety, 
The  members  of  his  fage  fociety  : 
Yet  would  not  alter  they  their  ftrong  belief, 
That  this  their  knighted  pris'ner  was  no  thief  ! 

**  Sirs,  I'm  no  highwayman,"  exclaim'd  the  Knight. — 
«  No— -there,"  rejoin'd  the  runners,  "  you  are  right — 

"  A  footpad  only — Yes,  we  know  your  trade— 
*'  Yes,  you're  a  pretty  babe  of  grace : 
c;  We  want  no  proofs',  old  codger,  but  your  face ; 

u.  So  come  aloiig  with  us,  old  blade," 


SUBJECTS  FOR  PAINTERS.  69 

vfwas  ufelefsto  rcfift,  or  to  complain  : 

In  vain.  Sir   JOSEPH  pleaded— 'twas  in  vain 
That  he  was  highly  titled,  that  he  (Wore — 
The  in ftanf  that  poor  BANKS  his  titles  counted, 
Which  to  an  F.  R.  S.  and  Knight  amounted, 

His  guardians  Uugh'd,  and  clapp'd,  and  cry'd  "encore." 

Sir  JOSKPH   told  them,  that  a  nerghb'ring  'Squire 

Should  anfwer  for  it  that  he  was  no  thief : 
On  which  they  plumply  damn'd  him  for  a  liar, 
And  faid  fnch  ftories  mould  not  five  his  beef; 
And  if  they  undc-rftood  their  trade, 
His  mittimus  would  foon  be  made ; 
And  forty  poondsi>e  their*s,  a  pretty  fum, 
For  fending  fuch  a  rogne  to  kingdom  come. 

Xow  to  the  *  Squire  mov'd  pris'ner  Knight  and  Co, 
The  runners  taking  him  in  tow, 

Like  privateers  of  Britain's  warlike  nation, 
Towing  a  French  EafMndiaman,  thtii;  prize, 
black,  and  of  enormou*  fiae, 

Safe  into  port  for  condemnation. 

Whether  thejr  ty'd  his  hands  behind  his  back, 

For  fear  the  Knight  might  run  away, 
And  made,  indelicate,  his  breeches  (lack, 

We've  really  no  authority  to  fay. 

And  now  the  country  people  gnther'd  round, 
And  ftar'd  upon  the  Knight  in  thought  profound, 

Not  on  the  fyftem  of  Linnaeus  thinking— 
Fanc)ing  tiny  faw  a  rogue  in  ev'ry  feature; 
buch  is  the  populace's  horrid  nature 

Tow'rds  people  through  misfortune  finking. 

At  lengtk.  a  mid  ft  much  mob  and  mire, 
Indeed  amrdit  iknunicrable  ranks, 

y  reach'd  the  manfion  of  the  'Squire, 
-To  prove  the  identity  of  JOSEPH  BANKS. 

v  to  the  'Squire  fann.  !  the  Knight, 

i  WJio  knew  Sir  JOSEPH  at  firft  fight— 
VOL.  JI.  H 


?3  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

What's  ftrongly  mark'd  is  quickly  known  agen — 
And,  with  a  frown  that  awe  and  dread  commanded, 
The  thief-takers  feverely  reprimanded 

For  grofsly  thus  miftaking  gentlemen  : 

Then  bade  them  afk  a  pardon  on  their  knees, 
Of  him  that  was  a  Knight  and  F.  R.  S. 

Who,  rather  than  the  higher  pow'rs  difpleafe, 
Imagined  that  they  could  not  well  do  lefs. 

Then  on  their  knuckles  rais'd  they  hands  and  eyes, 
And  crav'd  Sir  JOSEPH'S  pardon  for  belief, 

That,  when  they  jump'd  upon  him  by  furprife, 
They  took  fo  great  a  gemman  for  a  thief  j 

Hoping  to  mind  th'  advice  of  godly  books, 
.  not  to  judge  of  people  by  their  looks. 


SOL  ,O    M    O    N 

AND 

THE       MOUSE.   TRAP. 


A  MAN  in  rather  an  exalted  ftation, 
•**•  Whofe  eyes  are  always  eyes  of  admiration, 
Without  diftinclion,  fond  of  all  things  novel, 
Ev'n  from  the  lofty  fceptre  to  the  fliovel — 
Juft  like  ftray'd  bullocks  faunt'ring  through  the  lanes, 
Made  frequent  curiofity- campaigns ; 
Sometimes  caught  grafchoppers — now,  more  profound, 
Would  fometimes  find  a  pin  upon  the  ground  ; 
Where  if  the  head  towards  him  happ'd  to  point, 

His  mind  was  wonderfully  ftruck — 
Indeed  he^felt  a  joy  in  ev'ry  joint, 

Becaufe  it  always  brings  good  luck. 

This 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PATNTERS.  "I 

Thi*  gentleman,  fright  SOLOMON,  one  day, 

In  queft  of  novelty  purfu'd  his  way ; 

Like  great  COLUMBUS,  that  fam'd  navigator, 

\\'ho  found  the  world  we've  loft,  acrofs  the  water. 

But  rather  on  a  fomewhat  narrower  fcale, 

Lo  !  on  dry  land  the  GENTLEMAN  fet  fail : 

That  day  it  chanc'd  to  be  his  will, 
To  make  difcoveries  at  Salt-hill : 
Where  bounce  he  hopp'd  into  a  widow's  houfc, 
Whole  hands  were  both  employ 'd  fo  clever, 
Doing  their  very  beft  endeavour 

To  catch  that  vile  free-booter,  Monfieur  Moufe ; 
Whofe  death  (lie  oft  did  rnoft  devoutly  pray  for, 
Ikcaufe  he  eat  die  meat  he  could  not  pay  for : 

Refembling  Chriftians  in  that  faring  trick, 

Who,  wanting  to  obtain  good  cheer, 
Invented  an  ingenious  fcheme  call'd  tick, 

That  purchases,  like  money,  beef  and  beer : 
Poflefs'd  of  tick,  for  cafh  men  need  not  range, 
Nor  toil  in  taking  or  in  giving  change. 

Eager  did  SOLOMON  fo  curious  clap 

rare  round  optics  on  the  widow's  trap 
That  did  the  duty  of  a  cat ; 
And  always  fond  of  ufeful  information, 
Thus  wifely  fpoke  he  with  vociferation, 

"  What's  that !— Wh.it,  what?  hae,  hae?  what's  that?" 

To  whom  reply'd  the  mifirefs  of  the  houfe, 
"  A  trap,  an't  pltrafe  you,  Sir,  to  catch  a  moufe." 

a  Mbufe! — catchamoufe!"  faid  SOLOMON  with  glee — 
"  Let's  fee — let's  fee — 'tis  comical — let's  fee — 
"Moufe!  —  moufe!" — then  pleas'd  his  eyes  began  to 

roll— 

"  Where,  where  doth  he  go  in  ?"  he  marvelling  cry'd — 
'*  There,"  pointing  to  the  hole,  the  dame  reply'd. 
w  What!    here?"  cry'd   SOLOMON;  «  this  hole?  this 

"  hole?" 

H  a  Tiiea 


/•2  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS-. 

Then  in  he  p-afh'd  his  finger  'midft  the  wire, 
That  with  fuch  pains  that  finger  did  infpire, 

He  wifh'd  it  out  again  with  all  his  foul : 
However*  by  a  little  fquall  and  making, 
He  freed  his  finger  from  its  piteous  taking— < 

That  is  to  fay,  he  got  it  from  the  hole. 

44  What  makes  the  moufe,  pray,  go  into  the  trap? 

44  Something,"    he   cry'd,    "  that  pnift  their  palates 

"  pleafc." 
"  Yes,'*  anfwerd  the  fair  woman,  "  Sir,  a  fcrap 

"  Of  rufty  bacon,  or  of  toafted  cheefe." 

44  Oh!  oh!  faid  SoLtmoN,  "oh!  oh!  oh!  oh! 
*'  Yes,  yes,  I  fee  the  meaning  of  it  now  : 
*'  The  moufe  goes  in,  a  rogue,  to  fteal  the  meat, 
u  Thinking  to  give  his  gums  a  pretty  treat." 
Then  laugh'd  he  loudly,  ftretch'd  his  mouth  a  miler 
Which  made  the  mufcles  of  the  widow  frmle. 

"  Let's  fee,  let's  fee,"  cry'd  SOLOMON—''  let's  fee— 

*'  Let  me,  let  rner  let  me,  let  me,  let  me,  let  me." 

Then  took  he  up  fome  bacon,  and  did  clap 

A  little  (lice  fo  clever  in  the  trap : 

Thus  did  he,  by  his  own  fole,  fage  advice, 

Induce  himfelf  to  bait  a  trap  for  mice  ! 

Now  home  he  hied  fo  nimbly,  whelm 'd  with  glory,    . 
And  told  his  family  the  wondrous  ftory 

About  the  widow's  cheefe  and  bacon  fcrap !        > 
Nought  fufferrd  he  to  occupy  his  head, 
Save  moufe-ideas,  till  he  went  to  bed> 

Where  bleft  he  dreamt  all  night  about  the  trap. 

Here  let  me  paufe,  and  Heav'n's  great  goodnefs  chaunt— 
How  kind  it  is  in  gracious  Heav'n  to  grant 

To  full-grown  gentlefolks  of  lofty  (ration, 
A  pow'r  of  relifhing  moft  trifling  things, 
Pleafures  ordain'd  for  brats  in  leading  firings, 

By  way  of  happy  harmlefs  relaxation  I 

Ne*t 


SUBJECTS    TOR    PAINTERS. 

Next  day  the  Man  of  Wifdom  came, 

All  glorious,  to  the  houfe  of  this  fair  dame, 

know  if  Matter  Moufe  had  fmelt  to  bacon ; 
When,  lo  !  to  fill  with  jojr  his  eager  eyes. 
And  load  thofe  ftaring  optics  with  furprife, 
A  real  moufe  was  abfolutely  taken  ! 

Not  more  did  RODNEY'S  joy  this  man's  furpnfs,. 
When  in  his  cabin  firft  he  law  I)B  GRASS*.  ! 
Not  more  the  hair-brain'd  Macedonian  boy, 
Leap'd,  like  a  Bedlamite,  for  joy, 

Than  SOLOMON  to  fee  the  moufe  in  jail !        x 
Not  ALEXANDER,  foe  of  great  DARIUS, 
(Men  that  with  rich  comparifon  fupply  us) 

When  bleft  he  caught  tne  Perfian  by  the  tail. 

Around  the  room  the  captive  moufe  he  bore, 
Infulting  the  poor  pris'ner  o'er  and  o'er ; 
Laughing,  and  peeping  through  the  wire, 
As  if  his  eyes  and  mouth  would  never  tire  ? 

How  vaftly  like  to  TAMERLANE  the  Great, 
Poflefs'd  of  moft  unlucky  BAJAZET, 

Who  kept  the  vanquifn'd  hero  in  a  cage ! 
Mock'd  him  before  his  mighty  holt, 
With  cruel  names  and  threats,  and  grin  and  boaft, 

And  daily  thus  indulg'd  imperial  rage ! 

Xow  o'er  the  widow's  cat,  poor  watching  pufs, 
The  great  man  triumph'd  too,  and  alk'd  the  catr 

When  he  would  a&  heroically  thus — 
And  if  he  dar'd  to  venture  on  a  rat  f 

To  whom  the  cat,  as  if  in  anfwer,  mew'd, 

Which  made  the  Man  of  Wifdom  cry,  "  Oh !  oh!" 

As  if,  with  knowledge  of  cat-fpeech  endu'd, 
lie  thought  that  pufs  had  anlwer'd  "  No." 

On  which  he  laugh'd,  and  much  enjoy 'd  the  joke 

Then  told  the  widow  that  GRIM  ALK.IM  fpo!. 

H  3  Six 


74*  SUBJECTS  FOR  PAINTERS, 

Six  days  the  Man  of  Wifdom  went 
Triumphant  to  Salt-hill,  with  big  intent 

^  To  catch  the  bacon-ftealing-moufe : 
Six  mice  fucceffively  proclaimed  his  art, 
With  which,  fafe  pocketed,  he  did  depart, 
And  ftiow'd  to  all  his  much-aftonifh'd  houfe. 

But  pleafures  will  not  laft  for  aye ; 

Witnefs  the  fequel  of  my  lay  : 

The  widow's  vanity,  her  fex's  flaw,    . 

Much  liJke  the  vanity  of  other  people— 
A  vapour,  like  the  blaft  that  lifts  a  ftraw,  ' 

As  high,  or  higher,  than  Saint  Martin's  ft'eeple- 

This  vanity  then  kidnapp'd  her  difcretion, 
Defign'd  by  God  Almighty  for  her  guard  ; 

And  of  its  purpofe  got  the  full  completion, 
And  all  the  widow's  future  glories  marr'd  j. 

For,  lo !  by  this  fame  vanity  impell'd, 

Arid  to  a  middle-liz'd  balloon, 
"With  gas  of  confequence  fublimely  fwell'd, 

She  burfted  with  th'  important  fecret  foon* 

Loud  laugh'd  the  tickled  people  of  Salt-hill; 

Loud  laugh'd  the  merry  Windfor  folks  around 
This  was  to  SOLOMON  an  ugly  pill ! 

Her  fatal  error  foon  the  widow  found ; 
For  SOLOMON  re,linquifh'd  moirfe-campaign, 
-Nor  deign'd  to  bait  the  widow's  trap  again  1 


PETI- 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTEKS, 


PETITION  TO  TIME, 

IV    FAVOUR.    OF 

THE    DUCHESS    QF    DEVONSHIRE. 


long,  O  TIME,  in  JBitruJance's  fchool, 
1    I  lave  I  been  bred,  to  call  thee  an  old  fool ; 
Yet  take  I  liberty  to  let  thee  know, 
That  I  have  always  thought  thee  fo  : 
Full  old  art  thou,  indeed,  to  have  more  fenfe ; 
Then,  with  an  idle  cuftom,  TIME,  difpcnfe. 

Thou  really  acleft  now  like  little  mines, 

Who,  when  a  pretty  doll  they  make, 

Their  curious  fingers  itch  to  take 
The  pretty  image  all  to  pieces : 
Thus,  after  thou  haft  form'd  a  charming  FA  IK, 

Thou  canft  not  quit  the  Syren  for  thy  foul/ 
Till,  meddling,  thou  haft  fpoil'd  the  bloom  and  air, 

And  dimm'd  her  eye,  with  radiance  taught  to  roll. 

But  now  forbear  fuch  doings,  I  defirc ; 
Hurt  not  the  form  tliat  all  admire : 

Oh,  never  with  white  hairs  her  temple  fprinkle ! 
Oh,  facred  be  her  cheek,  her  lip,  her  bloom  i 
And  do  not,  in  a  lovely  dimple's  room, 

Place  a  liard  mortifying  wrinkle. 

Know,  fliouldft  thou  bid  the  beauteous  Duchefs  fader 
Thou,  therefore,  muft  thy  own  delights  invade ; 
And  know,  'twill  be  a  lone,  long  while, 
Before  thou  giv'ft  her  equal  to  our  ifle : 
Then  do  not  with  this  fweet  chef-d'txuvre  part, 
But  keep,  to  (hew  the  triumph  of  thy  art. 


ECO- 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS, 


ECONOMY. 

•pCONOMY's  a  very  ufeful  broom  ; 

•f-4  Yet  mould  not  ceafelefs  hunt  about  the  room- 
To  catch  each  draggling  pin  to  make  a  plum. 

Too  oft  ECONOMY'S  an  iron  vice, 

That  fqueezes  evrn  the  little  guts  of  mice, 
That  peep  with  fearful  eyes,  and  aik  a  crumb; 

Proper  ECONOMY'S  a  comely  thing.; 
Good  in  a  fubject — better  in  a  King ; 

Yet,  pufh'd  too  far,  it  dulls  each  finer  feeling, 
Moft  eafily  inclin'd  to  make  folks  mean ; 
Inclines  them,  too,  to  villany  to  lean, 

To  over-reaching,  perjury,  and  ftealing. 

Ev'n  when  the  heart  mould  only  think  of  grief,. 
It  creeps  into  the  bofom  like  a  thief, 
And  fwallows  up  th'  affections  all  fo  mild — 
Witnefs  the  Jewefs,  and  her  only  Child. 


THE  JEWESS  AND  HER  SON, 

POOR  Miftrefs  LEVI  had  a  lucklefs  fon, 
Who,  ru filing  to  obtain  the  foremoft  feat, 
In  imitation  of  th'  ambitious  great, 

High  from  the  gall'ry,  ere  the  play  begun, 
He  fell  all  plump  into  the  pit, 
Dead  in  a  minute  as  a  nit : 

In  fhort,  he  broke  his  pretty  Hebrew  neck ; 

Indeed  and  very  dreadful  \vas  the  wreck  ! 


The 


SrBJECTS    FOR     PAINTERS. 

he  mother  was  diftnufted,  raving,  wild  ; 

iri«k'd,  tore  her  hair,  embrac'd  and  kifs'd  her  child  ; 

Afflifted  ev'ry  heart  with  grief  around. 

>oa  as  the  fhow'r  of  tears  was  fomewhat  paft, 

nd  moderately  calm  th*  hyfteric  blaft, 

She  cad  about  her  eyes  in  thought  profound ; 

nd  being  with  a  faving  knowledge  blefs'd, 

ic  thus  the  pteyhoufe  manager  addrefs'd  : 

Sher,  Pm  de  modtr  of  de  poor  Chew  lad, 
Dat  meet  miftifartin  here  fo  bad —    . 
Sher,  Fmufs  haf  de  (hilling  back,  you  know, 
Afs  MOSES  haf  nat  fee  de  fhow." 


LIT  as  for  A v 'RICE,  'tis  the  very  devil ; 
The  fount,  alas  !  of  ev'ry  evil ; 

The  cancer  of  the  heart—the  word  of  ills : 
Wherever  foxvn,  luxuriantly  it  thrives; 
No  flow'r  of  virtue  near  it  lives— 

hike  Aconite,  where'er  it  fpreads,  it  kills. 
In  ev'ry  foil  behold  the  poifon  fpring! 
Can  taint  the  beggar,  and  infect  the  king. 

The  mighty  MAR  LB'*OUGH  pilfer'd  cloth  and  bread 
So  fays  that  gentle  fatiriff  'Squire  POPE  ; 

And  PKTKR  BO  ROUGH'S  Earl,  upon  this  head, 
Affords  us  little  room  to  hope, 

That  what  the  Twick'nam  Bard  avow'd, 

Might  not  be  readily  allow'd. 


THE 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

THE    EARL   OF   PETERBOROUGH 

AND 

THE    MOB. 


London  ftreets  upon  a  day, 
•*~   The  Earl  of  PETERBOROUGH  took  his  wayr 

All  in  his  pompous  coach  --  perhaps  to  dine  : 
The  Mob  of  London  took  it  in  their  head, 
This  was  the  Duke  of  MARLBOROUGH,  fo  dread 

To  Frenchmen  on  the  Danube  and  the  Rhine. 

Unable  fuch  high  merit  to  reward, 
The  mob  refolv'd  to  fliow  a  great  regard  ; 
And  fo,  uniting,  join'd  their  forces 
To  draw  his  carnage,  and  dilrnifs  the  horfes. 

The  Earl  from  out  the  window  pok'd  his  face, 
And  told  the  mob  that  he  was  not  his  Grace  j- 

Then  bid  them  be  convinc'd,  and  look  : 
Hard  of  belief,  as  ev'n  the  hardeft  Jew, 
They  plumply  told  him  that  they  better  knew  ; 

Then  fwore  by  G  —  he  was  the  Duke  ; 
Then  threw  their  hats  in  air  with  loud  huzzas, 
And,  fhouting,  form'd  a  thunder  of  applaufe. 

Loud  bawl'd  the  Earl  that  they  were  all  deceiv'd  j 
Loud  bawl'd  the  mob  he  ftiould  not  be  believ'd  t 

"  Zounds!"  cry'd  the  Earl,  "  be  converts,  tlien,  this 

"  minute;" 

So  throwing  fixpence  to  them,  "  There,  there,  there, 
w  Take  that,"  cry'd  PETERBOROUGH,  with  a  fneer  — 

u  Now  if  you  think  I'm  hey  the  devil's  in  it." 


ODE 


SUBJECTS    FOR    FAINTERS. 


ODE  TO  A  DISTRESSED  BEAUTV. 

O  \VKET  girl,  forbear  to  droop  thy  head  with  fliarne— 
'  What  though  the  parfon  did  not  tie  the  knot  ? 

What  though  the  boy  floulJ  come  r — he'll  bring  thee 

feme — 
The  world's  an  aft,  and  cuftom  is  a  fot — 

Hold  up  thy  head,  and  meet  mankind  with  pride, 

And  throw  thy  bluflies  and  thy  fear?  afide. 

EVE  had  no  parfon — for  no  prieft  wa^  ADAM, 
And  yet  not  out  of  countenance  was  Madam  : 
Her  modefty  receiv'd  no  grievous  (hocks, 
When  Mafter  CAIN  was  put  upon  the  flocks; 
Nor  when,  t*  increafe  the  number  at  her  table, 
She  fet  about  the  frame  of  Matter  ABEL. 

Once  more,  then,  do  not  be  afraid : 

Without  thy  boy,  a  wonder  may  be  miffing ; 

A  likenefs  of  my  charming  maid, 
The  boy  may  do  a  credit  to  thy  kifiing. 

Thou  putt* ft  me  of  the  MORN  ING  much  in  mind, 
Who  leems  afraid  to  peep  upon  mankind ; 
So  flow  her  motions !  all  fo  very  flow  ! 
And  then  her  cheeks  fo  deep  with  crimfon  glow  : 

But  fafe  delivered  of  her  boy,  the  SUN, 
The  lulty  lad,  fo  proud  his  race  to  run, 

Mounts  high,  exulting  in  his  birth  ; 
Dries  up  her  tears,  htr  bin  flies  puts  to  flight, 
Tow'rs  in  bold  triumph  o'er  the  cloud  of  night, 

And  pours  a  flood  of  radiance  o'er  the  earth. 

Then  let  me  kifs  away  thy  tears ; 

Oh !  ceafe  thy  fighs,  and  be  a  happy  mother ; 
Awl  when  this  chopping  boy  apjx 

Suppofe  \ve  give  the  lad  a'little  brother  ? 

THE 


8To  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 


THE     GENTLEMAN 

AND 

//  I  S     JV  I  F  E. 

PEOPLE  may  have  too  much  of  a  good  thing : 
Full  as  an  egg  of  wifdom,  thus  1  fing  ! 


A  MAN  of  fome  fmall  fortune  had  a  wife, 
Sans  doute^  to  be  the  comfort  of  his  life ; 

And  pretty  well  they  bore  the  yoke  together : 
With  little  jarring  liv'd  the  pair  one  year ; 
Sometimes  the  matrimonial  fky  was  clear ; 

<At  times  'twas  dark,  and  dull,  and  hazy  weather. 

Now  came  the  time  when  miflrefs  in  the  ftraw 
Did,  for  the  world's  fupport,  her  fcreams  prepare 

And  SLOP  appear'd,  with  fair  obftetric  paw, 
To  introduce  his  pupil  to  our  air ; 

Whilft  in  a  neighb'ring  room  the  hufband  fat, 

Mufing  on  this  thing  now,  and  now  on  that; 

Now  fighing  at  the  forrows  of  his  wife ; 
Praying  to  Heav'n  that  he  could  take  the  pain ; 
But  recollecting  that  fuch  pray'rs  were  vain, 

He  made  no  more  an  offer  of  his  life. 

Atone,  as  thus  he  mus'd  in  folemn  ftudy, 
Ideas  fometimes  clear,  and  fometimes  muddy, 

In  BETTY  rufh'd  with  comfortable  news  : 
"  Sir,  Sir,  I  wifh  ye  jqy,  I  wifh  ye  joy ; 
**  Madam  is  brought  to  bed  of  a  fine  boy, 

"  As  fine  as  ever  flood  in  flioes." 


I'm 


SUBJECTS    FO*    PAINTERS.  fl 

I'm  glad  on't,  BETTY,"  cry'd  the  mafter : 
I  pray  there  may  be  no  difaftcr ; 
44  All's  with  your  miftrefs,  wit,  I  hope  ?" 
Quoth  fiie,  44  All's  well  as  heart  can  well  defire 
With  Madam  and  the  fine  young  'Squire ; 
44  So  likewife  fays  old  DOCTOR  SLOF." 

Off  BETTY  hurried  as  faft  as  (lie  could  fcour, 

Faft  and  as  hard  as  any  horfe 
That  trotteth  fourteen  miles  an  hoar — 
.  A  pretty  tolerable  courfe. 

Soon  happy  BETTY  came  again, 
Blowing  with  all  her  might  and  main ; 

Juft  Tike  a  grampus,  or  a  whale ;' 
In  founds,  t&>,  that  would  Calais  rench  from  Dover : 
44  Sir,  Sir,  more  happy  tidings ;  'tis  not  over — 

44  And  Madam's  brifker  than  a  nightingale : 

u  A  fine  young  lady  to  the  world  is  come, 
44  Squalling  away  juft  as  1  left  the  room : 
44  Sir,  this  is  better  than  a  good  eftate." 
44  Humph,"  quoth  ihe  happy  man,   and  fcratch'd  his 
pate. 

Now  gravely  looking  up— now  looking  down ; 
Not  with  a  fmile,  but  fomewhat  like  a  frown— 
•4  Good  God  !"  fays  he,  44  why  was,  not  I  a  cock, 
44  Who  never  feels  of  bura'ning  brats  the  (hock ; 

44  Who,  Turk-like,  ftruts  amidft  his  madams  picking, 
"  Whilft  to  the  hen  belongs  the  care 
44  To  carry  them  to  eat,  or  take  the  air, 

44  Or  bed  beneath  her  wing  the  chicken?" 

Juft  as  this  fweet  foliloquy  was  ended, 
He  found  affairs  not  greatly  mended ; 

For  in  bounc'd  BET,  her  rump  with  rapture  jigging  t 
41  Another  daughter,  Sir — a  charming  child."  * 
•4  Another!"  cry'd  the  man,  with  wonder  wild ; 

44  Zounds  !  BETTY,  aik  your  Miftrefs  if  (he's  figging." 

VOL.  II.  I  THE 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS 


THE    PARSON-DEALER. 

"VTTHAT  pity  *tis,  in  this  our  goodly  land, 
*       Amongft  the  apoftolic  band, 

So  ill  divided  are  the  loaves  and  fifties ! 
Archbifnops,  Bifhops,  Deans  and  Deacons, 
With  ruddy  faces  blazing  juft  like  beacons, 

Shall  daily  cram  upon  a  dozen  difhes ; 
Whilft  half  th'  inferior  Cafibcks  think  it  well, 
Of  beef  and  pudding  ev'n  to  get  the  fmell. 

A  plodding  Hoftler  willing  to  be  mafter, 
And  rife  in  this  good  world  a  little,  fatter, 

Left  br,oom  and  manger  at'the  Old  Blue  Boar ; 
Meaning  by  pars'ning  to  fupport  a  table, 
Lo,  of  Divines  he  kept  a  liv'ry  ftabie ; 

A  pretty  ftud,  indeed— about  a  fcore. 

Of  different  colours  were  his  gofpel  hacks  ; 
Some  few  were  whites,  indeed — but  many  blacks : 

That  is,  fome  tolerable— many  fad ; 
And  verily,  to  give  the  Devil  his  due, 
The  man  did  decency  purfue, 

Which  fliows  he  was  not  quite  fo  bad. 

For,  lo  !  to  dying  perfons  of  nobility, 
He  fent  his  parfons  of  gentility^ 

To  give  the  ne£e(Tary  pray'r : 
To  parting  people  of  a  mean  condition, 
Wanting  a  foul  phyfician, 

He  fuited  them  with  blackguards  to  a  hair. 

To  fuch  as  were  of  mild  diforders  dying, 

,  Vi%.  of  the  doftor,  gouts,  or  ftones,  or  gravels, 
He  fent  good  priefts— -  of  manners  edifying— 
To  comfort  finners  on  their  travels ; 


Bu 


SUBJECTS    FOB.    PAINTERS.  3J 

But  to  Ivy)  people  in  infe&ious  fever, 

Or  any  other  dangerous  one  in  vogue, 
Such  was  hib  hoiiHty,  the  man  for  ever 

Moft  fcrupuloufly  fent  a 


It  happrn'd,  on  a  day  when  FATE  was  raging, 
Crimp-like,  for  other  regions,  troops  engaging, 

When  clergymen  were  bufy  all  as  bees, 
A  poor  old  dy'in*  woman  fent 
To  this  fame  parfon  monger,  compliment, 

Begging  a  clergyman  her  foul  to  cafe. 

Unluckily  but  one  was  in  the  flail, 
And  h  the  very  beft  of  all.  — 

What  fhould  be  done? 
Necc/ptas  non  habet  Jcgs  — 
So  to  the  prieft  he  goes,  and  begs 
Tfcat  he  would  vifit  the  old  crone. 

"  Sir,"  quoth  the  parfon,  "  I  agreed 
•*  To  go  to  gentltfolls  in  time  of  need, 

"  But  not  to  ev'ry  poor  old  loufy  foul."— 
•'  True,"  cry'd  the  patron;  **  to  be  furc  'tis  true  : 
"  But  parfon,  do  oblige  me  —  prithee  do—  - 

44  Let's  put  her  decently  into  the  hole  :  ' 

"  All  my  black  tribe,  you  know,  are  now  abroad— 
44  I'd  do  it,  if  I  could,  myftlf,  by  God  ; 

44  Then  what  a  dickens  can  I  do  or  fay  ?" 
"  Go,  mumble,  man,  about  a  pray'r  and  half  ; 
44  Tell  the  old  b—  ch  her  foul  is  fafe  ; 

44  Then  take  your  fee,  and  come  away  !  !  !" 


I  a  BIEN- 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 


B  I  E  N  S  E  A  N  C  E. 

HP  HERE  is  a  little  moral  thing  in  France, 
-*-    Call'd  by  the  natives  Bienseance  : 
Much  are  the  Englifh  mob  inclin'd  to  £cout  it, 
But  rarely  is  Monfieur  Canaille  without  it. 

To  Bienseance  'tis  tedious  to  incline, 

In  many  cafes ; 

To  flatter,  par  example,  keep  fmooth  faces 
When  kick'd,  or  fuff'ring  grievous  want  of  coin, 

To  vulgars,  Bienseance  may  feem  an  oddity. 
I  deem  it  a  moft  portable  commodity ; 

A  fort  of  magic  wand ; 
Which,  if  'tis  us'd  with  ingenuity, 
Although  an  utenfil  of  much  tenuity, 

In  place  of  fomethingyo//W  it  will  ftand. 

For  verily  I've  marvell'd  times  enow 
/  To  fee  an  Englifliman,  the  ninny, 
Give  people  for  their  fervices  a  guinea. 

Which  Frenchmen  have  rewarded  with  a  law* 

Bows  are  a  bit  of  Bienseance 
Much  practised  too  in  that  fame  France ; 
Yet  call'd  by  Quakers,  children  of  inanity : 
But  as  they,  pay  their  court  to  people's  vanity, 
Like  rolling-pins  they  fmooth  where'er  they  go 
The  fouls  and  faces  of  mankind,  like  dough ! 
^ith'fome,  indeed,  may  Bienseance  prevail 
To  folly— fee  the  under-written  tale. 


THE 


SUBJECTS    FOR    P4HCTBRS.  b 

THE 

PETIT    M AITRE 

AND    THI 

MAN    ON    THE    WHEEL. 

» 

AT  Paris,  fome  time  ft  nee,  a  rmird'ring  man, 
f*  A  German,  and  a  moft  unlucky  c 
Sad,  ftumbling  at  the  threshold  of  his  plan, 
Fell  into  Madam  JUSTICE'S  flrong  trap, 

The  bungler  \ras  condemn'd  to  grace  the  wheel. 
On  which-the  dulleft  fibres  learn  to  feel ; 

His  fitnbsfcctuufum  arttm  to  be  broke 
Amidft  ten  thoufand  people,  p'rhans,  or  more, 
.cnever  Monfieur  Ketch  apply 'd  a  ftroke, 
The  culprit,  like  a  bullock,  made  a  ro 

A  flippant  Pe/it-maftrc,  (kipping  by, 

Stepp'd  uj)  to  him,  and  check'd  him  for  his  cry : 

u  Boh  !"  quoth  the  German ;  '*  an't  1  'pon  de  wheel  ? 

**  D'  ye  tink  my  nerfs,  an  Wood,  and  bous  can't  fcel  ?" 

u  Sir,"  quoth  the  beau,  "  don't,  don't  be  in  a  paffion; 
a  I've  nought  to  fay  about  your  fituation  ; 
a  But  making  fuch  a  hideous  noife  in  France, 
u  Fellow,  is  contrary 


I  3  THE 


$6  .  SUBJECT*    FOR    PAINTER*. 

THE 

TRIUMPH    OF    ISIS, 

OR 

DOCTOR    CHAPMAN'S    THESIS* 


OXFORD'S  Vice-Chancellor,  a  man 
Who  fear'd  the  Lord,  and  lov'd  the  courtier  clan, 
By  virtue  of  his  trade  a  THESIS  *  ordered, 
Which  eurs'd  the  terrible  aflalfination 
Intended  for  the  Monarch  of  our  nation 

By  MARG'RET  NICHOLSON,  in  mind  diforder'd; 
That  likewife  prais'd  the  royal  peep 
On  Oxford  and  the  arts  fo  deep. 

"So  violent  was  Do&or  CHAPMAN'S  zeal, 

He  quite  forgot  Latinity  and  graces ; 
Poor  Prifcian's  head,  whofe  wounds  he  cannot  heal, 

Was  broken  in  half  a  dozen  places. 

Yet,  though  a  fimple  Doftor,  how  amazing ! 
He  fef  the  Univerfity  a  blazing.: 
Such  was  the  kindling  zeal  that  he  inherits— 
A  farthing  candle  in  a  cafk  of  fpirits ! 

Richards  of  Trinity,  who  won  the  prize, 
Now  ftrutted  viclor  forth  with  fcornful  eyes; 
Bringing  to  mind  the  rJards  and  tuneful  dames 
Who  vied  for  conqueft  at  th'  Olympic  games. 

*  A  Latin  Thefis  is  annually  given  out  by  the  Vice- Chancellor 
for  the  fubjedt  of  a  Poem,  and  twenty  pounds  allotted  to  the  prize  can 
didate. 

JL  Forth 


SUBJECTS    FOK    FAXNTEKS.  67 

Forth  march'd,  too,  Vice — vMtlicef,  the  Doftor, 
Who,  purring  for  preferment,  flily  monfet^ 

Attended  by  each  dog-whipper,  call'd  Proftor, 
And  eke  the  heads  and  tails  of  all  the  Houfes. 

Forth  march'd  the  Nobles  in  their  Sunday's  geer  j 
Forth  ftrutted,  too,  each  beadle,  like  the  Peer, 
With  filver  frafft,  blue  gowns,  and  velvet  caps ; 
A  fet  of  very  pompous  -looking  chaps ! 

'.ft  Hayes,*  who  flicks  like  (lag-hounds  to  a  haunch,. 
Mov'd  on  in  all  the  Mnjefty  of  paunch  : 
To  greet  of  all  our  ears  the  trembling  drums, 
The  piper  play'd  '  The  conqu'ring  hero  comes.' 

Loud  groan'd  the  organ  through  his  hundred  pipes, 
As  if  the  poor  machine  had  felt  die  gripes  \. 
As  if,  too,  'twas  the  organ's  firm  perfuafloiis, 
He  oit  had  roar'd  on  more  fublime  occafions. 

Now  CHAPMAN  took,  'mid  ft  great  com  peers,  hisftation; 
CREW  open'd  fubjecl  in  a  fair  oration ; 

Then  clapp'd  was  CREW — to  him  applaufc  was  news. 
Now  Van  the  BARD  his  poem  to  recite, 
And,  fearing,  bade  poor  Common  Scnfe  good  night, 

So  lofty  were  the  pinions  of  his  Mufe  ! 

Thick  as  the  pattering  hnil  his  praifes  fhow'r ; 
So  ftrong  is  POETRY'S  mechanic  pow'r, 

High  mounts  the  Monarch  by  his  tuneful  lever ; 
His  Mufe's  magnifying  art  fo  great, 
Behold  his  George,  an  Alfred  form  complete  ; 

Small  Pegr  Goliah;  and  her  knife  a  cleaver ! 

Nou-  back  the  fable  bodies  mov'd  a^ain, 

Like  beetles  all  fo  thick,  a  crawling  hoft  ; 
Whilft  contemplation  wrapp'd  the  loyal  train, 

Expefting,  by  the  next  day's  poft, 
To  fee  their  a£h  in  pompous  print  difplay'd, 
And  wreaths  of  glory  crown  the  cavalcade  ! 
*  The  erganift. 

ASE- 


88.  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS* 

A    SERIOUS   REFLECTION". 

HOW  ufelefs  was  thr  above  !  each  perfon  grieves,. 
And,  with  the  grieving  Doctor,  cries  out  fhame, 
That  fo  much  loyal  zeal  for  nought  fbould  flame  t 

Not  ev'n  obtain  a  pair  of  coarfe  lawn  ileeves, 

Which  poor  Saint  David  giveth  to  fupport 

The  holy  oil-of-fool  men  of  a*  Court  I 


ODE    TO     PATIENCE.. 


daughter  of  Religion,  modeft  faiiy 
Thy  hands  upon,  thy  botbm  fo  tranquille^ 
With  eyes  to  Heav'n,  with  fo  divine  an  air, 

So  calmly  fmiling,  fo  reiign'd  thy  will  ; 
Oh,  fent  to  teach  us,  and  our  pailions  cooly 
I  wifh  thou  hadft  a  little  larger  fchool. 

Lo,  man,  fo  great  his  want  of  grace, 
If  he  but  cuts  a  pimple  on  his  face 

When  fhaving  ; 

Like  man  bewitch'd  he  jumps  about, 
Kicks  up  a  moft  infernal  rout, 

And  feemeth  abfoiutely  raving  ; 
And,  lo  !  all  this  for  want  of  thy  tuition  : 
Thus  travel  fouls  of  people  to  perdition  ! 

Stand  at  ray  fide,  O  ftoic  dame  ! 

On  ftarling  MARTYN  bid  me  cry  out  "  fhame,'r 

Inftead  of  knocking  the  dul;  fellow  down  ; 
When  up  the  ninpyhamrner  ftarts  to  preach, 
And  impudently  interrupts  a  fpeech 

Of  orators  of  fair  and  fir  ft  renown, 
Juft  like  the  owl  that  fcares  the  moonlight  hour,, 
Whiift  Philomela,  warbles  from  her  bovv'r. 


And 


JUBJECTS    FOIL    *AINT£RS.  1$ 

And,  oh  !  attend  me  when  my  eyes 
View  dedications  fill'd  with  rulfome  lies, 

In  praife  of  gen'rous  Queens  and  Kings ! 
Heav'n  fwell  the  fountains  of  their  hearts, 
That  feldom  water  the  poor  (hrivell'd  arts, 

However  fweetly  ADULATION  fings  ! 

Eke,  when  I  hear  that  fhipid  Parfon  HILL, 
God's  houfe  with  ev'ry  nonfenfe  fill, 

And  "then  with  blasphemy  each  fentence  cramm'd; 
And  when  I  hear  th'  unpoftor  cry, 
"  I've  news,  ye  ragamuffins,  from  the  (ky ; 

"  I'm  come  to  tell  ye,  that  you'll  all  be  damn'd ; 

•*  I'm  come  from  God,  ye  (trumpets — come  from  God— 
"  I'm  God  Almighty's  fervant— hear  my  voice." — 

Which,  if  it  werefo,  would  be  vaftly  odd, 

Since  Heav'n  would  (how  bad  judgment  in  the  choice. 

Dead  all  his  money-loving  foul's  defires, 

When  fubtle  HAWKESB'RY  talks  of  patriot  fires, 

And  yielding  places  up  to  fave  the  nation ; 
When  of  importance  braggeth  fimple  LEEDS  ; 
When  GLO'STBE'S  far-fam'd  wife  for  jneeknefs  pleads; 

And  GLO'STER'S  Duke  breathes  war  and  defolation: 

When  BRUDENBLL  talks  of  elegance  and  cafe; 
When  THURLOW  turns  the  firft  of  devotees, 

And,  to  aftound  the  million,  builds  a  church ; 
When  royal  folk  of  pureft  friend  (hip  boaft, 
Make  gcnerofity  their  conftant  toaft, 

Yet  leave  poor  pining  MERIT  in  the  lurch  ; 

When  wonders  thro'  his  fpyglafs  MARLB'ROUGH  view?, 
And  fends  to  BANKS  the  great,  th'  important  news, 

Freih  from  his  cranium's  philofophic  fogs  ; 
When  DICK  defcants  on  any  thing  but  croute; 
Whea  THOMPSON  ought  performs  beyond  a  fcout, 

And  MAWBEY  talks  of  any  thing  but  hogs  ; 
Sweet  PATIHNCE,  footh  me  with  thy  faint-like  note, 
Or,  driv'n  to  madneis,  I  (hall  cut  my  throat ! 


C^O  SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS. 

TO    A    NEST    OF    LORDS. 

TDEDCHAMBER  utenfils,  ye  feem  difirefs'd, 
•*"*  And  fwear  with  horror  that  my  rhymes  moleft 

Of  certain  folks  fo  great  the  fweet  repofe ; 
Running  about  with  horrors,  groans,  and  fighs, 
And  floods,  produc'd  by  onio'ns  in  your  eyes, 

So  ftrong  your  friendfhip,  and  fo  vaft  your  woes  ! 

Dear  humming  Lords,  on  friendfhip  bray  no  more, 

Nor  thus  the  Bard's  depravity  deplore : 

Lo !  like  youi  felves,  each  man  his  trumpet  bears, 

In  tame  CREDULITY'S  wide-gaping  ears, 

Of  friend fbip  the  fubiimity  to  found ; 

Frkndftiip !  in  dictionaries  only  faund ! 

Perchaunce,  my  Lords,  in  foreign  parts  you've  been ; 
Perchaunce  your  optics  fair  Veriaiiles  have  feen ; 

Likt'vvife  toe  Vatican,  with  dl  its  ftate; 
And  elc  rl,'  Hfcurial,  pride  of  Spain  confeft: 
But,  'midfi  thofe  ibenes,  did  e'er  your  eyeballs  bleft 

See  a  pig-  hanging  -in  a  gate  ? 

If  e'er  you  did  this  la  ft  great  fight  behold, 
You  need  not,  l.6rd>  fo  fapieat,  to  be  told 

What  inoft  untuneful  notes  the  pris'ner  makes: 
Indeed  the  hog  his  mouth  a/id  lung-  employs 
In  raifingfuch  ear-crucifying  nolle, 

As  if  he  really  was  transfix'd  with  flakes.^ 

Nov/  near  him  fhould  there  happen  to  be  hogs     , 
Paffing  their  happy  hours  amidft  the  bogs, 

Greycing  foft  thing?  to  their  own  flcm  and  bloo4; 
That  is,  upon  their  fweetheart-:  and  their  brides. 
Lying  like  ancient  Romans  on  their  fides, 

And  dining  on  the  dainties  of  the  mud  j 

Forgetting  love,  and  dainty  mnd  fo  fatt'ning, 
In  which  they  had  been  batt'ning, 

Up 


SUBJECTS    FOR    PAINTERS.  91 

Up  leaps  the  herd  of  fwine  for  his  protection  ; 
Juil  like  the  herd  that  had  the  devil, 
Away  they  fcamper,  all  fo  civil, 
Refolving  or  to  free  him  or  to  die : 
Such  js  of  fwine  the  friendly  quality, 
Although  proverbial  for  brutality  ! 

But  when,  at  Newgate  to  be  hung, 
A  Chriftian  pours  a  dying  fong, 

I  grant  that  numbers  haften  to  the  wretch, 
Moft  pig-like — but,  alas  !  lift  not  a  hand 
To  kerp  him  longer  in  the  land, 

And  fnatch  him  from  the  talons  of  Jack  Ketch. 

No ;  on  the  contrary,  fo  fond  their  eyes 
Of  feeing  how  a  brother  dies, 
I,  from  the  bottom  of  my  foul,  believe 
They  would  not  wifli  him  a  reprieve. 

Thus,  were  your  good  friend  PITT  condemned  to  fwing ; 

Nay,  ev'n  were  greater  people  1  could  name, 

For  whom  with  goodly  zeal  ye  feeni  to  flame ; 
I  don't  believe  you'd  wifli  to  cut  the  firing, 

Were  ye  but'tolerably  furc 

The  next  in  pow'r  would  give  you  fixpencc  more. 

Learn  then,  my  Lords   (though  with  contempt  ye  treat 

'em) 
Friendfliip  from  hogs,  as  well  as  eat  'em. 


AT  length  my  fubje&s  end  ;  and  now 

To  FOLLY  let  nu  make  my  beft  Court  bow. 

O  Goddefs  !   ftill  monopolize  the  G RE) AT  : 
Then  oft,  to  pleafe  the  palate  of  the  times, 
The  Mufe  fhall  r<de  to  market  with  fier  rhymes, 

And  thrive  upon  her  Helicon  eftate. 


TKX 


EXPOSTULATORY  ODES 

TO  A 

GRE4T    DUKE 

AND   A 

LITTLE     LORD. 


»  .  TorrtMf  Jicendi  rty/u  **lrity 

Etjua  mortiftra  eft  factttuti*  ! 

JuTfKAL. 

l^ull  many  a  wight  hath  fufficr'd  l<  r  a  fong, 
And  cursM  his  volubility  of  tongue. 

That  Ptter  may  no;  /  ..«  have-  caufc  to  (ay 
With  Juvenal  po«r  fellow,  let  us  pray  ! 


VOL.  IT.  K 


EPISTLE    DEDICATORY. 

\  _  i 

MY  LORDS, 

"\7OUR  UNCOMMON  ATTENTION  to  my 

late  publications  demand  a  return  of 
gratitude.  Permit  me  to  prefent  to  your  LORDSHIPS 
the  following  Lyric  Trifles,  which,  if  poflefled  of  merit 
fufficient  to  preferve  them  from  oblivion,  will  inform 
Poflerity  that  you  exijled. 

I  am,  my  LORDS, 

&c.  &c.  &c. 
/  PETER  PINDAR. 


(     9*     ) 


EXPOSTULATORY  ODES, 


ODE    I. 


AT  OST  noble  Peers,  there  goes"  an  odd  report, 
*yjb  That  you,  prime  fav'rites  of  an  kmtft  Court, 

Are  hunting  treafon  'mkUl  my  publications; 
Hunting,  like  bloodhounds,  with  the  keeneft  nofes, 
Which  hound-like  hunting  nat'rally  fuppofes 

The  Bard  dares  fatirize  the  KING  OF  NATIONS. 

Ye  (harp  ftate-moufers,  with  your  watering  jaws, 
God  keep  me  from  the  vengeance  of  your  claws  ! 
An  Afiatic  fight  may  be  renew'd  : 
What  feathers  flying,  what  a  field  of  blood, 

Twixt  falcon  BURKE  and  SHERIDAN,  fo  brave, 
And  heron  HASTINGS,  fiich  a  dainty  dilh, 
So  wont  to  cram  on  Afiatic  fifli, 

The  large  ft,  fatteft  of  the  eaftern  wave  ! 

Yes,  yes,  I  hear  that  ye  have  watch  'd  my  note, 
And  wilh'd  to  fqueez'e  my  tuneful  throat  : 
When  THURLOW  your  defign.s  moft  wifely  fcoutedr 
Swearing  the  Poet  fliouid  not  yet  be  knouted. 

Th  s  when  grimalkin  in  its  cage  efpies 

A  linnet  or  canary  bird,  fo  Kreet  ; 
The  fcoundrei  .  nclitred,  his  eyes, 

(Jourriving  how  the  warbler's  back  to  greet  : 


He 


96  EXPOSTULATO'RY    ODES. 

He  fqulnts,  and  licks  his  lips,  (talks  round  and  round, 
Twinkling  with  mifchief  fraught  his  tiger  tail ; 

Now  on  his  rump  he  fits,  in  thought  profound, 
Looks  up  with  hungry  wifhes  to  afiail ; 

When  Hidden  enters  mafter  with  a  roar, 

And  kicks  the  fcheming  murd'rer  to  the  door. 


ODE    II. 

T3  IGHT  honeft  watch-dogs  of  the  State, 
A  *•  I  like  to  fmile  at  Kings,  but  treafon  hate. 

Mod  bufy  JENKINSON,  BUTE'S  oncebeft  friend, 

A  praife  that  ftamps  a  character  divine ; 
Believe  not  thus  the  Poet  can  offend  j 

Ye  Gods !  can  PETER  pour  th'  unloyal  line  ? 

/PETER,  perpetrate  fo  foul  a  thing  ! 

/  offer  mifchief  to  fo  good  a  King  ! 

Now  be  it  known  to  all  the  realms  around, 

I.  would  not  lofe  my  LIEGE  for  twenty  pound  * 

Mild  Os BORNE,  fofter  than  the  down  of  goofe, 

I  beg  thou  wilt  not  let  fufpicion  loofe ; 

If  fo,  of  hiftory  I'll  turn  compiler — 

Divulge  fome  tame  amours  with  Miftrefs  Cu  YLER  ; 

So  tame,  indeed,  fo  iingularly  ftupid. 

As  gave  a  blufli  to  little  pimping  Cupid  ! 

O  Heav'ns !  can  JENKINSON  and  OSBORNE  long, 
Foes  to  the  Mufe,  to  cut  out  PETER'S  tongue  ? 
Arm'd  with  the  Jove-like  thunders  of  the  crown, 
To  knock  with  thofe  dread  bolts  a  fimple  Poet  down  ? 

Lo  !  into  life  again  ft  my  will  I  tumbled ; 

And,  fays  my  nurfe,  I  made  a  horrid  clatter; 
Kick'd,  fprawl'd,  and  fputter'd,   gap'd,  and  cry'd,   and 

grumbled, 
Quite  angry,  feemingly,  with  .Mother  NATURE  ; 

Who 


EXPOSTULATORY    ODES.  97 

Who,  queen-like,  thinking  all  (he  does  is  right, 
Againft  my  wiflies  lugg'd  me  into  light ; 
And  what  is  harder,  and  worfc  manners  ftill, 
She'll  kick  me  out  of  it  againft  my  will. 

Yet  fince  on  this  world's  theatre  I'm  thrown. 
Which  with  my  temper  now  begins  to  fuit ; 

And  fince  its  drama  pleafes,  I  mult  own 
I  fliould  be  forry  to  remain  a  mute ; 

Inclin'd  to  fay,  like  BECK  FORD,  undeterr'd, 

"  By  G— d  I'll  fpeak,  and  d-mme  I'll  be  heard."* 

My  Lords,  I  fain  would  live  a  little  longer ; 

For,  lo !  defire,  as  to  a  bofom  wife, 

Undoubtedly  the  greateft  blifs  of  life, 
Hath  taken  deeper  root  and  ftronger. 

Would  HE  who  made  the  world  look  down,  and  fajr, 
••  PET EI,  wilt  live  on  earth  a  thouiand  years  ?" 

44  Lord,  Lord,"  I  fliould  delighted  roar  away, 
"  Ten  thoufand,  if  to  thee  it  meet  appears." 

•«  So  long  !  what  for?'1  the  Deity  may  cry. 
"  O  great  Divinity,  quoth  I, 

"  A  thou&nd  reafons ;  principally  one, . 
"  To  fee  the  prefent  Prince  of  Wales, 
M  Whom  many  an  afpic  tongue  ailails, . 

"  Aloft  on  Britain's  envied  throne^, 

"  Where  half  the  Monarchs  that  have  fat  before 
"  Have  only  fat  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  fnore ; 
**  To  blaft,  nay  damn  the  credit  of  the  age, 
u  And  loau-wim  folly  Hift'ry's  blu dung  .page/' 

*  The  Houfe  of  Commons  frequently  refounJed  with  thofc  empha 
tic  cxprefliuna  of  the  late  angry  patriotic  Alderman,  when  gentlemen, 
by  fciaping,  hemming,  coughing,  and  graining  (to  adopt  the  phrafco- 
logy  of  my  old  friend  Ductor  Johni>  n)  meant  to  oppugn  the   impe- 
of  pecuniary  arrogance,  and  ar.iiihiLitc^the  ebulLionof  pertm.i- 
' 

K  3  Ar.d, 


98  EJtPOSTULATOR-?     ODES. 

And,  JEN  KINS  ON,  fhould  thy  hard  face  beholcf, 
A  GEORGE  THE  FOURTH  upon  the  throney 

Adieu  at  once  thy  age  of  gold  ! 

Behold  thy  hopes  of  higher  honours  gone  ! 

Then  get  thyfelf  an  Earldom  quick,  quick,  quick, 

For  fear  of  FORTUNE'S  wild  vagaries ; 
Thus  fliall  thy  daughters  all,  like  raufhrooms  thick, 
Rife  Lady  JOANS  and  MADGES,  NELLS  and  MARYS* 


ODE    III. 

T  OWN  I  love  the  PRINCE — his  virtues  charm  : 
-*-  I  know  the  youth  receiv'd  from  heav'n  a  heart 
In  friendfhip's  caufe  I  know  his  boforn  warm, 
That  maketh  certain  folk  with  wonder  ftart. 

'Tis  true,  that  from  my  foul  the  man  I  hate, 
Immers'd  in  mammon,  and  by  mis'ry  got; 

Who,  to  complete  his  dinner,  licks  his  platef 
And  wifhes  to  have  ev'ry  thing  for  nought : 

Who,  if  he  gam'd,  the  dice  would  meanly  cog ; 
Rob  the  blind  beggar's  fcrip,  and  ftarve  his  dog : 
And  that  there  are  fuch  wretches  near  a  throne, 
Degraded  NATURE  tells  it  with  a  groan. 

Perdition  catch  the  money-grafping  wretch, 
With  hook-like  fingers  ever  on  the  ftretch, 
Who,  fighting,  vents  on  CHARITY  a  curfe, 
That  afks,  for  WANT,  a  penny  from  his  purfe  ! 

The  heart  that  lodges  in  that  mifer's  breaft, 
For  money,  feels  the  hunger  of  the  fliajrk  ; 

Reiembling,  too,  the  rufty  iron  cheft' 

That  holds  his  idol— clofe,  and  hard,  and  dark. 


Give 


EXP08TULATORY    OP  99 

jive  me  the  youth  who  dares  at  times  unbend; 
And.  .  MODERATION'S  prude-like  dare, 

-Can  to  her  teeth,  and  to  the  world,  declare, 
Ebriety  a  merit  with  a  friend. 

When  FRIENDSHIP  draws  the  corks,  and  bids  the  dome 
\\irli  mirth  and  Tallies  of  the  foul,  rcfound  ; 

When  FRIENDSHIP  bids  the  bowl  o'erflowing  foam, 
Till  MORNING  eyes  the  board  with  plenty  crown'd; 

Behold  the  VIRTUES  that  fublimely  foar, 

Iiulead  of  meanly  damning,  cry  u  Ennrt" 


ODE    IV. 

"\lfITH  you,  my  Lords,  I'm  ev'ry  thing  that's  evil  j 

There's  frarce  a  crime  I've  not  committed ; 
The  verv  eflence  of  the  devil ; 

Dt  ..rving  by  the  demon  to  be  fpitted. 

Juft  like  a  turkey,  goofe,  or  clue', 

Prepar'd  by  Joan  th?  cook  to  go  to  fire ; 
So  wanton  have  you  both  been  pleas'd  to  pluck 

The  fwan  who  beats  in  fong  his  Thebian  fire. 

Of  ev'ry  quality  am  I  bereft — 
Not  even  tne  Qir.tlow  of  a  virtue  left; 
Not  one  fnvui  moral  leather  in  my  wings,' 
When  dead,  to  lift  me  to  the  King  of  Kings. 

My  Lords,  beware — by  mouthing  oft  my  name 
Un  wifely,  ye  may  Jama  me  into  fame : 
By  letting  thus  your  Ipieen  on  PETER  loofe, 
He  builds  triumprui  arches  on-  abufe  ! 

In  vain  the  BARD  turns  oculift,  and  tries 

To  purge  the  fil.n  in  .in  i'u's  world's  tlarken'd  eyes  : 

In  vain  to  Primers  and  to  Printers  devils 

J  fly,  and  advertife  to  cure  King's  Evils ; 

With 


10O  EXPOSTULATORY    ODESv 

With  huge  contempt  ye  look  on  me,  alack  ! 
My  noftrums  curfe,  and  call  the  BARD  a  quack. 

In  general,  authors  are  fuch  coward  things, 
They  fear  to  fpeak  their  fentiments  of  Kings, 

Till  thofe  fame  Kings  are  dead ;  and  then  the  crowd,. 
(Juft  like  a  pack  of  hounds)  hiftorian,  bard, 
With  throats  of  thunder  run  his  mem'ry  hard, 

And  try  to  tear  him  piecemeal  from  his  ihroud. 

Now,  if  we  wHh  a  Monarch  to  reclaim, 

In  God's  name  let  us  fpeak  before  he's  dead ; 

Or  elfe  'tis  ten  to  one  we  mifs  our  aim, 

By  flaying  till  the  FATES  have  cut  his  thread: 

After  this  operation  of  their  knife, 

I  ne'er  knew  reformation  in  my  life.. 

And  yet,  what  is  the  greateft  King,  when  dead, 
When  duft :  and  worms  his  eyes  and  ears  o'erfp ready. 
And  low  he  lies  beneath  the  ftone  ? 
The  man  who  millions  call'd  his  own, 
Howe'er  his  fpe&re  may  be  willing,' 
Cannot  give  change  t'ye  for  ^ 


O  D  E    V. 

"V^OUR  taunting  voices  now,  my  Lords,  Iheary 
-**    And  thus  they  grate  the  poet's  loyal  ear : 
w  BARD,  we  are  both  fuperiostothy  lays  ; 
*'  Deaf  to  thy  cenfure,  and  defpife  thy  praife. 

**  Know  that  our  Monarch  lifts  his  head  fublime 
**  Beyond  the  reach  of  groveling  rhyme, 

44  An  Atlas,  hiding  midit  the  thickeft  clouds  *, . 
*'  Whilil  thou,  a  beetle,  doom'd  to  buzz  below, 
**  In  circles,  envious,  rambling  to  and  fro, 

4i  Survey'ft  the  filming  mift,  his  head  that  (hrotids. 

"  Thy 


EXPOSTULATORY    ODES.  101 

Thy  rhymes  infulting  Kings  with  pigmy  pride, 
44  Are  like  die  feas  mad  waves  that  make  a  pother, 
Wild  ru filing  on  fome  promontory's  fide, 
44  One  noify  blockhead  following  another  : 

The  (lately  promontory  feems  to  fay, 
"  Afpiring  fools,  go  back  again,  go  home : 
At  once  the  fhoulder'd  bullies,  dafli'd  a\ 
44  Sink  from  his  lofty  fide  in  fruitlcfs  foam. 

Thou,  with  rabfcallions  like  thyfelf, 

A  poor  opiniated  fenfelefs  elf, 

Letting  on  Kings  thy  pen  licentious  loofe, 

Art  like  an  impudent  lane  goofe» 

Who,  as  the  traveler  calmly  trots  along, 

Starts  from  amongft  his  flock,  an  ill-bred  throng, 

Waddli ne-  with  pok'd-out  neck,  and  voice  focoarle, 

As  if  to  (wallow  up  the  man  ajid  horfe  : 

With  rumpled  feathers  to  the  fteed  he  deals : 

And,  like  a  coward,  maps  him  by  the  heels : 

Then  to  his  gang,  with  napping  pinions  hobbling, 

The  fool  erecr  returns  Tt  Devm  gobbling, 

And  from  each  brother's  greeting  gullet  draws 

The  mingkd  triumph  of  a  coarle  applaufc, 

As  if  the  trotting  enemies  were  beaten, 

And  man  and  jwlfry  fairly  kilPd  and  eaten. 

4  Poor  rogue^  thou  haft  not  got  the  trifling  fpirit 
4  To  own  thy  King  e'er  did  one  art  of  merit." 

My  Lord-,  ulrh  great  fubmiflion  to  your  fen fe, 
jiving  the  lie,  yet  hoping  no  offence  ; 
\n  act  is  his  my  heart  with  rapture  hails— 
GEOKGE  gave  the  world  the  PRINCE  OF  WALES; 
A  Prince,  who,  when  he  fills  Old  England's  throne, 

The  Vi;  .;  fair  SCIENCE  (hall  furround  it; 

And  when  he  quits  die  fccptre,  all  (hall  owa 
He  left  it  as  vnfullitd  as  he  found  it. 


ODE 


EXPOSTULATORY    ODES. 


ODE      VI. 

(THREAT  was  the  Bard's  defire  to  fmg  the  Queen, 
^*    Vaft  in  her  foul,  majeflic  in  her  mien : 
But  fierce  GEORGE  HARDING  *  fwore  if  .pens  or  pen^ 
Of  woman,  women,  man,  or  men, 

In  any  wife  or  fhape,  in  ode  or  tale, 
Dar'd  mention  that  fuperior  Lady,  lo  ! 
The  law  fliould  deal  themfucA  a  blow  l—r 

Hang,  pill'ry,  or  confine  for  life  in  jail ! 

And  as  a  kite,  on  whom  the  fmall  birds  flare, 
That  tow'ring  critic  of  the  air, 

Is  oft  befet  by  tribes  of  rooks  and  crows, 
Amidft  the  cryftal  fields  of  Heav'n  ; 

By  whofe  hard  beaks  and  wings,  no  common  foes, 
Sad  knocks  to  gentle  kite^re  giv'n ; 

Surrounded  thus  amidft:  that  lofty  hall, 

Nam'd  Weitminfter,  the  gentle  Bard 
Might  of  the  fable  legions  tafte  the  gall : 
He,  therefore,  wifely  means  to  play  his  card ; 
The  Poet's  quidltbet  audendi  waves, 
And  thus  his  hide  an  old  companion  faves. 

Ah,  me  !  the  legiflators  of  Parnaflus, 
In  liberty,  though  Englifhmen,  furpafs  us  ! 
What's  found  at  Hippocrene,  the  Poet's  SPA, 
Is  not,  I  ween,  at  WeftminfW,  found  law  1 

Parnaflus  never  with  rare  GENIUS  wars; 
But  aiding,  lifts  its  head  to  ftrike  ,the  ftars  : 

At  Weflminfter  how  diff'rent  is  his  fate  1 
Where  if  he  {bars  fubiime,  and  boldly  fmgs, 
The  fheers  of  Law,  like  FATE'S,  fliall  fnip  his  wings, 

And  bid  him  warble  through  an  iron  grate. 

Perchaunce  law-neckcloths,  .form'd  of  deal  or  oak, 
Like  marriage,  often  an  unpleafarit  yoke, 
*  Solicitor  to  the  Queen.. 

Shall 


EXPOSTULATORT    ODES.  103 

Shall  rudely  hug  his  harmlefs  throat, 

And  flop  his  Apollinian  note ; 

The  empire  of  fair  Poetry  o'erturning, 

And  putting  every  gende  MUSE  in  mourning. 


ODE      VII. 

TE  tell  me  both,  with  grievous  malice  carping, 
*•     On  one  dull  tune  eternally  I'm  harping. 

You  would  havefaid  to  MILTON  jurf  the  fame; 
fho  through  twelve  books  the  head  of  Satan  maul'd ; 
Jch  names  the  prince  of  darknefs  called, 

As  muft  have  made  you  roar  out  '  fliame  !' 

e  would  (or  greatly  I  miftake)  have  faid, 
"  What ! "  MILTON,  always  plaguing  the  poor  Devil! 
For  ever  beating  Nick  about  the  head  ! 
"  How  canft  thou  be  fo  dev'lifhly  uncivil  ? 

Was  not  one  book  fufficient  for  thy  fpleen, 
44  But  muft  thou  to  a  mummy  beat  him, 
"  And,  like  a  pickpocket,  fo  barb'rous  treat  him 
Through  books  a  dozen,  or  fourteen  :" 

uppofe  thefe  things  ye  could  have  utter'd, 
And  glorious  MILTON,  like  a  ninny, 
Had  anfwcr'd,  "  There  is  fcnfe  and'  reafoQ  in  yc — 
Thank  ye,  kind  dentlemen,  for  all  you've  utter'd; 
"  Tlie  hint  you  offer  not  amifs  is ; 
"I'll  tearmy  Paradifc  to  pieces." 

uppofe  I  afk  you  what  had  been  the  evil  ? 

Believe  me,  fomething  to  the  world's  fad  coft  : 
y  fuch  civility  to  fpare  the  Devil, 

My  Lords^  a  fecond  Iliad  had  been  loft. 

'  ^  Thus 


104  EXFOSTT7LATORY    ODES. 

Thus  from  poor  PETER  take  the  GREAT  away, 

Of  fun  ye  rob  him  of  cart-loads. 
What  would  his  cuftomers  all  do  and  fay  ? 

Lord  !  curfe  you  for  the  lofs  of  Odes. 

You'll  fay,  "Let  SATIRE  meaner  fubjects  look." 
Well,  JENKY,*  grant  my  fatire  flies  at  jo«, 

Who'd  buy  myjmelancholy  vulgar  book  ? 

Adieu,  fair  FAME,  and  FORTUNE'S  fmiies  adieu! 

But  if  we,  daring,  trim  a  royal  jacket,      f 
Lord  !  what  a  buying,  reading  !  what  a  racket1. 
How  fpruce  the  metarmorphos'd  bard  appears  ! 
With  what  a  confidence  he  pricks  his  ears  ! 
Who  juft  before,  in  piteous  chop-fall'n  plight, 
Look'd  of  the  woeful  face,  LA  MAN-CHA'S  KHIGHT  ! 

Who  runs  to  fee  a  monkey  in  a  trap  ? 

But  let  the  noble  lion  grace  the  gin, 
l/o  !  the  whole  world  is  out  to  fee  him  fnap, 

To  hear  him  growl,  and  triumph  o'er  his  grin  I 

Cut  off  the  head  of  a  great  Lord, 

Not  wifer  than  the  head  of  a  great  goofe, 

Tow'r  Hill  at  once  with  gapers  will  be  ftor'd, 
As  if  the  world  was  all  broke  loofe : 

But  when  a  little  villain  haps  to  fwing, 
What  a  poor  folitary  ft  ring .! 
How  few  by  CURIOSITY  are  fetch'd 
To  fee  the  rope  of  Juftice  ftretch'd ! 

Scarce  any  but  the  hangman  and  the  prieft, 

.  To  do  their  duty  at  the  culprit's  fide, 
With  hemp  and  pray'rs  his  neck  and  foul  aflift, 
And  wifh  the  lonely  trav'ler  a  good  ride. 

*  Here  feetneth  to  be  a  contradiction  ;  but  when  the  reader  is  inform 
ed  that  JENKY  cannot  without  mockery  be  ranKed  amongft  the 
GREAT,  Uie  myftery  ftands  explained. 


ODE 


fXFOSTULATOEY    OOE5 


ODE         VIII. 

HARK  !  hark  !  I  hear  your  courtier  pair  exclaim, 
••  This  PETER  is  the  moll  audacious  dog ; 
"  The  fellow  hath  no  rev'rence  for  a  name — 

"  A  King  to  him  is  fcarce  above  a  log." 
Sometimes  Je/<r»*-a  log,  Sirs,  if  you  pleafe; 
A  bold  aflertion,  to  be  prov'd  with  eafe. 

But,  goodly  Gentlemen,  I  do  defire  ye 

T'  avoid  in  this  affair  minute  inquiry 

Concerning  their  refpeftive  merit ; 

I  fear  lefs  prudence  will  be  feen  thiao  fpirit : 

Logs  univtrfally  are  ufeful  things ; 

A  p9ftula(um  not  allowed  to  Kings. 

"  For  us,  "  on  HOVQUR'S  pinnacle,"  ye  cry, 
41  Whole  heads  are  nearly  level  with  the  fky, 

*'  High  bafltine  in  the  blaze  of  n-g.il  pow'r ; 
41  Tin's  PETER,  feidom  from  rank  pride  exempt, 
"  Calls  us,  with  fcowling  eyes  of  fix'd  contempt, 

"  A  pair  of  jackdaws  pefch'd  upon  a  tow'r. 

"  Archbi(hop%  biihops,  fervants  of  the  Lord, 
44  Head^fervants  too,  who  preach  the  pureft  word, 

"  \\  ith  wavuig  hands  enforcing  goodly  matter, 
'*  No  more  by  him,  the  fcorner,  are  accounted 
'*  Than  imp-'like  fucej>ers  on  their  chimneys  mounted, 

"  That  weild  their  bniih,  and  to  the  vulgar  chatter.** 

True,  my  dear  Lords — for  merit  only  warm, 
Me^  rank  and  trappings  long  have  cea^'d  to  chann ; 
And  yet,  their  eyes  the  fhipid  million  bleA, 
For  barely  getting  Jightx  of  jrank  and  drefs ! 

\ 

f   A  frw  f*r:igi  Monirchs  j'jflify  the  aflertion. 

VOL.  II.  L 


I06  £KJ>OST«LATORY    OBBS. 

When  Judges  a  campaigning  go, 

And  on  their  benches  look  io  big, 
What  gives  them  confequence,  I  trow, 

Is  nothing  but  a  bufhel  wig: 

Yet  bumpkins,  gaping  with  a  bullock  flare, 
See  lofty  learning  lodg'd  in  ev'ry  hair. 
But  headst  not  hair, 'my  admiration  draw;- 
.Not  wzg-j1,  but  ivifdom,  ftrikcs  my  foul  with  awe. 


O  D  J£      IX. 

THE  man  who  printeth  his  poetic  fits, 
Into  the  Public's  mouth  his  head  commits ; 
Too  oft  a  lion's  mouth  of  danger  full, 
Or  flaming  mouth  of  PHALARIS'S  bull : 
He  pours  the  fad  repentant  groan  in  vain : 
The  cruel  world  but  gigglts  at  his  pain. 

For,  lo !  our  world,  fo  favage  in  Its  nature, 
Would  father  fee  a  fellow  under  water, 
Or,  from  the  attic  ftory  of  a  houfe, 

Fall  down  foufe 

Upon  1  fet  of  surfed  iron  fpikes, 
Than  fee  him  with  the  blooming  lafs  he  likes, 
Bleft  on  a  yielding  bed  of  down  or  rofes, 
Where  LOVES  fond  couples  often  join  their  nofes. 

Upon  me  .what  a  hoft  I've  got ! 

Who  by  their  black  abufes  boil  their  pot. 

Ay,  that's  the  reafon— wide-mouth'd  HUNGER -calls  j 

And  from  the  hollows  of  each  ftomach  bawls  ! 

Thus  the  poor  (ilk-worms,  born  to  blefs  mankind^ 
Whilft  for  the  ftiv'ring  world  the  robe  they  fpin, 

In  ev'ry  ring  a  thoufand  infeds  find, 
Gnawing  voracioufly  their  harmlefs  Ikin* 


EXPOSTCLATORY    CU  IO/ 

A u.l  thus  the  lambs,  whofc  ufeml  fleeces  treat 
With  coats  and  blankets  people  of  all  ibtl, 

By  preying  maggots  are  befet, 
Harb'ring  whole  ftinking  nations ; 

Which,  from  their  backs,  the  crows  fo  kindly  pi. 

Enough  to  make  a  Chriftian  fick. 

Oh,  would  fomc  critic  crow  but  eat  the  pack 
\ow  nettling  in  my  lyric  bat  k, 
That  daily  in  their  hofts  mcreut'c. 
And  try  to  fpoil  the  fineft  fleece ! 
Why  am  I  perfecuted  for  my  rhymes, 
That  kindly  try  to  cobble  Kings  «uul  times ! 

To  mine,  CHARLES  CHURCHILL'S  rage  was  ilownn«t»t 

rancour : 

He  was  ?.  firft-rate  man-of-war  to  me, 
Thund'ring  amidft  a  high  tempefruous  fea ; 

I'm  a  fmall  cockboat  bobbing  at  an  anchor ; 

Playing  with  pateraroes  that  alarm, 

Yet  fcorn  to  ao  a  bit  of  harm. 


My  fatire's  blunt — his  boafted  a  ke^n  e^e  ; 

A  fugar-hammer  mine — but  his  a  blackfmith's  Hedge  ! 

And  then  that  JUNIITS  !   what  a  fcalping  fellow  ! 
Who  dar'd  fuch  treafon  and  ikUtion  bellow  ! 

Compar'd  to  them,  whofe  pleafure  'twas  to  (lab, 
Lord  !  I'm  a  melting  medlar  to  a  crab  ! 

My  humour  of  a  very  diff 'rent  fort  is  : 
Their  fatire's  horrid  hair-cloth ;  mine  is  lilk  : 
I  am  a  pretty  nipperkin  of  milk ; 

They,  two  enormous  jugs  of  aqua-fort  is. 

Compar'd  to  their  high  floods  of  foaming  fatire,  \ 
My  rhyme's  a  rill — a  thread  of  murmuring  water: 
A  whirlwind  they,  that  oaks  like  ftubble  heaves ; 
I,  zephyr  whifp'ring,  fporting  through  the  leaves. 

La  Andf 


jp8  EXFOSTULATORY    ODES. 

And  fuch  all  candid  people  muft  conclude  it— 

The  world  (hould  fay  of  PETER  PINDAR'S  ftrain, 
"  In  him  the  courtly  HORACE  lives  again— 

*'  Circum  pr<ecordia  Petrus  ludit." 

Which  eafy  fcrap  of  J^atm  thus  I  render,  ^ 
No  man' by  PETER'S  verfe  is  hardily  bitten; 

Like  lambkins  bleats  the  bard  fo  fweet  and  tender, 
And  playful  as  the  fportive  kitten. 

So  chafte  his  fimiles,  fo  foft  his  ftyle, 

That  ev'u  his  bitt'reft  enemies  fhould  fmile  r 

He  biddeth  not  his  verfe  in  tk*n*kr  roar- 
Bis  lines  perpetual 'fummef— fuihine  weather : 

He  tickles  only,  how  can  he  do  more, 
\Vhofe  only  inftrument's  a  feather  f 


ODE      X. 

T  IKE  children,  charm'd  with  PRAISE'S  fugar'd  fong, 
•*^  How  much  the  Great  admire  the  cringing  throng  ! 

And  how  moil  hvingly  the  men  they  hate, 
Who,  to  the  ftubbornnefs  of  confeien'ce  born, 
Tenacious  of  the  rights  of  nature,  fcorn 

To  hold  the  cenfor  to  the  nofe  of  STATE! 

Too  many  a  weak -brain 'd  man,  and  filly  dame, 
Are  made  ridiculous  by  fulfome  fame ; 
Rais'don  high  pedeftals  in  rich  attire, 
For  half  the  globe  to  laugh  at,  not  admire. 

Ye  bid  the  bard  in  panegyric  mine  ; 
With  courtly  adulation  load  the  line  ; 
Sirs,  adulation  is  a  fatal  thing — 
Rank  poifoa  for  a  fubjecl,  or  a  King. 

My 


EXPOSTULATORY    ODES.  109 

My  Lords,  I  do  declare  that  it  requires 

A  brain  well  fortified,  to  bear  great  flatt'ries ; 
Such  very  dangerous  maflc'd  batteries, 

That  keep  on  great  men'*  brains  fuch  ceafelefs  fires ! 

I  hope  that  God  will  give  fuch  great  men  grace 

To  know  the  general  vvtatttffs  of  the  place. 

Pray  do  not  fancy  what  I  utter  ftrange — 
The  love  of  flatt'ry  is  the  foul's  rank  mange, 
Which,  though  it  gives  fuch  tickling  joys, 
Inftead  of  doing  fervice  it  deflroys : 
Tuft  as  the  mange  to  lapdogs'  (kins  apply 'd, 
Though  pleating,  fpoils  the  beauty  of  the  hide: 

A  fonnet  now  and  then  to  pleafe  the  fair, 
With  flatt'ry  fpic'd  a  little,  does  no  harm  ; 

That  talks  of  flames,  perfections,  hope,  dcfpair, 
And  hyperbolical ly  paints  each  charm. 

P'rhaps  to  a  fault  at  times,  my  Mufe's  art, 
By  admiration  fwelPd,  hath  foar'd  too  hic;h  ; 

But  CYNTHIA  knew  the  lover's  partial  art, 
And  chid  her  poet  for  the  tuneful  lie. 

Perhaps  too  loud  the  bard  hath  (truck  the  lyre : 
And  when  th'  enthufiaft,  with  a  lover's  fire, 

More  bright  than  angels,  gave  the  nymph  to  glow; 
By  TRUTH'S  delightful  dilates  foldy'fway'd, 
Ought  of  his  fav'rite  CYNTHIA  tohavefaid, 

44  She  triumphs  only  o'er  the  world 


ODE      XI. 

VTY  Lords,  I  won't  tonfent  to  be  a  bug, 

A  To  batten  in  the  royal  rug, 
,     And  on  the  backs  of  Monarchs  meanly  crawl ; 

And  more,  my  Lords,  I  hope  I  never  fliall. 
Yet  certain  vermin  I  can  mention,  love  it ; 
You  know  the  miferables  that  can  prove  it, 
L  3 


HO  EXPOSTULATORY    ODES. 

Icannot,  Papift-like,  (a  dupe  to  Kings) 
Create  divinities  from  wooden  things. 

Somewhere  in  Afia — I  forget  the  place — 

Ceylon  I  think  it  is — yes,  yes,  I'm  right- 
There,  Kings  are  deem'd  a  heav'nly  race, 
Arid  blafphemy  it  is  their  pow'r  to  flight. 

Like  crouching  fpaniels,  down  black  Lords  muft  lie, 
Whene'er  admitted  to  the  Royal  eye, 
And  fay,  whene'er  the  mighty  Monarch  chats 
To  tho'fe  black  Lords  about  their  wives  and  brats, 

That  happen  in  the  world  to  tumble : 
"  Dread  Sire,  your  Have  and  bitch  my  wife 
4     "  Hath  brought,  to  blefs  your  dog  fo  humble, 
f  One,  two,  three,  four,  five  puppies  into  life ; 

*  All  fubjecl:  to  your  godlike,  will  and  pow'r, 

"  To  hang  or  drown  in  half  an  hour." 

This  is  too  fervile,  I  muft  dare  confefs — 
Twixt  man  and  man  the  difference  mould  be  le/1. 

t  own  I  brought  two  wond'ring  eyes  to  town, 
Got  bent  by  mobs  my  ribs  like  any  hoop,  . 

To  fee  the  mighty  man  who  wore  a  crown— 
To  fee  the  man  to  whom  great  courtiers  ftoop. 

Much  had  I  read,  which  certes  fome  time  fince  is, 
My  Bible  fo  replete  with  Kings  and  Princes, 

A  nd  thought  Kings  taller  than  my  parifh  fleeple ; 
I  thought  too,  which  was  natural  enough, 
JOVE  made  their/kins  of  very  diff'rent  fluff 
,    From  that  which  clothes  the  bones  of  common  people. 
But,  mark  1  by  faring,  gaping  ev'ry  day, 
The  edge  of  admiration  wore  away, 

Like  razors'  edges  rubb'd  againft  a  ftone ; 
Kings  ceas'd  to  be  fuch  objects  of  devotion; 
I  faw  the  Beings  foon  without  emotion, 

And  thought  like  mine  their  bodies  fleih  and  bone. 


Lil 


Ill 


Like  mmy  thoufands,  I  was  weak  enough 

To  think  JOVE  kept  a  foul  and  body  Slop  ; 
Like  mercers,  had  rariety  of  (luff 

For  fucfe  wliofe  turn  it  was  to  be  made  up  j 
And  that  he  treated  with  great  liberality 
Folk  born  to  figure  in  the  line  of  quality  ; 
Giving  fouls  fuperfine,  and  bones  and  bloods, 
In  fhort,  the  choiceft  of  celefthl  goods  : 

But  on  the  lower  clafles  when  employ'd, 
It  (truck  me  that  he  work'd  with  muc 


Not  caring  one  brafs  farthing  for  the  chaps  j 
Forming  them  juft  as  girls  themlelves  amufe 
In  making  workbags,  pincufhions,  and  (hoes— 
VIDELICET,  from  fcraps. 

Now  can't  I  give  a  thimlltful  of  praife, 

E'en  to  an  EmpYor,  if  uncrown'd  by  merit* 

A  ftarving  princiule,  'fajth,  now  a-days, 

And  unconnected  with  the  courtier's  fpirit. 

You,  Sirs,  I  think,  can  give  it  with  a  laMe. 

And  rock  of  grinning  Idiotifm  the  cradle. 


ODE      Xlf. 

CO  mtich  abus'd,  I  loie  my  lyric  merit-— 

'  Evaporated  half  its  fpirit ; 
Rcduc'd  from  alcohol  to  phlegm  : 
From  fplid-pudding  to  whipp'J  cream  ! 

There  was  a  time,  when,  rot  one  bit  afraid 
Of  ought  the  people  roar'd,  or  fung,  or  (aid, 
I  carelef&ly  my  fev'rite  trade  purfu'd  ; 
Invok'd  Apollo,  and  the  Mufes  woo'd : 
And,  with  the  ftoieifm  that  lulls  a  ftone, 
J  fat  me  down,  and  i  ick'd  my  mutton  bone. 


Thus 


Hi*  EXPOSTUtATORY    ODES, 

Thus  when,  amidft  the  trembling  world  of  waves, 


Shouts  defolation  through  the  twilight  wafte, 
And,  thund'ring,  threats  a  fyftem's  doom ; 

Lo  !  with  light  wing  a  gull  the  billows  fweeps, 
Sports  on  the  ftorm,  and  mocks  the  bellowing  deeps ; 
Now  on  the  mountain  furge  compos'd  he  fquats, 
Adjufts  his  feathers,  and  looks  round  for  fprats. 

I  now  may  fay,  with  righteous  DAVID,  "  Lord, 
"  With  foes  I'm  fore  encompafled  about;" 

And  rhyme-like  STERN  HOLD,  once  for  verfe  ador'd, 
"  I  wote  not  when  I  mail  get  out  j 

"  So  craftily  the  heathen  me  aflail, 

"  My  cajiticle  doth  -not  a  whit  avail." 

Lo  !  almoft  ev'ry  one  at  PETER'S-  head 
Levels  his  blunderbufs,  and  takes  a  pop — 

Bounce  on  my 'dear  os  frontis  falls  the  lead  ; 
But  harmleis  yet,  thank  God,  I've  feen  it  drop  : 

Yet,  by  and  by,  fome  lucklefs  (hot 

May  knock  about  the  brains  of  tuneful  PETER  j 
Thoufands  will  fmile  to  fee  him  go  to  pot, 

And  mock  him  in  his  grave,  \vith  Ihameful  metre : 
Not  fo  our  gracious  King  and  Queen,  I  know  it — 
They've  />//)',  if  not  pence,  to  give  a  poet. 

Patient  as  JOB,  when  SATAN,  all  fo  vile, 

Betting  his  fkin  againft  the  LORD'S, 
Adding  a  moft  contemptous  fmile, 

As  well  as  moft  indecent  words, 
Cover'd  the  man  of  UZ  with  boils, 
At  which,  with  horror,  ev'ry  heart  recoils  : 

Yes,  patient  as  the  man  of  UZ  am  T, 
Though  foro'd  on  ENVY'S  burning  coals  to  fry. 


Seek 


ExrosTULAioay  or  115 

Seek  I  the  Court  ?— Lords,  Lordlings  fly  the  place— 
The  ladies,  too,  fo  full  of  loyal  grace, 

Turn  their  gay  backs  when  there  I  fliow  my  head ; 
As  happen'd  at  St.  James's  t'other  thy, 
When  up  the  ftajrs  I  took  my  folemn  way, 

And  fill'd  the  fine-drefs'd  gentlefolks  with  dread. 

Off  BRUDENELL  flew;  and,  wi:h  his  (tar  fo  blazing, 
Off  flew  the  frij>hten\l  Sir  JOHN  DICK,  fo  flout, 

Who  won  his  blazing  ftar  by  means  amazing— 
By  manufacturing  lour  crout, 

Off  flew  with  this  great  crout- compofing  DICK, 
THOMSON,  and  SALISB'IY,  HARCOURT,  andGoldftkk; 
Such  was  the  terror  at  the  man  of  rhymea, 
As  though  he  enter'd  to  divulge  their  crimes. 

Thus  on  a  bank,  upon  a  Cummer's  day, 
Of  fome  fair  ftream  of  Eaft  or  Wcftern  Ind, 

When  puppies  join  in  wanton  play, 
Free  from  the  flightcft  fear  of  being  flcinn'd ; 

If  from  that  ftream,  which  all  fo  placid  flows, 
A  fly  old  alligator  pokes  his  nofe ; 
Wifhing,  fcrchakHce^  to  takt  a  dice  of  cur; 
At  once  the  dogs  are  off  ujx)n  the  ijpur  j 
Xor  once  behind  them  cart  a  courtly  look, 
To  compliment  the  monarch  of  the  brook. 


ODE      XIII. 


TAESERTED  in  my  utmoft  need  by  fate. 
J--'     Like  fam'd  DARIUS,  great  and  good; 
Fall'n,  fall'n,  poor  fellow,  from  a  large  eftate ; 
Forc'd,  forc'd  to  fcroufe,  like  goats,  the  lanes  for  food  ! 


Alas! 


TT4  EXPOSTULATE* Y    ODES* 

Alas  L  deferted  quite  by  ev'ry  friend ; 

And  what  than  friendfhip  can  be  fweeter  ? 
Lo  !  not  a  foul  will  kind  affi  fiance  lend  ; 

Lo  !  ev'ry  puppy  lifts  his  leg  at  PETER  !" 

Like  feme  lone  infulated  rock  am  I, 

Where,  midft  th'  Atlantic  vaft,  old  JfLol  raves : 

Shook  by  the  thunders  of  each  angry  Iky, 
And  roll'd  on  by  the  milling  world  of  waves ! 

So  hard,  indeed,  the  critic  tenipeft  blows, 
I  fcarce  can  point  againft  the  gale  my  nofe— 

A  ftorm  more  violent  was  never  feen  t 
So  dread  the  war  ! — indeed  it  muft  be  dread, 
When  from  his  fhop  JOHN  NICHOLS  pops  his  head, 

And  pours  the  thunders  of  his  Magazine. 

For  heavier  artill'ry  ne'er  was  played : 

And  yet,  not  all  th'  artill'ry  is  his  own ; 
HAYLEY,  a  clofe  ally,  in  ambufcade 

Behind,  aflifts  the  war  of  furious  JOHN. 

JOHN  NICHOLS,  witji  WILL.  HAYLEY  for  his  'Squire, 
Are  ferious  things,  howe'er  the  world  may  laugh  j 

Arid  therefore  dread  I  much  to  face  the  fire 
Of  this  intrepid  Hudibras  and  Ralph. 

You  too,  my  Lords,  combin'd  with  thofe  dread  foes 
To  tear  the  bard  to  pieces  for  his  rhymes, 

Is  very  cruel,  righteous  Heav'n  well  knows. 
And  does  no  fort  of  credit  to  the  times. 

Yet  let  me  feel  myfelf— I'm  not  yet  dead,. 
Though  tnaul'd  Co  terribly  about  the  head ; 

By  Printers  Devils  and  allies  furrounded : 
P'rhaps,  like  the  Pruffian  Monarch,  I  may  rife^ 
Herculean,  to  the  world's  furprife, 

And  fee  my  enemies  confounded. 

Full 


EXPOSTULAT01Y    ODh  IXC 


Full  many  a  cock  hath  won  ten  pound, 

Though  feeming  dead,  ft  retch 'd  out  amid  ft  the  pit— 
Leap'd  up,  and  giv'n  his  foe  a  fatal  wound — 

Then  why  not  mint,  ye  Gods,  the  lucky  hit  ? 


ODE      XIV. 

your  good  leave,  my  Lords,  I'll  xiow  take 
mine. 
NotdeenYd,  perthannce^  a  poet  quite  divine — 

Pcrchnunce  with  beafts  at  Ephefus  I've  warr'd, 
Like  diat  prodigious  orator,  Saint  Paul ; 
And  for  my  ftanzas,  p'rhaps  both  great  and  final!, 
Yc  kindly  wifti  me  feather'd  well,  and  tarr'd. 

Ye  think  I  loathe  the  ftame  of  King,  no  doubt — 
Indeed,  my  Lords,  you  never  were  more  out : 

I  am  not  of  that  envious  cUfe  of  elves ; 
Though  Dame  MAC  AUI.KY  turns  on  Kings  her  tail, 
With  gmt-rfffefl  the  facred  names  I  hail, 

That  is,  of  Monarch*  who  rcjfreff  tit mf the  .  , 

But  flionld  they  a£  with  meannefs,  or  like  fools, 
The  Mu  f  E  mall  place  a  fool's-cap  on  their  fkulls* 
Stubborn  as' many  a  King,  indeed,  lam — 
That  is,  as  ftubborn  as  a  halter'd  ram: 

A  change  in  PETER'S  life  ye  muft  not  hope: 
To  try  to  wafh  an  afs's  face, 
Is  really  labour  to  mifj  ', 
And  really  lofs  of  time,  a?  well  as  fbap. 


ODR 


Il6  EXPOSTULATORY    ODES. 


ODE      XV. 

T3RAY  let  me  laugh,  my  Lords  ;  I  muft,  I  will — 
•*"     My  Lords,  my  laughing  mufcles  can't  lie  ftill : 
Unpolifh'd  in  the  fupple  fchools  of  France, 
I  cannot  burft,  to  pleafure  COMPLAISANCE. 

Care  to  our  coffin  adds  a  nail,  no  doubt ; 
And  ev'ry  grin,  fo  merry,  draws  one  out : 

I  own  I  like  to  laugh,  and  hate  to  figh ; 
And  think  that  rifibility  was  giv'n 
For  human  happinefs,  by  gracious  Heav'n, 

And  that  we  came  not  into  life  to  cry  : 

To  wear  long  faces,  ju'ft  as  if  our  Maker, 
The  God  pf  Goodnefs,  wss  an  undertaker, 
Well  pleas'd  to  wrap  the  foul's  unlucky  mien 
Jn  forrow's  difmal  crape,  or  bombafin. 

Methinks  I  hear  the  Lord  of  Nature  fay, 

**  Fools,  how  ye  plague  me !  go,  be  wife,  be  gay ; 

"  No  tortures,  penances,  your  God  requires— 
"  Enjoy,  be  lively,  innocent,  adore, 
M  And  know  that  Heav'n  hath  not  one  angel  more 

u  In  confequence  of  groaning  nuns  and  friars. 

4<  Heav'n  never  took  a  pleafure  or  a  pride 

4<  In  ftarving  ftomachs,  or  a  horfewhipp'd  hide. 

'*  Mirth  be  your  motto — merry  be  your  heart : 
"  Good  laughs  are  pleafant  inoffenfive  things ; 

M  And  if  their  follies  happen  to  divert, 
"  I  ihall  not  quarrel  at  a  joke  on  Kings" 


ODE 


EXPOITULATOIT    OBIS*  tlf 

ODE      XVI. 

T  F  Monarchs  (the  fuggeftion,  p'rhaps,  of  liars) 

Turn  houfebreakersj  and  rob  the  nuns  and  friars; 
Steal  pictures,  crucifixes,  heav'nly  chattels, 
To  purchafe  fwords  and  guns  and  fouls  for  battles  { 

In  fpite  of  all  the  world  mn.y  fay  and  think, 
If  Empreffes  will,  punk-like,  kifs  and  drink : 

If  Kin^s  will  fell  the  hares  and  boars  they  kill, 
And  fnipe  and  partridge-blood  for  Mammon  fpilL 
Denying  thus  tktmfclves  a  dair.tv  difh  ; 
And  go  themfelvfs  to  market  with  their  fifh  : 

Pleas'd  with  the  vulgar  herd  to  join  their  name, 
f  f  Kings,  ambitious  of  a  blackfmith's  fame, 
Not  wond'roully  ambitious  in  their  views, 
Inftead  of  mending  empires,  make  hort'e  (hoe* : 

Dt.ul  to  fair  SCIENCE,  if  to  vagrant  hogs, 
To  toymen,  conjurors,  and  dancing  dogs, 
Great  Princes,  pleas'd,  a  palrona^e  extend ; 
\Vhilft  modeft  GEM  us  pines  without  a  friend  : 

Difmiffing  grandeur  as  an  idle  thing, 

If  on  bob -wigs,  flouch'd  hats,  and  thread  -bare  coar>, 

Upon  vulgarity  a  Monarch  doats, 
More  pleas'd  to  look  a  coachman  tlian  a  King : 

If  with  their  bullocks  Kings  delight  to  battle; 

On  hard  horfe-chel'nuts  make  them  dinevand  fup, 
Refolv'd  to  ftarve  the  nice-mouth'd  cattle 

Until  they  eat  the  chefmits  up ; 
Poor  fellows,  from  the  nuts  who  turn  away, 
And  think  it  dev'lifh  hard  they  can't  have  hay ; 

If  Kings  will  mount  old  houfes  upon  rollers, 
Convening  fober  manfions  into  ifrollers, 
HERACLITUS'S  gravity  can't  bear  it — 
i  mnfl  laugh  out,  and  all  the  world  mwfl  hear  it. 
VOL.  II.  M  ODE 


EXPOSTULATORY    OTJES. 


ODE      XVII. 

TU8T  one  word  more,  my  Lords,  before  we  part 
**    Do  .not  vow  vengeance  on  the  tuneful  art  ; 
'Tis  very  xlang'rous  to  attack  a  poet  — 
Alfo  ridiculous—  the  end  would  fliow  it. 
Though  not  to  write  —  to  read  I  hear  you're  able  : 
Read,  then,  and  learn  inftruclion  from  a  fable. 


THE    PIG    AND    MAGPIE.. 


A    FABLE, 


COCKING  his  tail,  a  faucy  prig, 
A  Magpie  hopp'd  upon  a  Pig, 

To  pull  fome  hair,  forfooth,  to  line  his  neft  j 
And  with  fuch  eafe  began  the  hair-attack, 
As  thinking  the  fee-fimple  of  the  back 

Was  by  himfelf,  and  not  the  Pig,  poflefl. 

The  Boar  look'd  up,  as  thunder  black,  to  Mag, 
Who,  fquinting  down  on  him,  like  an  arch  wag, 

Inform'd  Mynheer  fome  briilles  muft  be  torn  j 
Then  bufy  went  to  work,  not  nicely  culling ; 
Got  a  good  handfome  beakfull  by  good  pulling, 

And  flew,  without  a  "  Thank  ye,"  to  his  thorn, 

The  Pig  fet  up  a  difmal  yelling ; 
Follow'd  the  robber  to  his  dwelling, 

Who,  like  a  fool,  had  built  it  'midft  a  bramble ; 
In,  manfully,  he  fallied,  full  of  might, 
Petermin'd  to  obtain  his  right, 

And  'midft  the  bulhes  now  began  to  Scramble, 


He 


EXFOSTUtATOtY    ODES. 

He  drove  the  Magpie,  torr  his  ncft  to  rags, 
And,  happy  on  the  downfall,  pour'd  his  brags  : 

But  ere  he  from  the  brambles  came,  alack ! 
His  ears  and  eves  were  miferably  torn, 
His  bleeding  Side  in  fuch  a  plight  forlorn, 

He  could  not  count  ten  hairs  upon  his  back. 


TUTS  is  a  pretty  tale,  my  Lords,  and  pat : 
TV- folks  like^w  To  clever,  wrbhm  f*t. 


Ma  A  BE- 


BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

TO 

SVLVANUS  URBAN, 

ALIAS 

MASTER    JOHN    NICHOLS,    PRINTER,. 

Cotum0n-Counci!raM  of  FarrtngJon  Ward,  nnd  Ccafor -General  of 
Literature  ; 

WOT    FORGETTING 

MASTER  WILLIAM  HAYLEY. 

To  whicl\  is  added, 
AN     ELEGY     TO    APOLLO; 

A1SO 

STR  JOSEPH  B4NKS  and  tkc  BOILED  FLEAS: 

AN     ODE. 


Fit,  nay,  prithee,  John  ; 
Do -not  quarrel,  man  ; 
JL«t's  be  merry  and 
.D*lnlc  abouu  CATCH, 


THE    ARGUMENT. 

THE  Poet  co-mmenceth  in  a  fubliirte  ftrain  of  happy  imi 
tation  of  claflic  fimplicity  with  the  ille  ^o---felf-confe- 
quence  of  the  Mantuan  Bard ;  giving  an  account  of  the 
various  themes  of  his  Mufey  from  MAJESTY  to  Matter 
JOHN  NICHOLS — He  afketh  the  reafon  of  JOHN'S  great 
anger,  and  freeth  himfelf  from  the  imputation  of  illibe- 
rality,  by  telling  the  -world  what  handfome  things  he 
hath  faid  of  the  Printer- -yThe  Poet  attacketh  JOHN  in 
turn  for  bn  want  of  candour — fpeaketh  oracles  to  JOHN 
-— maketh  a  fine  comparifon  between  himfelf  and  purling 
ftreams;  alfo  between  cursy  cats,  and  courtiers — The 
Poet  declaimeth  virtuoufly  and  politically  againfl  fwear— 
^  ing  in  a  palfion-— complaineth  of  inftances-  of  JOHN'S 
v 4>nielty  towards  him  tor  barely  adminiftering  a  few  ad 
monitory  laffees  to  the  back  of  the  PRESIDENT  of  the 
KOYAL  SOCIETY,  Madame  Piozzi,  and  Mifter  JAMES 
Bosw£LL---The  Poet  again  comphiineth  of  JOHN'S  difin- 
genuoufnefs;  praiiing,.  at  the  fame  timey  his  own  fweet- 
nefs  of  difp-ofjtion-  — he  mentioneth  the  horrors  of  dying; 
people  at  tlie  thought  of  being  exhibited  in  JOHN'S  Ma 
gazine,  in  which  the  Poet  is  fuppofed  to  allude  to  the 
letters  of  the  Rev.  Mifter  BADCOCK  and  others,  as  well 
as  fcandalous  anecdotes  collected  from  families,  to  give  a 
zeft  to  his  monthly  lumber---The  Poet  informeth  JOHN 
of  the  appellation  ..given  him  by  fbme  people,  and  which 
the  Poet  was  always  too  delicate  to  life— -The  Poet  con- 
feffeth  that  he  ma.rvelleth  at  JOHN'S  impudence  in  af- 
iuming  the  management  of  the  Gentleman's  Magazine 
after  Doclor  JOHNSON  ;  on  which  Do6tor  JOHNSON,  the 
Poet  pattern  a  juft  ftrielure  with  unprecedented  delicacy 
---The  Poet  challengeth  JOHN  to  fay  he  ever  expo  fed" 
him  for  his  praifes  of  fuch  as-  contributed  to  his  Maga 
zine or  when  he  tried  to  eclipfe  the  biographical 

fame  of  PLUTARCH,  by  his  anecdotes  of  poor  old 
BOWYER — The  Poet  ex-hibiteth  more  inftancesof  gran-^ 
deur  of  foul---ftill  more  noblenefs-— ftill  more-— The 
Poet  maketh  a  moft  luminous  remark  on  the  difference 
between  the  happinefs  of  fools  and  wife  me  n,  and  con- 
cludeth  with  advifing  JOHN  to  make  a  proper  application 
•f  his  talents, 


A  BENE. 


A 

BENEVOLENT  EPISTLE, 


T     WHO,  ambitious  that  the  brats,  my  rhymesy 
*  9  Should  fo'j  the  gentlefolks  of  future  times; 
Rife  like  antiques  in  value,  nor  expire, 
Till  RUIN  fnrcad*  be  univerfal  fire; 

i  thought !  that  to  deflrnclion  imift  be  giv'n 
This  charming  worldr  this  handfome  work  of  Heav'n  F 
I,  who,  regardful  of  the  courtier  throng, 
To  Kings,  and  Lords,  and  Commons,  tun'd  the  fong;. 
Bade  TOM  *  no  more  indulge  the  golden  dream, 
And  kindly  vrHh'd  his  wit  a  tjoifsr  theme ; 
Struck  to  the  lime  and  mortar  Knight  f  the  firing, 
And  hail'd  of  butterflies  the  nurfing  king,J 
Who,  fcorning  funs  and  moons,  with  happier  eyes 
Beholds  from  dunghills  purple  Emp'rors  §  rife; ' 
More  bleft  on  this  our  earth  a  frog  to  fee, 
To  find  a  cockJefhell,  and  boil  a  flea.R 
Than  dwell  in  yonder  fkies,  with  glory  crown'd, 
Where  frogs,  nor  fleas,  nor  cocklefhells  abound ; 
More  bleft  to  mark  a  bat's  than  angel's  wing, 
To  hear  a  grafshopper  than  fcraph  fing ; 

*  Mr.  Wartow.  f  Sir  William  Chamtxrs. 

t  Sir  Jofcph  Bru  §  A  rare  ^pccic«uf  buUcrfly. 

j  Sec  the  CXfc  at  p^e  1 3$. 

A  Mere 


124'  A- BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

More  pleas'd  to  view  (if  rumour  juftly  paints) 

The  tails  of  tadpoles  than  the  heads  of  faints ; 

And  hear  (to  fame  if  credence  may  be.giv'n)  •• 

One  humming-bird  than  all  the  hoft  of  heav'n : 

I;  who  to  men  of  canvafs  ftruck  the  lyre, 

And  fet  with  rhyme  th'  Academy  en  fire  ;* 

O'er  Mount  Parnaflu  s, .  Jove-  like,  caft  my ,  ilioe  ; , 

At  poets  fmil'd,  .and  poetefles  too ; 

Preferred  the  Ballads  of  the  good  Old  Bailey, 

To  all  the  cold  pompofities  of  HA YLEY, 

Whofe  rhymes,  f  as  foon  as.litter'dy  join  the  heaps^ , 

Where,  'rnidft  her  fhadowy  gulph  OBLIVION  fleepss : 

So  deep,  who  fcarce  can  dive  into  himfelf ! , 

So  lofty,  too,  the  tenant  of , the  fhelf  P 

Now  ftiffer  than  recruits  fo  raw  at  drill  j , 

Now  petit -maftre of  the  Mufes  hill :  • 

I,  who  to  grave  Reviewers  figh;d  my  pray'iy , 

Snbmiflive, bending  at  the,crit>e  chair ; 

And,  bluflving,  begg-d  one  Jittle. laurel  fprig, 

To  bring  importance,  .and- adorn  nay  wig  : 

I,  who  Sam-  Whitbread's  brewhonfe .prais'd,  in  fong^, 

So  highly  honour'd  by  the  Royal  throng;  . 

Be-rhym'd  a  goodly  Monarch  and  his  ipoufe, . 

Mifs  Whitbread's  cuctfies,  .Miller  (Whitbreaid's  bows, , 

Amounting,  hift'ry  fays,  .to  many  a  fcore, 

Such,  too,;  as  Chifwell  Street  ne'er-faw  before 7  . 

Not  e'en  forgetting,, with  my  claffic- force, 

The  Brewer's  bulldog,  .and  his  marv'ling  horfe;  -. 

The  .curious  draymen  into  puncheons  creeping, 

And,    charra'd  with  greatnefs,*  through  the  bung-hoks- 

peeping,- 

1,5  who  to  Pitt  the  chords  in  anger  ftruck^ 
Who  whelm'd  his  PRINCE  fo  gracefully  with  muck; 

*  The  jfctideny  on.jire.~]  ».  e.  produced  an  emuhitian  •  amongft  the 
irvgeniouf  artifts.  This  pafTage  feemed. to- want  an  explanation,  as  an 
^liberal  reader  might  have  imagined  that  I  'meant  that  my  academic 
odes  had  put  the. members  into  a  violent  faJJ:on  ;  an  idea  fo  very  foreign 
to?  my  wifhes. 

f  -Such,  is  really  ;hc  prefcnt  fwnk  condition  of  this  Lady-author. 


TO    JOHN     NICHOi.' 

:rgus  Pitt,  whofe  penetrating  eye* 
Behold  the  fount  of  freedom  in  fxciff ; 
Whofe  patriot  lo^ic  poffibly  maintains 
Th'  identity  of  liberty  in  cha 

10  of  Leeds  and  Hawkefb'ry  deign'd  to  (ing, 
The  blefled  fav'rites  of  a  blefled  »»»*  ; 
High  on  the  lab'ring  pinions  of  an  ode, 
Heav'd  Brudenell's  wily,  what  a  leaden  load  ! 

encll  who  bids  us  all  the  proverb  feel, 
44  The  largcft  calves  are  not  the  fweeteft  veal :" 
I,  who  on  fuch  fubjecls  deign'd  to  (hine, 
Now  tune  to  once  a  Printer's  DEV'L  the  line  j 
But  now  no  more  a  dev'l— with  Atlas  mien, 
The  great  fupj>orter  of  a  Magazine  ;* 
No  more,  no  more  a  dev'l  with  humbie  airt 
But  fit  companion  for  our  great  LORD  MAY'K  f 
How  like  the  worm  which  crawls  at  firft  the  earth, 
But,  getting  a  new  coat,  difdains  its  birth  j 
Spreads  it«  gold  tiffue  to  the  fblar  ray, 
And  wings  o'er  trees  and  tow'rs  its  airy  way  ! 

With  anger  foaming,  and  of  vengeance  full, 
Why  belloweth  JOHN  NICHOLS  like  a  bull? 
Say,  Goddefs,  could  a  few  poetic  ftripes 
Make  JOHN,  fn  furious,  kick  about  his  typci ; 
Spin  round  ais  pandemonium  like  a  top, 
And,  thund'ring,  to  its  centre  (hake  tne  (hop? 
Could  SATIRE'S  twig  produce  fo  dire  a  din? 
And  dwells  fuch  foftnefsin  sprinter'*  (kin? 

IllibVri !  never,  never  have  I  (aid, 
That  thou  wert  not  an  honeft  man  in  trade  ! 
Whether  from  principle  or  jail  difmay 
Springs  thy  morality,  we  dr.re  not  fay  ; 
Since  jails,  thofe  iron  ager4s  of  the  law, 
Keep  many  a  gracelefs  rogue  in  pious  awe. 

*  The  Gmt/eman'i,    as  it  is   modcftly    called ;    to   whofe 
Miflcr  Hayley  i»  a  conflant  contributor,  in  the  way  of  ingenious :  rhyme 
*  — '  '•        '  criticiTm. 


12.6  A    BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

Yet,  fon  of  ink,  devoutly  let  us  hope 

Thou  lov'ft  a  virtue  more  than  dread'ft  a  rope  ; 

Nay,  to  thy  honour  let  me  this  declare, 

To  make  the  rigid  fons  of  confcience  flare, 

That  when  thou  money  lendeft,  fuch  thy  purity,. 

Detefting  bad,  thou  feekeft  ^Wfecurity. 

Inclin'd  for  ever,  JOHN,  to  take  thy  part, 

Thus  have  I  pour'd  the  dictates  of  my  heart : 

*'  If  'midft  a  vulgar  mafs  his  ftars  unkind 

"  Have  plac'd  mofi  niggardly  a  pigmy  mind; 

44  'Tis   not  JOHN'S  fault— jo H-N   ftiould  not  blufti  for 

"  ftiame; 

44  His  parfimonkms  planets  are-to  blame. 
**  What  though  in  WISDOM'S  crucible  his  head,     „ 
44  Prove  that  it  dealeth  lefs  in  gold  than  lead  : 
44  Unikill'd  on  claffic  ground  to  cut  a  caper, 
44 "  Yet  knoweth  JOHN  the  price  of  print  and  paper : 
44  His  nice  difcerning  knowledge  none  deny, 
44  On  crown,  imperial,  fool's-cap,  and  demy. 
44  On  blanket,  fheepfldns,*  urine,  JOHN  can  think': 
44  Myfelf  would  take  his  fentiments  on  ink  ; 
44  Myfelf  would  take  his  ientiments  on  letters  : 
44  On  fyllabies,  indeed,  I'd  afk  his  betters. 
44  The  'meaneft  mortal  let  us  not  deride  : 
44  Lo  !  beafts  of  burden  oft  muft  be  our  guide ; 
44  Yes,  through  the  dark  and  unknown  track,  of  courfe, 
"  I  yield  up  all  opinion  to  my  horfe." 
TRUTH,  let  fair.  TRUTH  for  ever  rule  my  rhymes  ! 
I'm  told  this  lady  vifits  thee  fometimes  ! 
How  kind  !  how  humble  !  thus  the  GOD  of  day 
Peigns  to  a  raudpool  to  impart  his  ray  ! 
Amidft  the  paflions  roar,  a  clamorous  hoft,, 
0ft "is  the  gentle  voice  of  REASON  loft  ! 
How  try 'ft  thou,  butcher-like,  to  carve  my  work, , 
And  treat  each  fweet-foul'd  ftaliza,  like  a  Turk  ! 
From  fuch  fad  readers  Heav'n  the  Mufe  protect,. 
Eroud  to  find  feu  It,  and  raptur'd  with  defeat ! 

*  Ncceffary  for  making  Printers  balls,  - 

Yet, 


TO    JOHN    KlCHOI.f.  I2j 

Yet,  though  tbou/rozwr'/?  on  PETER'S  every  line, 
behold  the  difference,  JOHN  !  \\cfniihs  on  thine. 

<>t  I  hate  each  man  of  verfe  and  profe; 
I  rev'rence  genius,  JOHN,  where'er  it  grows : 
Whene'er  it  beams  through  IGNORANCE'S  night, 
1  mark  the  ftranger  with  as  keen  delight 
As  looks  the  Pilgrim  on  BaflTora's  tow'rs, 
Her  ftreams,  ambrofial  blooms,  and  myrtle  bow'rs ; 
Who,  long  deny'd  of  HOPE'S  fweet  cup  to  tatte, 
Had  figh'd  amidtt  the  folitary  wafte. 

Blame  not  the  Bard,  thou  man  of  lettered  pride. 
Who,  taking  not  Dame  PRUDENCE  for  thy  guide, 
Didft  ftone  the  Poet's  manfion  like  an  afs, 
Forgetting  that  thy  own  was  made  of  glai's. 
Know,  JOHN,  that  paffion  maketh  man  a  fwinc : 
Know  this,  and  bid  thy  conduct  copy  mir.e. 
When  deeming  me  a  Saracen  in  heart, 
Why,  (imple  JOHN,  attempt  my  road  to  thwart  ? 
Amidft  thy  walks,  would  bullies  meet  thine  eye, 
I'ompos'dly  let  thofe  bullies  j>afs  thee  by. 
To  buttling  bravoes,  for  my  cafe  and  pride, 
/  give  the  wall,  and  muling  turn  afide. 
Thus,  if  a  rock  or  log  the  ftream  opfx>le, 
That  fweetly  lambent  from  its  fountain  Hows, 

foamy  turbulence  the  rills  betray, 
But,  eafy  yielding,  wind  in  peace  away. 
My  hate  of  courtiers,  how  thine  anger  drew  ! 
I  own  I  loathe  St.  James's  fervile  crew : 
Where'er  the  fmiles  of  royalty  are  found, 
The  lazy  clan  of  courtiers  crouch  around*: 
Thus,  on  the  country  towns  when  Phoebus  (Line*-, 
Amidft  the  radiance  ev'ry  cur  reclines ; 
And,  lo  !  negleftfiil  of  the  mice  and  rats, 
Each  ftreet  prefents  us  with  a  line  of  cats. 

Truth  needs  not,   JOHN,  the  eloouence  of  •aths, 
^ot  more  fo  than  a  decent  fuir  of  CM 


Not  more  fo  than  a  decent  fuit  of  clothes 

glare, 
e: 

Befidcs, 


Requires  of  broad  gold  lace  th  expenfive  glare, 
That  makes  the  lialev-woolfv  million  ftare : 


t2$  A    BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

Befides,  a  proverb,  fuited  to  my  wifli, 

Declares  that  fwearing  never  catcheth  fifli. 

'Tis  vulgar  —  I  have  laid  it  o'er  and  o'er  ; 

Then  keep  thy  temper,  man,  and  fwear  no  more, 

Struck,  nay,  half-petrified,  that  BANKS  fli  on  Id  dare, 

Indecent  fellow  !  ravifh  NEWTON'S  chair  ; 

Mock  fuch  as  WISDOM'S  facred  mines  explore, 

And  kick  the  Arts  and  Sciences  to  door  • 

"Making  (methinks  a  monftrous  impropriety) 

A  fly-club  of  a  great  and  fam'd  Society  : 

The  Mufe,  with  virtuous  indignation  flung, 

In  rhyme's  ftrong,  chains  the  brazen  culprit  hung; 

When,  with  the  fury  of  a  thoufand  foes, 

Howl'd  the  wild  tempeft  of  thy  verfe  and  profe  ! 

Shock'd  that  an  idiegoliip,  Madam  THR  ALE,* 

And  he,f  'a  feather,  GE-NIUS  in  thy  fcale, 

High  panting  for  the  echo  of  a  name, 

Should  meanly  crucify  poor  JOHNSON'S  fame; 

I  own  I  glow'd  with  more  than  mortal  ire, 

And  fix'd  to  SATIRE'S  fcourgemy  fharpeft  wire  ; 

When,  lo:l  the  poet's  vifage  t®  begrime, 

Forth  rufri'd  thy  muddy  -flu  ice  of  profe  and  rhyme: 

For  this,  againft  my  will,  indeed  with  tears, 

1  fhow'd  a  grinning  land  thy  afs's  ears, 


fhat  the  Mufe  mould  daringly  fuggeft 
How  ftars  have  beam'd-upon  the  blackeft  breafl; 
Juft  like  their  heav'nly  coufinsaii  fo  bright, 
O'er  the  dark  mantle  of  old  mother  NIGHT  ; 
Should  hint  (by  FORTUNE'S  wild  vagaries  plac'd^ 
That  Croivns  may  feel  themfelves  at  times  difgrac'd; 
To  take  a  King's  and  courtiers  part  fo  prone, 
Full  at  my  forehead  did  ft  thou  fling  the  ftone  ; 
But  thanks  to  Phoebus,  who  fecur'd  my  crown, 
No  David  thou,  to  bring  Goliah  dowa  ! 

Griev'd    that  th'   ambitious  Mufe  a  FRANCE  ihould 

praife, 
Whofe  name  diffufes  luftre  o'er  her  lays; 

*  Now  Madam  Piozzi.  f  Mr.  James  Bofwell. 

A  PRIKCE 


TO    JOHN     NICHOLS. 

A  PRINCE  whofe  only  fault  u>  want  of  ait, 

Whofe  horrid  vice,  benevolence  of  heart; 

Which  little  abjeft  fouls  prpfufion  call, 

And  o'er  each  action  vainly  fpit  their  g  ill : 

Griev'd  that  the  Mufe  attacked  with  fco 

Unlucky  fornVd  on  Nature's  hungry  plan  ; 

Who,  lord  of  millions,  trembles  for  his  ftore, 

And  fears  to  give  a  farthing  to  the  poor ; 

Proclaims  that  penury  will  be  his  fate, 

And,  fcowling,  looks  on  charity  with  hate ; 

Whofe  mat  chiefs  avarice  is  meat  and  drink, 

That  dreads  to  fpill  a  fingledropof  ink  ; 

On  each  fuperfluous  letter  vents  a  figh, 

And  faves  the  little  dot  upon  an  /  / 

Happy  e'en  NATURE'S  tendereft  ties  to  flight, 

And  vilely  rob  an  offspring  of  his  right : 

Forth  rum'd  thy  venom-^-harmlefs,  too,  it  flow'd, 

For  man  defies  the  poifon  of  a  toad ; 

Vex'd  that  the  Mule  (as  if  me  utter'd  treafon) 

Should  try  to  bring  poor  KOSWELL  back  to  reafofl; 

(Herculean  toil,  to  keep  fuch  folly  under  !) 

J.oud  from  thy  head's  dark  cloud  I  felt  thy  thunder ! 

When,  mad  f  induce  the  u  orld  to  deem  thee  wife, 

Thou  ftarMft  through  fj>eftacle$  with  fapient  eyes ; 

Say,  did  I  cry,  th*  impoitor  to  expofe, 

"  See  JOHN'S  whole  ftock  of  wifdom  on  his  note !" 

Caf-like,  becairfe  the  world  my  lyrics  read, 

Thine  envy  claw'd  the  laurel  on  my  he. 

Yet  claw'd  I  not  again,  with  cat-like  fplccn, 

The,  drooping  leaves  of  thy  fad  Magazine : 

Touch'd  not  thy  trafh,  nor  HAYLEY'S  tinfel  Huff; 

Nor  frefh,  ftale,  new  antiquities  of  GOU£H  :* 

Indeed  I'm  tender-confcienc'd  on  that  fcore, 

And  learn  to  look  with  pity  on  the  poor : 

No  Mohawk  J,  in  fccnes  of  horror  brtd, 

I  fcorn  to  fcalp  the  dying  or  the  dead  ; 

* 

*  A  maker  of  antiquities,  and  one  of  Sir  Jofcnh  B-akf«  copper 
farthing  «racles,  and  cooftant  tea  and  toaft  men. 

VOL.  II.  N  Yet 


JjO  A    BENEVOLENT 

Yet  well  thou  knoweft  that,  with  trifling  toil, 
On  SATIRE'S  gridir'n  I  could  bid  thee  broil- 
Turn  tuneful  butcher,  cut  thee  into -quarters, 
And  give  thee,  JOHN,  for  one  of  FOLLY'S  martyrs. 
I  fee  thy  vanity  in  all  its  fulnefs ; 
The  turbot,  ven'fon  of  afpiring  dulnefs ! 
And  let  me,  O  rare  epicure,  remark, 
That  thou  haft  got  a  gullet  like  a  ftiark. 
Myfelf  as  merciful  as  man  can  be, 
I  grieve  to  find  that  mercy  not  in  thee. 
Behold,  amidft  their  ihort'ning,  panting  breath, 
Poor  foulsl  the  dying  dread  thee  more  than  death : 
44  Oh !  fave  us  from  JOHN  NICHOLS  !"  is  the  cry, 
44  Let  not  that  death-hunter  know  where  we  lie ; 
44  What  in  delirium  from  our  lips  may  fall, 
44  Oh !  hide — our  letters,  burn  them,  burn  them  all ! 
44  Oh !  let  not  from  the  tomb  our  ghofts  complain ! 
44  O  Jefu  !  we  lhall  foon  be  up  again ; 
44  Condemn'd,  alas !  to  grin  with  grifiy  mien, 
44  'Midft  the  pale  horrors  of  his  Magazine ; 
44  Like  felons  firft  in  Newgate- ballads  fung, 
44  Then  (giv'n  to  INFAMY)  onHounflowhung!" 
Know,  when  thou  took'ft  of  Ariftarch  the  chair, 
My  eyes  expanded  only  to  a  ftare : 
Softly,  indeed,  unto  myfelf,  I  figh'd, 
44  JOHNSON,*  thy  place  is  d — nably  fupply'd: 
44  Not  that  I  think  this  idol  of  the  million, 
44  Longinus,  Ariftotle,  or  Quintilian ; 
44  Who  gives  (againft  found  tafte  fo  apt  to  fin) 
44  A  pyramid's  importance  to  a  pin ; 
*'  On  ev'ry  theme,  alike  his  pompous  art ; 
44  The  general  conflagration  or  a  f — ." 

When  into  FAME'S  fair  dome,  t'infult  her  throne, 
So  free,  as  if  the  houfe  had  been  thy  own, 
1  he'- •  dar'dft  to  {hove  a  vile  conundrum  crew, 
i;  v  *'•.-  k ;.  whom  Phcebus  nor  the  Muies  knew  ; 

"  I  re  Dr.  Johnfon  fuperintended  this  Magazine  :  a,peft-of  ho- 

,c.t  afuimed  afterwards 'by  Miftcr  John  Nicivols. 

Speak, 


TO    JOHN    FICHOLS.  JJI 

Speak,  did  I  tell  the  Nation  with  my  pen, 

How  FAME  in  anger  kick'd  them  out  agen; 

Threw  at  their  heads  the  lumber  of  their  brains. 

And  call'd  thee  a  pert  puppy  for  thy  pains  ? 

On  fm  h  mark'd  impudence  did  I  harangue, 

And  give  to  public  fcorn  the  pigmy  gang  ? 

Short  are  the  hours  that  fmuggl'd  praile  can  laft, 

An  echo,  a  poor  meretricious  blaft  j 

A  fuddt-n  g'ift  that  bids  old  ruins  flare, 

And,  howfing,  whirls  a  feather  through  the  air* 

FLAIT'RY,  a  little  fly  deceiving  lafs, 

With  fmile  refiftlefs,  and  a  front  of  brafs, 

Shall  reign,  perchance,  the  idol  of  a  day ; 

Then,  like  a  batter'd  harridan,  decay  ;  ' 

\Vhilft  TK  in  H,  unfading,  lifts  the  head  fiiblime, 

Ami  dare  the 'formidab'  f    JE. 

Thou  dragon  of  th'  Hefp rrian  fruit,  call'd  frctfe, 

Whofe  leather- ftrctchhig  conkicnce  interett  fways; 

Shame,  that,  through  fordid  avarice  and  fpleen, 

None  tafte,  but  fuch  as  cram  thy  Magazine ! 

ChamVd  as  a  child  whofe  doting  eye  regards 

Its  imitation  of  St.  Paul's  with  cards ; 

When,  fir'd  by  Plutarch's  venerable  name, 

Whofe  genius  rais'd  a  pyramid  to  fame, 

Thou  gav'ft  of  BOWYER'S  life  a  goffip's  ftoryv 

And  only  rear'dft  a  dunghill  to  thy  glory ; 

I  rail'd  not  at  thy  infant  emulation,. 

Nor  fpread  thy  weaknefs,  Jo  H  N,  around  the  nation  j 

Nay,  griev'd  was  I,  as  all  the  world  can  tell, 

That  thou  ftioul-Jft  write  a  book  *  that  would  not/ftf* 

When,  tort'ring  the  poor  gamut  wild  and  louci, 

Thou  fcrap'dft  harfli  difcords  on  tliy  Mufe's  crowd ; 

*  Unfortunately  for  poor  John,  even,'  book  that  he  has  publifhsd 
has  been  pofleiled  of  fo  much  of  thev/i  inert  I**  &  not  to  be  jblc  (to 
ufc  the  booktcller's  phrafe)  to  rmve  off;  witnrfs  the  Life  of  Old 
Bowyr,  the  guttings  of  old  Magazines  and  Ladie-'  Diaries,  c^ll^d 
Mifcellarics,  the  Progreflfrs  of  Queen  Eliiabeth,  editions  of  trafh  of 
every  denomination,  ice.  &c. 

N  %  Wlrat 


*3?  A    BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

V  hat  though  I  ftopp'd  my  cars  with  all  my  pow'rs, 

mourn 'd  the  labour. of  thy  tunelefs  hours. 
Oft  have  I  whifper'd  tomyfelf,  "  Enough 
"  Of  this  inoft  tirefome  fellow's  monthly  fluff: 
"  A  magazine !  a  pedlar's,  huckfter's  mop, 
"  That  harbours  brufh,  and  cabbage-net,  and  mop, 
"  Pan,  gridiron,  button,  buckle,  bodkin,  bead, 
"  Tape,  turnip,  malkins,  nightcaps  green  and  red, 
"  Pins,  pipkyis,  garters,  oatmeal,  Jordan,  difli, 
"  Stale  loaves,  and  nifty  nails,  and  ftinking  filhj" 
Yet  bade  I  not  the  world  its  laughs  prepare, 
To  rfieet  thy  miferable  monthly  ware  : 
Nay,  man,  I've  prais'd  thee — for  example,  faid, 
"  Lo  !  in  his  cumbrous  magazine  difplay'd 
*'  Once  in  a  year  a  verfe  to  raife  our  wonder, ' 
"  Which  proves  that  JOHN  may  make  a  lucky  blunder; 
"  How  like  the  heavy  mountain,  on  whofe  fide 
"  A  daify  Harts  in  folitary  pride !" 
Lo  !  from  ebriety  their  fons  to  fave,  ' 
The  Greeks  oft  fhow'd  the  lads  a  drunken  flave : 
1  thus  mightthee,  O  jingling  JOHN,  difplay, 
A  fad  example  in  the  rhyming  way 
For  printers  and  their  demons  to  avoid, 
Whofe  labours  might  more  wifely  be  employ'dj, 
But  PITY  fweetly  whifpers  in  my  ear, 
"  Expofe  riot  childhood  that  deferves  a  tear ; 
fi  Set  not  the  roaring  lion  at  a  rat, 
"  Nor  call  down  thunder,  to  deftroy  a  gnat." 
When  mad  for  honours* — foftly  have  I  faid, 
"'  What  imp  could  puf  it  in  the  Printer's  head  ?- 
"  Oh  !  may  the  fates  the  maniac  over-rule, 
44  For  titles  cannot  dignify  a  fool !" 

*  John's  ambition  to  be  a  Common-council  man  was  violent  for  a 
longtime;  great  were  the  pains  u  led,  manifold  were  the  contrivances 
employed,  and  prodigious  was  frhe  intereft  made  for  the  obtention  of 
this  honour. — .A  vacancy  happening  in  Farringdon  Ward,  John's  more 
lucky  genius  prevailed,  and  his  wiihcs  were  gratified  ;  thus  is  he  in  the 
\vav  of  being  what  I  have  in  an  ode  prophefied  of  Mr.  Auc^ionee? 
Skinner, 

«  If  things  go  fair,     , 

«  Proud  London's  proud  Lord  Mav'r." 

Complain 


TO    JOHN    NICHOLS.  13 

Complain  not  that  I've  ••  ron^'d  thy  reputation, 
By  tailing  thee  the  Jillifjl  in  the  nation  ; 

JOHN,  be  comforted — it  cannot  be; 
I  think  I  know  a  few  that  eattal  thee 

,  Twear  not  that  I've  laid,  t  >  wo  nd  t!.y  rame. 
That  hirelings  wrote  each  work  which  bears  thy  nan 
ftow  ialfe !  1  know  th*u  wroteft  many  a  line  : 
Lo !  all  the  blunders  of  the  books  are  tl'iine* 
A  literary  jackdaw  thou,  god  wot ! 
Yet  by  that  thievifti  name  I  <.  aH'd  thee  not  r 

rrion  crow  that  lives  upon  the  dead  ; 
Yet  hawk-like  pounc'd  I  not  upon  thy  head : 
A  daring  coiner ;  lo  !  I  let  thee  pafs. 
Nor  once  impeach'd  thy  literary  brafs ! 
Speak — when,  enamoured  of  thy  monthly  hau\, 
Thou  clapp'dft  another  flxpenct-  on  thy  trafli, 
Once  did  It  thou  hear  me  in  a  paffion  roar, 
44  Was  ever  impure  nee  like  this  before?'* 
Jnftead  of  making  in  th'  affair  a  fufs> 
In  mild  foliloqay  I  whifper'd  thus  : 
**  How  bleft  the  FOOL  !  he  thinks  he  all  things  knows  ? 
*'  \Virh  joy  he  wakes,  with  joy  his  eyelids  dofe  ; 
"  Pleas'd  through  the  world  to  r^iread  his  own  renown,, 
'*  With  calm  contempt  he  look.s  on  others  down ; 
**  Self  and  his  own  dear  works  th'  eternal  thc.ne, 
"  His  daily  idol,  and  bis  nightly  dnram; 
**  Thrice- envied  Bemg>  whom  no  tongue  can,  u'oundy 
"  In  PRIDK'S  impenetrabic  armour  bound  ! 
44  How  much  in  huppinels  beyond  the  WISH, 
u  Who  view  the  greateft  mtn  with  pitying  eyes;. 
M  O'er  human  imbecility  who  groan, 
44  And  figh  to  think,  how  LttJs-s  to  be  known  !'" 
Oh,  do  not  to  the  Mufes*  hill  refort, 
jtfop's  dull  brute  ^* — a  bumpkin  'midft  a  court : 
With  brother  council  crack  the  clumfy  joke, 
*Midft  beer  and  brandy^  bread  and  cheefe,  aiui  fmoke; 
Pefcend  the  ladder  to  the  clouds  bel»nv, 
Where  ordinary  mea  of  two-pence  go  -r 

*  The  fable  of  the  Gentleman,  the  ACs,  and  ihe  LajxJog, 

N  Where 


134  A'BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

Where  vagrant  knives  and  forks  are  bound  in  chains,. 
And  never  tablecloth  is  fpoil'd  by  ftains; 
Where,  in  the  board's  black  hole  (fuperbdefign  !) 
Pepper  and  fait  in  matrimony  join ; 
And  in  another  hole,  with  frown  and  fmile, 
Much  too  like  marriage,  vinegar  and  oil  !— 
Where  for  a  towel  (economic  thought ! ) 
A  monftrous  maftiff,  after  dinner  brought, 
Complacent  waits  on  Gentlemen's,  commands^ 
And  yields  his  back  of  mag  to  wipe  their  hands- 
Such  is  the  fcene  where  thou  fhouldft  ever  fit,. 
Form'd  to  thy  tafte,  and  fuited  to  thy  wit. 
Deal  not  in  Hift'ry  ;  often  have  I  faid 
'Twill  prove  a  moft  unprofitable  trade : 
Talk  not  of  PAINTING,  for  thou  know'ft  her  not? 
Such  coy  acquaintance  will  not  boil  thy  pot : 
Nor  make  ftrong  love  to  Music-;  'tis  a  Dame 
Who  fmiles  not  on  the  fouls  of  earth,  but  flame. 
Pufh  not  thy  brain  to  thought— thou  can  ft  not  think  i. 
From  metaphy  fics  fhould  thy  genius  (brink  ! 
To  thee  fuperior,  fee  the  GODDESS  rife, 
Ancf  hide  her  lofty  head  amidft  the  ikies !. 
Behold  eternai  mift  her  beauties  fiiroud, 
And  'tis  not  thy  weak  eye  can  pierce  the  cloud. 
Curs'd  with  fhe  common  fuvor  of  inditing, 
Yet  if  thy  head  poflefs  the  mange  of  writing ; 
Go  with  biography  and  cool  thy  rage, 
Pen  lives  that  cannot  well  difgrace  thy  page; 
Defcribe  whom  ev?ry  nobler  virtue  curfes, 
A  PAIR  who  mump,  with  millions  in* their  purfes. 
If  loftier  fubje6t.s  thy  ambition  :all, 
Go  fing  the  ftaring-  giants  of  Guiiuhall.. 


TO    JOHN    NICHOIS.  l'.- 


The  POET  «w//a/V/A  <f  t he  cruelty  of  AUTHOIS,  AtN 

THORKbSES,   end  the    BLUE-STOCKING    ClA'». 

ELEGY   TO    APOLLO. 

/"^RE  AT  are  my  enemies  in  trade,  God  knows ! 
^-^  There's  not  a  poet  but  would  flop  my  note  j 
With  fuch  a  world  of  fpite  their  venom  flows, 

With  fuch  good-will  the  knaves  would  cut  my  throat. 

Yet  how  have  I  offended;  PHOSBUS,  fay, 

To  get  fo  much  ill-blood,  fuch  curling  looks  ? 

Is  it  becaufe  my  more  ambitious  lay 

Difdains  to  vkit  trunk-makers  and  cooks  ? 

With  theirs  to  vifit  grocers,  and  the  men 
Who  fortune,  in  that  weed  tobacco,  fee; 

From  thence  come  deeply  laden  back  agen, 
With  fugar,  pigtail,  pepper,  and  rappee  ? 

The  man  of  words,  of  ftilt-fupported  phrafe, 
Thegjift'ring  HAY  LEY  fcorns  whate'er  I  write; 

This  Wiil-o'wilp  of  verfe  difdains  my  lays; 

Tales,  Odes,  nor  Loufiads,  yield  the  leafi  delight  \. 

So  /«/>y,  yet  in  ware  fo  kumbfy  dealing ! 

So  damcaUy  tallelefs !  big  with  nought  h 
So  tertder^  yet  fo  defthute  of  feeling ! 

So  fentimental  too,  without  a  thought ! 

I  fee  the  band  of  BLUB-STOCKINGS  arife, 

Hjftoric,  critic,  and  poetic  dames  ! 
Tkis  lifts  her  palms,  and  that  her  marv'lling  eyej, 

And   fqueaks,    **  The  fellow's  fluff  fhould   feel  the 

*• 


I>6  A    BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

"  Such  is  the  way  his  works  fhould  come  to  light"— 
Thus  rail  thofe  dames  of  claffic  erudition  ; 

Thus,  leagu'd  with  WIT,  unmerciful  they  bite 
Thy  fav'rite  BARD,  O  PHCF,  BUS,  and  Phyficiaru 

And  now  I  hear  a  fcore  in  union  bawl—  - 

"  In  cold  contempt  fhall  poor  PIOZZI  figh? 

**  Miss  HANNAP  MORE  into  oblivion  fall  ? 
"  Dear  MISTRESS  MONTAGUE  neglected  lie  ? 

**  Thofe  rich  Corinthian  pillars  of  our  clubr 

"  Sink  to  the  ground  fo  vile,  with  duft  befpread  j, 

"  Whilft  he,  of  motley  poetry  the.  SCRUB,* 
"  Erects,  Coloflus-like,  his  brazen  head  ! 

"  Oh  !  let  the  fcullion  ufe  his  vapid  t>0ok 

*'  Inftead  of  diih  clouts,  when  her  hands  fhe  wipes  t 

**  Oh!  let  the  kindled  leaves  affift  the  cookr 
**  And  of  old  waflierwomen  light  the  pipes  !'^ 

Thus  in  rny  condemnation  they  agree, 

The  mighty  cloud-  capp'd  PETTICOATED  WISE  t 

Whilft  pleas'd  (as  confcious  of  the  juft  decree) 
Jn  proud  difdain  their  fnuff-dad  nofes  rife  1 

The  Miffes  fad  of  ele^y,  my  foes, 

Say  my  rude  genius  wants  the  genuine  fire  ; 

Bald  half  my  rhymes^  my  verfes  meafur'd  profe  t     x 
Tiiat  bears  would  better  touch  the  Mufe's  lyre. 

The  riddle  and  conundrum  mongers  cry,. 
'  "  Phaw!  d-mnhis  Ly/ics,  Loufiads  —  d-mn'emallr. 
**  His  ftrength  \\\  fields  diarian  dares  he  try  ? 
"  Soon  would  the  Almanack  record  his  fall  !'* 

Thus  with  dread  voice  my  enemies  exclaim  ! 
Thus  am  I  doom'd  to  gulp  the  bitter  piil  ! 
Themfelves,  "fair  traders  of  the  Mount,"  they  name;: 
-  But  me  zfaugglsr  on  thy  facred  hill  I 


*  The  Poet  here  moft  fancifully  alludeth  to  Mr.  Scrub,  the  fervant 
af  all  work,  in  Farquhar's  play  of  the  Beaux  Stratagem. 

God 


TO    TOKN     NICH(.' 

God  of  us  Lyrics,  (hall  I  rouze  my  rhyme, 
Confound  the  gang,  and  vindicate  my  lay; 

Or  calmly  leave  them  to  devouring  Tr  M  K, 
Who  dineth  on  fuch  ivit/iugj  every  day  ? 


Adif- 


A    BENEVOLENT 


A  difcontent,  mingled  with  fome  grumbling,  amongft  the 
more~enlightened  members  of  the  ROYAL  SOCIETY,  on 
account  of  Sir  JOSEPH'S  non-communication  of  wifdom 
to  the  Royal  Journals,  fpurred  the  Knight  on  at  la(t 
{without  the  help  of  Balaam's  Angel)  to  '  open  his 
mouth  —  He  told  an  intimate  friend  that  he  had  made  a 
difcovery  that  would  aftonifh  the  World,  enrich  the 
Journals,  and  render  himfelf  immortaU-with  the  moft 


important  confidence  and  philofophic  folemnity,  he  af 
firmed  that  he  was  upon  the  very  eve  of  proving  what 
had  never  entered  into  the  foul  of  man,  viz.  that  Fleas 
were  Lob  flers--  that  JONAS  DRYANDER  was  ordered  to 
collect  fifteeen  hundred  Fleas,  and  boil  them;  which,  if 
they  thanked  to  the  fine  crimfon  of  the  Lobiier,  would 
put  the  identity  of  the  fpecies  beyond  the  poflibility  of 
doubt.  At  length  the  beds  of  the  Prefident  were  rah- 
facked  by  his  Flea-crimp,  honeft  JONAS—  fifteen  hundred 
of  the  hopping  inhabitants  were  caught,  and  paired  the 
dreadful  ordeal  of,  boiling  water  ;  with  what  fuccefs,  O 
gentle  Reader,  the  Ode  will  inform  thee.. 


SIR      JOSEPH      BANKS 

ANI> 

THE    BOILED    FLEAS. 

T>  LEST  be  the  man  who  thought  upon  a  college, 
-*~*  The  market  of  all  forts  of  knowledge, 

Th'  emporium^  as  we  clafiic  people  fay  : 
Nay,  he  upon  fccieties  who  thought, 
To  learning's  ftock  a  deal  of  treafure  brought, 

Dragging  OBSCURITY  fo  deep  to  day; 

Making 


TO    JOHN    NICHOLS.  239 

Making  the  dame  turn  out  her  bag, 

Conceal'cl  beneath  her  inky  cloak ; 
Examining  the  fmalleft  rag, 

Blacken'd  by  TIME'S  mod  facred  finoke; 

To  ufe  a  fmilc  a  little  rough, 
Stripping  dame  NATURE  to  her  very  buff ; 
Or,  to  be  fomewhat  more  in  fpecch  Pefia'd, 
By  dint  of  pow'rs  of  eye  and  mind, 
Enlightening  what  through  dark nefs  might  efcape: 
Embroid'ring  thus  with  filver  fpangles,  crape* 

The  mention  of  focieties  recalls 
Of  Somerfet  *  the  lofty  walls 

The  hive  where  fam'd  Sir  JOSEPH  reigns  Queen  Bee  j 

ugh  men,  to  whom  Sir  JOSEPH  is  not  known, 
Moft  cenainly  muft  take  him  for  a  drone  ; 

Whofeface,  by  floven  NATURE'S  hard  decree, 
Seems  form'd  fair  ladies  poclfets  to  alarm, 
Rather  than  (leal  fair  ladies  hearts  by  charm. 

•Tell!  fo  much  for  Sir  JOSEPH'S  face, 
And  eke  about  the  hive-like  place, 

Where  fam'd  Sir  JOSEPH  reigns  Queen  Bee ; 
And  veqly  Queen  Bee's  a  proper  name  ; 
For,  Reader,  know  it  is  a  royal  dame, 

V.'ho  to  her  fubjefts  iflbeth  decree ; 
"Sr ndfth  her  fubjefts  eaft  and  weft, 

tch  on  flowers  and  weeds  thebeft, 
•    And  bring  fweet  treafure  to  the  hive ; 
She  keepeth,  too,  of  gentlemen  a  band, 
To  fay  foft  things  and  flatter,  kifs  her  hand, 

Who  eat  the  honey  for  fuch  deeds,  and  thrive. 

Sir  JOSEPH  has  his  flatt'rers,  too,  in  hand, 
Who  fay  foft  things — yea,  wy  foft  indeed, 

>For  which  the  gentle  flatt'ring  band 

Gain'd  butter'd  toaft,  fweet  FLATT'RY'S  oily  meed. 

*   The  Royal  Society  hold  their  meetings  there. 

A  girl 


I4P'  A    BENEVOLENT    EPTSTL* 

A  girl  for  novelty  where'er  it  .lies, 

In  mofles,  fleas,  or  cocklefhells,  or  flies, 

Sir  JOSEPH  ever  feeks  for  fomething  new; 
Of  this,  whene'er  he  fits  he  gravely  talks, 
Or  whilft  he  eats,  or  drinks,  or  runs,  or  walks, 

Amidft  his  royal  and  attendant  crew. 

ONE  morning1,  at  his  hot.fe  in  Soho-Square,  s 
As,  with  a  folemn,  awe-infpiring'  air, 

Amidft  fome  royal  fycopharits  he  fat ; 
Mofl  manfully  their  mafticators  ufing, 
Moft  pleafantly  their  greafy  mouths  amufing  '. 
With  coffee,  butter'd  toaft,  and  birds-neft  chat ; 
In  JONAS  DRYANDEK,  the  fav'rite,^came, 
WhVmanufac"hjres  all  Sir  JOSEPH'S  fame' — 

"  What  luck?"  Sir  JOSEPH  bawl'd— • "fay,  Jonas,  fay." 
"  I've  boil'd  juft  fifteen  hundred,"  JONAS  whin'tl ; 
"  The  dev'l  a  one  change  colour  could  I  find." 

Intelligence  creating  dire  difmay  ! 

Then  JONAS  curs'd,  .with  many  a  wicked  wi/h, 
Then  fhow'd  the  flubborn  fieas  within  the  difli. 
**  How!"  roar'd  the  Prefident,  and  backward  fell — 
**  There  goes,  then,  my  hypothecs  to  hell !" — 

And  now  his  head  in  deep  defpair  he  fhook  ; 
Now  clos'd  his  eyes  ;  and  now  upon  his  breaft, 
He,  mutt'ring,  dropp'd  his  fable  beard  unbleft  ; 

Now  twirl'd  his  thurribs,  and  groan'd  with  piteous  look* 

Bread-ftruck,  fat  Aubert,  Blagdon,  Planta,  Woide, 
Whofe  jaw-bones  in  the  mumbling  trade  employ 'd, 

Half  open'd,  gap'd,  in  fudden  ftupor  loft; 
Whilft,  from  the  mouth  of  ev'ry  gaping  man, 
In  mazy  rili  the  cream >dad  cbffee  ran, 

Supporting  dainty  bits  of  butter'd  tdaft. 

Now  gaining  fpcech,  the  parafitic  crowd 
Leap'd  up,  and  roar'd  in  unifon  aloud  : 

«  Heav'ns  ! 


TO    JOHN    NICHOLS.  141 

"  Heav'fis!  what's  the  matter !  dear  Sir  JOSEPH,  pray  ?" 

Dumb  to  their  queftions  the  GREAT  MAN  remain'd  : 
The  Knight,  deep  pond'ring,  nought  vouchfaf'd  to  fay. 

Again  the  GtntUmcn  their  voices  ft  rain 'd  : 
Sudden  the  PRESIDENT  OF  FLIES,  fo  fad, 
Strides  round  the  room,  with  difappointment  mad, 

Whilft  cv'rv  eye  enlarg'd  with  wonder  rolls; 
And  now  his  head  againft  the  wainfcot  leaning, 
".Since  you  muft  know,  ntuft  know  (he  figh'd)  the  meaning, 

"  Fleas  are  not  lobfters,  d-mn  their  louls."* 

*  The  author  would  not  have  fo  frequently  taken  the  liberty  of 
putting  vulgarifms  into  the  worthy  Pffident's  mouth,  had  he  not  pre- 
vtoufly  known  that  Sir  Jufrph  wa»  the  moll  accoroplilhcd  fwearcr  of 
the  R»yai  Society. 


VOL.  n.  o 


A  ROW. 


A 

ROWLAND    FOR    AN   OLIVER; 

OR,   A 

POETICAL    ANSWER 

TO   THS 

BENEVOLENT    EPISTLE 

OF 

MISTER  PETER  PlNUAR, 

ALIO   TUI 

MANUSCRIPT   ODES,  SONGS,    UTTERS,    *c,    *c. 

or 
THE  ABOVE  MISTER  PETER  PINDAR, 

VOW    FIRST    FtJLliHiD 

BY  SYLVANUS  URBAN. 


Sir,  you  lie !— I  fcorn  your  wofd, 
Or  any  man's  that  wears  a  fword, 
For  all  you  huff,  who  caret  a  t— d  ? 

Or  who  cares  for  you  I  CATCH. 


-.V. 


ROWLANT)  FOR  AN  OLIVER, 


LITTLE  did  I  think  that  a  man  of  my  m'dd  and 
peaceable  difpofition,  that  would  not  hurt  a  cat, 
ihould  be  forced  out  to  battle  :  but  fuch  is  the  audacity 
of  the  times — (O  tempora,  O  moret  '. )  I  have  ventured 
.  forth  to  attack  this  Goliath  of  Ode  and  Impudence;  and 
J  hope,  with  God's  affiftance,  like  little  David,  to  cut 
off  his  head.  I  communicated  with  my  good  friend 
Mr.  WILLIAM  HAYLEY,  who  is  a  conftant  communi 
cant  to  my  Gentleman's  Magazantj  both  in  verfe  and 
profe,  that  is  to  fay,  in  rh)inc  and  criticifm;  whom  I 
may  rightly  term  one  of  the  great  pillars  of  mv  Gentle- 
man's  Magaiine,  which  every  Gentleman  in  tne  king 
dom,  I  hope,  reads ;  which,  if  he  doth  not  read,  I  hope 
he  will  read,  as  it  is  not  only  the  gretteft  ftvouritc  with 
our  Moft  Gracious  Sovereign,  .who  is  the  greateit  Mo 
narch  upon  earth,  but  alfo  with  his  Nobles,  who  are 
men  of  judgment  and  learning;  alfo  with  foreign  p;irrv, 
who  tranflate  it  conftantly  into  their  language :  fo  that, 
if  1  may  be  permitted  to  verfify  die  praifc  of  my. monthly 
Publication  (for  indeed  I  muft  own  I  have  a  gryat  itch, 
for  poetry)  I  will  do  it  in  this  poetical  diftich : 

My  Magazine  all  magazines  excels ; 

And,  what's  ftill  better  too  for  JOHN,  it  ftlh.  • 

I  afkcd  Mr.  HAYLEY,  paying -him  the  compb'ment 
f.rft,  if  he  would  be  the  champion  to  encounter  this 
great  Mr.  PETER  PINDAR  To  this  Mr.  HVYLF.Y  re 
plied,  after  fome  hefitation,  -and  pondering^  and  blowing 
hU  nole  in  his  handkerchief,  that  he  did  not  much  ad* 
mire  a  public  exhibition ;  tlut  it  would  wear  the  afpe& 
of  a  bruiiing-match,  too  much  like  a  fet-to  of  Jolmfin 
O  3  and 


146  A    ROWLAND    POR    AN    OLIVER. 

and  Big  Ben  ;  but  added  that  7  might  do  it,  if  I  thought 
proper.  "  But,"  fays  my  good  Friend,  "  I  will  privately 
"  attack  him,  under  a  fiSitious  fignature :" — which  he 
did  indeed,  and  gave  the  audacious  fellow  many  a  good 
thump,  in  verfe  and  profe :  but  this  was  only  fmall-fhot, 
with  deference  to  Mr.  HAYLEY  ;  the  grand  artillery  was 
referred  for  me. 

Kind  Reader,  wilt  thou  permit  me  to  fay  fomething  of 
myfelf,  in  fimplicity  and  candour,  before  I  go  to  work 
with  this  Caliban  ?  When  I  firft  took  the  chair  of  criti- 
cifm,  I  own  that  I  trembled ;  for  I  am  not  afhamed  to 
confefs,  that  fo  great  was  my  ignorance,  that  when  a 
correfpondent  fent  me  an  account  of  an  ancient  coin,  I 
did  not  know  a  fyllable  about  it — neither  the  meaning  of 
reverfe,    exergue,    or  legend:    but  now,    thank  God,    I 
know  every  thing  appertaining  to  numifmata,  if  I  may 
be  indulged  with  a  Latin  expreffion.     Indeed  the  legends 
ufed  to  perplex  me  much,  in  as  much  as  I  expofed  my 
felf  greatly  ;  for  I  am  not  afhamed  to  confefs  my  igno 
rance.     I  thought  that  AUG.  upon  a  Roman  medal, 
meant  the  month  in  which  it  was  ftruck  off;  and  there 
fore  I  deemed  it  Auguft  :  and  G.  P.  R.  which  I  now 
know  to  be  Genio  Populi  'Romani,  I  verily  thought  to  be 
a  coin  ftruck  by  one  George  Peter  Richardfon.     The 
figures  of  Romu\ns  and  Remus  fucking  a  me- wolf,  I  took 
to  be  two  children  milking  a  cow.     D.  M.  for  Diis  M.I- 
nibus^\  took  to  be  David  Martin,  or  Daniel  Mufgrove. 
The  half-word^  HEL,  lignifying  Heliopolis,  I  imagined 
to  be  no  other  than  the  Houfe  of  Satan.     JAN.  CLU. 
that  is  to  fay,  Janum  clujit,  I  took  to  be  the  name  of  a 
man.     LUD.  SyEC\F.  I  verily  thought  to  be  downright 
filthy,  and  blufhed  for  the  Romans:  but,  lo !   I  after 
wards  cjifcovered  it  to  be  Ludos  f secular  es  fecit.     COS.  I 
thoughi'to  be  Cos  Lettuces,  which  only  meantth  Ccnful; 
M.  F.  K*v.  Ford,  which  meaneth  Marci  Ftlius.     N.  C. 
(wouldft  thou  think  it,  Reader?)  I  tranflated  Nincom 
poop  ;  when,  lo !  it  meaneth  Nobilijfimus  Ccefar.     P.  P. 
which  fignifieth  Pater  Patria,    I  thought  might  mean. 
Peter  Pounce,  or  Philip  Pumpkin.    R.  P.  I  alio  thought 

might 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVFR.  147 

might  mean  Robert  Penruddock,  or  Ralph  Pigwiggin, 
or  any  other  name  beginning  with  thofe  initials :  but,  lo ! 
its  true  meaning  I  find  to  be  Rcfpnbllca,  (ignifyine,  in 
Englifli,  the  Republic.  Thus  it  will  appear  that  I  am 
not  afliamed  to  confcfs  my  error,  which  this  enemy  of 
mine  dareth  not. 

TRIB.  POT.  which  only  meaneth  Tribunitia  Pot  eft  at  f, 
I  actually  imagined  meant  a  tribe  of  Potatoes,  and  that 
the  coin  was  ftruck  on  nccount  of  a  plentiful  year  of 
that  fruit.  S.  P.  Q^R.  which  meaneth  only  Scnatus  /V 
pulufquf  Romanus,  un wifely,  yet  funnily,  did  1  make  out 
to  be  Sam  Paddon,  a  Queer  Rogue;  for  "as  much  as  I 
was  informed  that  tht  Romans  ftruck  coins  on  every 
trifling  occafion.  SCI  P.  AS.  which  fignifieth  no  more 
than  Set f  19  Jfricanus,  1  read  literally  Skip  Afs ;  but  for 
why,  I  could  not  fay : — fuch  was  my  ignorance. 

Many  were  the  impofitions  upon  me : — rings  for  pigs 
nofes  were  fent  me  for  HO fe -jewels  worn  by  the  Roman 
Ladies ;  a  piece  of  oxycroceum,  juft  made  in  a  drug- 
gift's  (hop,  for  the  pitch  that  furrQimded  the  body  of 
Julius  Cajfar ;  a  large  brown  Jordan,  for  a  lacrymatory  j 
a  broken  old  black  fugar-bafon,  for  a  dniid  urn ;  a  piece 
of  a  watchman's  old  lantern,  for  a  Roman  lamp.  The 
wig  of  the  famous  Boerhaavc  was  alfo  fent  me  as  a  cu- 
riofity  ;  the  roguery  of  which  I  did  not  diicover  till  an 
engraving  of  the  wig  was  nearly  finilhed,  coding  me 
upwards  of  thirty  millings : — for,  lo !  Reader,  this  great 
man  never  wore  a  wig  in  his  life.— -In  my  Obituary,  too, 
I  made  great  miftakes,  from  impofition ;  as  I  gave  the 
deaths  of  many  that  were  not  dead,  and  others  that  never 
cxifted.  Sometimes  the  wickednefs  of  correfpondents 
were  fuch,  that  I  have  perpetuated  the  death  of  bull 
dogs,  greyhounds,  maftiffs,  horfes,  hogs,  &c.  in  my  Obi- 
ttsary,  under  an  idea  that  they  were  people  of  confe- 
Quence.  Indeed  I  have  not  ftuck  to  the  letter  of  my  af- 
iertion  at  the  head  of  my  Obituary,  that  declares  it  to  be 
a  record  of  confiderable  perfons ;  for  as  much  as  I  have 
jfometimts  put  a  fcavenger  over  a  Member  of  Parliament, 

a  pig- 


148-  A  ROWLAND  FOR  AN 'OLIVER. 

a  pig-driver  over  a  Bifhop,  a  lamp-lighter  over  an  Alder 
man,  and  a  chimney-fweeper  over  a  Duke  :  but  as  I  was 
defired  by  the  friends  of  the  deceafed  to  do  it,  (for  who 
is- not  ambitious  r)  and  as  I  was  paid  for  it  too,  (and 
who  can  withftand  a  fee?).  I  have  in  fome  little  meafure 
difgraced  my  Journal,  and  forfeited  my  word. — My  pre- 
fent  antiquarian  knowledge,  gratitude  maketh  me  confefs 
that  I  owe  it  all  to  Mr.  R.  GOUGH,  of  Enfield,  who 
fome  years  ago  was  alfo  an  ignorant  and  illiterate  gentle 
man,  like  myfelf — buty  by  hard  rtudy,  hath  attained  to 
his  prefent  perfection,  as  may  be  feen  in  our  Topographia 
Britanriica,  whjch  is  not,  as  that  arch-enemy  PETER 
PINDAR  hath  aflerted  it  to  be,  the  idle  production  of  a 
couple  of  fellows  that  want  to  make  a  fortune  by  a  hif- 
tory  of  cobwalls,  old  chamberpots,  and  rufty  nails.  My 
friend  Mr.  GOUGH'S  zeal  for  the  promotion  of  antiqua 
rian  knowledge  cannot  be  better  proved  than,  by  his  run 
ning  the  rilk  of  being  well  trounced,  for  borrowing  one 
of  KING  EDWARD'S  fingers,  as  he  lay  expofed  a  few 
years  fince,  in  Weftminfter  Abbey ;  which  finger  my: 
friend  gently  flipped  into  his  pocket;  but,  unfortunately, 
he  was  perceived  by  the  Bifliop  of  .Rochefter,  who,  to 
the  difgrace  of  the  antiquarian  fcience,  ordered .  poor 
Mr.  GOUGH  to  be  fearched,  and  to  reftore  the  treasure. 
Had  it  not  been . for  this  impertinent  and  hawk-eyed  at 
tention  of  the  Bifliop,  Sir  JOSEPH  AYLOFFE,  and  other 
antiquarians  prefent  at  the  opening  of  the  Monarch's 
coffin, — fuch  was  the  intrepidity  of  my  antiquarian' 
friend  GOUGH,  that  he  would  have  attempted  the  1ieadr 
inftead  of  a  pitiful  finger,  as  he  had  on  a  large  watch- 
man's  coat  for  the  purpofe.  Nor  muft  I  omit  the  zeal 
of  my  friend  Sir  JOSEPH  BANKS  on  the  ocean' on;  who, 
on  hearing  what  was  gping  on,  and  fufpe&ing.  that  King 
Edward  might  have  been  lodged  in  pickle,  galloped  off 
with  a  gallon  jug,  in  a , hackney  coach,  in  order  to  fill  it 
v/ith  the  precious  liquor,  as  a  fauce  for  his  future  Attic 
entertainments  in  Soho-fquare  \-  but  unfortunately  no 
pickle  was  found. 

I  con« 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER.  149 

I   confcfs  that  an  impudent  fellow  feni  me  for  my 

>!ary  the  following,  which  was  really  printed  off  (but 

-lied)  before  I  was  informed,  by  a  friend,  of  the 

fallacy — to   wit :    "   On  Sunday  night  laft,    died  Mrs. 

.ARGERY  MOUSER,  a  widow-lady,  beloved  in  life, 

"  and  lamented  in  death  ;  flic  was  the  only  daughter  of 

a  ROGER  GRIMALKIN,    Efq.    of  Ratify." — Ignorant, 

indeed,    was  I  that  it  was  an  impofition ;    for,   gentle 

Reader,  it  was  a  dead  cat ! — Many  a  good  cuftomer  hav» 

I  gained  by  my  Obituary,  who  liked  to  fee  themfelves 

dead  in  my  Magazine — I  mean  their  relations  liked  to 

fee   their  deaths  difplayed  in  a  work  of   fo  much  re- 

foeftability  as  mine.     But  enough  of  myfclf ;  and  now 

for  Matter  PETER. 

In  the  fullnefs  of  my  paffion,  I  at  firft  fet  me  down, 
and  faid  to  myfelf,  Facit  injt'gnatio  ver/us— when,  be 
hold!  in  lefs  than  two  hours  I  knocked  off  the  following 
Poem.  Some  time  after,  however,  after  a  deal  of  deep 
thought  on  the  fubjecl,  it  (truck  me  that  I  might  fight 
this  Poet  PETER  againft  himfelf ;  make  him,  like  fome 
game-cocks,  cut  his  own  throat  with  his  own  fpurs. 
Accordingly  I  fet  about  it,  and  collected,  from  every 
Quarter,  his  manufcripl  verfes  of  every  denomination ; 
lome  written  in  Cornwall,  others  in  Devon,  others  in 
the  Weft  Indies,  others  in  Bath,  others  in  London ;  as 
alfo  forne  of  his  Letters,  particularly  thoie  to  the  KINC 
of  the  MOSQUITOES,  who  was  fent  for  by  the  Governor 
of  Jamaica,  Toon  after  that  Gentleman  arrived  at  his  go 
vernment.  I  have  alfo  collected  fome  of  his  Obferva- 
tions,  and  Sayings,  and  Speeches : — I  may  verily  fay, 
Obfervations  on  men  and  manners,  without  any  manners 
at  all;  or,  in  plainer  phrafe,  much  ill  manners.  PETER 
muft  not  complain  of  my  fhowing  himtno  mercy  by  this 
publitation,  as  he  is  the  moft  mercilefs  Mohawk  that 
ever  fcalped. 


•   -  •   Nee  lex  eft  jnjtior  ulla 
Quam  ntcij  artifcts  arte 


A  POETIC 


A 

POETICAL      ANSWER 

TO 

MISTER    PETER    PINDAR'S 
BENEVOLENT  EPISTLE  TO  JOHN  NICHOLS, 


r\  SON  of  wicked  Satan,  with  a  foul 
^  Hot  as  his  hell,  and  blacker  than  his  coal ! 
Thou  falfe,  thou  foul-mouth'd  cenfurer  of  the  times, 
I  do  not  care  three  ilraws  for  all  thy  rhymes. 
Thy  wit  is  blunter  than  old  worn-out  flieers : 
I'll  make  a  riddle  with  thee  for  thy  ears  ; 
Write  any  fort  of  verfe,  thou  bluft'ring  blade  ! 
Egad!  I'll  fay,  like  KECKS  Y,  "  Who's  afraid  ?"-— 
Thank  God,  I've  talk'd  to  greater  folks  than  thee : 
Jn  tfiat  I  will  not  yield  to  any  HE  ; 
No,  not  to  any  HE  that  wears  a  head — 
Again  I'll  fay,  like  KECKSEY,  "  Who's  afraid  ?"— 
Thank  God,'  whene'er  I  wifti  .like  Kings  to  fare, 
I  go,  unafk'd,  and  dine  with  my  Lord  May'r; 
But  thou  ?  who  afks  thee,  varlet !  to  their  houfes> 
Fear'd  by  the  hufbands,  dreaded  by  the  fpoufes. 
May  God  Almighty  hear  what  now  I  fpeak  ! — 
Some  Aldermen  would  gladly  break  thy  neck. 
Thou  tell'ft  us  thou  haft  ftruck  thy  lyre  to  Kings — 
Yes,  faith,  and  founded  very  pretty  things. 


A    IOWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVEl.  |jl 

Thou  blockhead,  thou  pretend  to  think  thy  rhymes 
Shall  live  to  fee  the  days  of  after-times ! 
Fool,  to  pretend  on  fubje&s  great  to  (liine, 
Or  e'en  to  Printers  DevTs  to  tune  the  line  ! 
Sir,  let  me  humbly  beg  you  to  be  civil— 
Thou  know'ft  not  that  1  was  a  Printer's  Dev'l : 
So,  Sir,  your  fatire  wants  the  pow'r  to  drub, 
In  thus  comparing  NICHOLS  to  a  grub. 
Whatever  thou  fay 'ft,  Tm  not  of  vengeance  full, 
Nor  did  I  ever  bellow  like  a  bull  : 
And  grant  I  am  a  bull,  I  fhan't  fuppofe 
A  cur  like  the  can  nail  me  by  the  !.ofe. 
Thou  lied  when  thou  fayeft,  like  a  top, 
With  anger  rais'd,  I  fpinn'd  about  my  fhop : 
Nor  did  I  ever,  madden'd  by  thy  ftripes, 
Thou  prince  of  liars,  kick  about  my  types. 
Books  have  I  written  ;  books  I  ftill  will  write, 
And  give,  I  hope,  to  gentlefolks  delight : 
With  charming  print,  and  copperplates  fo  fine, 
Whofe  magazine  goes  off  fo  well  as  mine? . 
Who,  pray,  like  me*  the  page  fo  fond  of  Ailing  ? 
Who  gives' more  curious  matter  for  a  (hilling  ? 
England's  firft  geniufes  I  keep  in  pay  ; 
Much  profe  I  buy,  and  many  a  poet's  lay : 
The  (ilk-worm,  H  A  Y  L  e  Y,  fpins  me  heaps  of  verfe ; 
And  Go  UGH,  antiquities  exceeding  fcarce : 
Great  HORACE  WALPOLE  too,  with  fweet  good-will, 
Sends  me  choice  anecdotes  from  Strawb'ry-Hill : 
Mifs  SEVVARD,  Miftrefs  YEARnsLEY,~and  Mifs  MORE, 
Of  lines  (dear  women !)  fend  me  many  a  fcore. 
Thefe  are  the  nymphs  at  whom  thine  envy  rails- 
Fool  !  of  their  gowns  not  fit  to  hold  the  tails — 
Thefe  are  the  men,  of  profe  and  verfe  the  knights, 
With  genius  flaming,  like  the  northern  lights; 
Thefe  are  the  men  whofe  works  immortal  fliow 
The  man  of  literature  from  top  to  toe, 
But  thou'rt  a  wen — a  blue,  black,  bloated  tumour, 
Without  one  fingle  grain  of  wit  or  humour  ; 
Thy  Mufe  to  all  fo  confequential  ftruts, 
As  if  all  Helicon  were  in  her  guts ; 

3  A  fiftu 


I£2  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

A  fifh-drab — a  poor,  nafty,  ragged  tiling, 
Who  never  dipp'd  her  muzzle  in  the  fpring, 
Thou  think'ft  thyfelf  on  Pegafus  fo  'fteady ; 
But,  PETER,  thou  art  mounted  on  a  "Neddy  :' 
Or,  in  the  London  phrafe— rthou  Dev'nftiire  Monkey, 
Thy  Pegafus  is  nothing  but  a  Donkey. 
I  own,  my  vanity  it  well  may  raife, 
To  find  fo  many  gaping  for  my  praife  ; 
Who  fend  fuch  flatt'ring  things  as  ne'er  were  feen, 
To  get  well  varninYd  in  my  Magazine : 
Indeed  I  often  do  indulge  the  elves, 
And  fuffer  authors  to  commend  themfelves  ; 
Wits  of  tJiemfelves  can  write  with  happieft  fpirit, 
And  men  are^judges  of  their  proper  merit. 
Lumps  have  I  giv'n  them  too  x>f  beef  and  pudding, 
That  helps  a  hungry  genius  in  its  ftudying  ; 
And  humming  porter,  when  their  Muie  was  dry—  t 
For  this  be  glory  unto  God  on  high  ! 
And  not  to  me,  who  did  not. make  the  pudding, 
Nor  beef,  aflifting  genius  in  its  ftudying. 
To  authors,  yes,  I've  given  both  boil'd  and  roaft,"| 
And  many  a  time  a  tankard  with  a  toaft—  > 

But  God  forbid,  indeed,  that  I  fhould  boaft  !        J 
And  halfpence  too,  and  fixpences,  ecod ! 
But  boaft  a  vaunt !  the  glory  be  to  God  ! 
To  Bards,  good  ihoes  and  ftockings  I  have  giv'n — 
But  not  to  me  the  glory,  but  to  Heav'n ! 
Yes,  yes,  I  fee  how  much  it  fwells  thy  fpleen, 
That  I'm  head  Mafter  of  the  Magazine ; 
Who  let  no  author  fee  the  houfe  of  FAME, 
Before  he  gets  a  paflport  in  my  name. 
Art  thou  a  Doctor  ?  Yes,  of  thinning  fkill  ^ 
For  thoufands  have  been  poifon'd  by  thy  pill. 
But  let  my  foul  be  calm  : — it  fha'n't  be  faid 
I  fear  thee,  O  thou  Monfter  !— "  Who's  afraid  ?" 
What  though  I  know  fmall  Latin,  and  lefs  Greek, 
Good  fterling  Englifh  I  can  write  and  fpeak  : 
Yet  thoufands,  who  prefume  to  be  my  betters,^ 
Can't  fpell  their  names,  and  fcarcelv  know  their  letters. 

Belike, 


FOR     AN    OUVfctt.  153 

Belik^  the  curious  world  would  hear  with  joy 

trade  I  was  deiign'd  for,  when  a  boy: 
«  A  barber  or  a  t  ay  lor,",  faid  my  mother — 
««  No,"  cry'd  my  father,  "  neither  one  nor  t'other; 
*'  A  foldier,  a  rough  foldier,  JOHN  (hill  wander, 
"  Pull  down  the  French,  and  fight  like  ALEXANDER," 
But  unto  lettt-rs  was  I  ahv  ing, 

Soafk'd  my  daddy's  leave  to  ftudy  Printing; 
And  got  m'yfelf  to  uncle  BOWYER'S  (hop, 
Where,  when  it  plens'd  the  Lord  that  he  fliould  drop, 
The  trade  arui  good- will  of  the  (hop  was  mine; 
"Where,  whhout  vanity,  I  think  I  jiina 
And  where,  thank  God,  in  fpite  of  dull  al> 
I'm  \vnrm,  and  married,  and  can  boil  my  goofe. 
And  had  I  been  to  fwords  and  mufkets  bred, 
r.nu'd  aC*:sAR,  or  theSwE! 
Hadft  thou  a  fokucrbccn,  thou  forty  mummer, 
'l  hy  i;;i.\  had  never  rofe  above  a  drummer. 
Mow  d^r'rt  tliou  lay,  that  ihoufd  HU  UOVAL  HIGH:- 
( A  I  o wn'd  for  modefty  and  (hy nel'O, 

Bo  G'  oof  all  our  fr.. 

A  jack-aib's  old  bac-:,  and  not  a  horfc's, 
Should  cam'  the  good  Prince  into  the  field, 
Whofearm  a  broomftick,  for  a  Half,  ihould  v/ield, 

very,  very  broomftick  which  his  wile 

'd  to  fini(h  matrimonial  it  rile  ? 

Jofl  not  praife  the  virtue i  of  the  Qute*% 
\  foul,  as  noble  in  her  mien, 

the  foulo:  tick, 

Strong  as  her  fmiff,  and  as  her  di'momls  thick  ? — 
But  wherefore  this  to  PETER  c'.  I  . 
Owls  love  the  dark,  and  therefore  loath  the  day, 
The  K  ...  as  wife  a  man  as  man  ca 
The  Q_. .  \ .  fo  mild,  who  cannot  kill  a  flea ; 
Brave  *  GLO'STER'S  Highnels,  «and  his  ibber  wLe, 
Who  lead  die  fofteft,  fweetril,  ciimeft  life ; 
RICHMOND  and  L  -  Duke  a  firft-rate  ftar, 

One  fam'd  for  ind  one  for  war ; 

The  open  I !  ,er  to  all  guile, 

c-  robb'd  oor  ille; 
H.  P  The 

TUB  •-•  .-f  Q. 


l£4  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

The  modeft  PITT,  the  Jofeph  of  the  day, 

Who  never  with  lewd  women  went  aftray ; 

.And  many  others,  that  I  foon  could  mention, 

Are  much  oblig'd,  indeed,  to  thy  invention  ! 

But  w here's  the  oak  that  never  feels  a  blaft  ? 

Or  fun,  at  times  that  is  not  overcaft  ? 

Alas !  e'en  people  dreft  in  gold  and  ermine 

May  feel  at  times  the  bites  of  nafty  vermin : 

And  when  thou  dar'ft  great  Quality  attack, 

What  art  thou  but  a  bug  upon  their  back  ?    . 

What  harm,  pray,  hath  my  friend  Sir  JOSEPH  done? 

So  good,  and  yet  the  fubjecT:  of  thy  fun  r 

Juft  in  his  ways  to  women  and  to  men — 

Indeed  he  fwears  a  little  now  and  then. 

Behold  his  breakfafts  fliine  with  reputation  ! 

His  dinners  are  the  wonder  of  the  nation  ! 

With  thefe  he  treats  both  commoners  and  quality, 

Who  praife,  where'er  they  go,  his  hofpitality : 

Tiv'n  from  the  north  and  fouth,  and  weft  and  eaft, 

Men  fend  him  ihell,  and  butterfly,  and  beaft. 

Sir  WILLIAM  HAMILTON  fends  gods  and  mugs; 

And,  for  his  feaft,  a  fow's  moil  dainty  dugs. 

And  fliall  fuch  mob  as  thou^  not  worth  a  groat, 

Dare  pick  a  hole  in  fuch  a  great  Man's  coat  ? 

Whenever  at  St.  James's  he  is  feen, 

Is  not  he  fpoke  to  by  the  King  and  Queen  ? 

And  don't  the  Lords  at  once  about  him  prefs, 

And,  like  his  Sov'reigns,  much  regard  profefs  ? 

Tell  him  they'll  come  one  day  to  him  and  dine, 

Behold  his  rarities,  and  tafte  his  wine ; 

Such  are  the  honours,  to  delight  the  foul, 

On  which  thy  longing  eyeballs  vainly  roll : 

Such  are  the  honours  that  his  heart  muft  flatter, 

On  which  thy  old-dog's  mouth  in  vain  may  waier. 

Whether  in  Dev'nfhire  thou  haft  got  a  houfe, 

I  value  not  three  capers  of  a  loufe ; 

Whether  in  Cornwall  thou  a  hut  haft  got, 

And,  at  elections  only,  boil'ft  thy  pot ; 

Whether  a-  Doclor,  Devil,  or  a  Friar, 

I  know  not — but  I  know  thou  art  a  liar. 

Whene'er . 


A    ROWLAND    FOR     AN    OLIVER* 

Whene'er  I  die,  I  hope  that  I  (hall  read 

This  honeft  epitaph  upon  my  head  : — 

41  Here  lies  JOHN'S  body;  but  hi  <  en 

11  In  that  f.  k,  the  Ge'mman's  Magazine: 

.ive,  yet  pofll-fs'd  of  all  the  Jr/ter  fee  lit 
"  Succefsful  with  the  Mufes  in  his  dcaii 
*"  Mild,  yet  in  virtue's  cauic  as  quick  as  tinder-*; 

.  one  f — 13  for  I'u  r c  R  ij i  N  n  A  R." 


Mr.  PETER  PIKDAR'S  Apology  for  the  variety  of  en 
tertainment  in  his  pretty  Poetical  Olio,  is  the  firft  thing  I 
fhall  prefent  to  the  Public. 


P  E  T  E  R's      APOLOGY. 

T  ADTES,  I  keep  a  rhyme- (hop— mine's  a  trade; 

•*  J  I  fell  to  old  and  young,  to  man  and  maul : 

All  cuflomers  nuft  be  oblig'd  ;  and  no  man 
\\i  flies  more  univerfally  topleafe: 
I'd  really  crawl  upon  my  hands  and  knees, 

T'  oblige — particularly  lovely  woman. 

Ytt  fome,  (the devil  take  fuch  virtuous  times!) 
1-aftidious,  pick  a  quarrel  with  my  rhymes, 

And  beg  I'd  only  deal  in  love-fick  fonuet — 
How  eafy  to  bid  others  ceafe  to  feed ! 
On  beauty  can  quickly  ///>  indeed, 

But,  truft  me,  can't  live  long  upon  it. 

If  there  is  not  a  great  deal  of  impudent  <kuble-entcntlre 
in  this  Sonnet.  I  do  not  know  what  purity  meaneth — 
Sweetly  wrapped  up  indeed,  'Squire  PINDAR  ! 

P  Z  Inftead 


1$6  A    ROWLAND    FOR     Att    OLIVER. 

Inftead  of  a  formal  commentary  on  every  composition, 
I  fhalt  make  mort  work  with  them,  by  giving  them  their 
true  character  in  a  few  words,  as  for  example. 

Impudence,  Egotifm,  and  Conceit* 


The  expulfion  of  a  moil  excellent  fet  of  Players  from- 
Kingibridge  in  Devonfhire,  with  the  afyhrnj  offered 
them  by  the  Author's  Barn  in  an  adjoining  pariili,  is  the 
true  foundation  of  the  following  Ode. 

ODE    TO    MY    BARN. 

OWEET  haunt  of  folitude  and  rats, 
^  Mice",  ttmeful  owls,  and  purring  cats  j 

Who,  whilft  we  mortals  fl^ep,  the  gloom  pervade^ 
And  wifli  not  for  the  fun's  all-feeing  eye, 
Your  rriouiing  myiteries  to  fpy  ; 

Bleft,  like  philofophers,  amidd  the  fhade  ; 

When  PERSECUTION,  with  an  iron  hand, 
Dar'd  drive  the  moral-menders  from  the  land, 

Call'd  Players — fHe'ndly  to  the  wand'ring  crew, 
Thine  eyes  with  tears  furvey'd  the  mighty  wrong, 
Thine  open  arms  receiv'd  the  mournful  throng — 

Kings  without  fhirts,  and  Queens  with  half  a  (hoe. 

Alas  !  what  dangers  gloom'd  of  late  around  ! 
Monarchs  and  Queen's  with  halters  nearly  bound — 

Duke,  Dukeling,  Princefs,  Prince,  corifign'd  to  jail  !- 
And,  what  the  very  foul  of  PITY  fhocks, 
The  poor  old  LEA"  a  was  threaten'd  with  the  flocks, 

CORDELIA  with  the  cart's  unfeeling  tail. 

Still  cherifli  fuch  rare  royalty  forlorn — 
A  GARIUCK  in  thy  boihm.  may  be  born; 


A    10WLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER.  157 

A  SIDDONS  too,  of  future  fair  renown  : 
For  LOVE  is  not  a  fqueamith  God,  they  fay ; 
As  pleas'd  to  fee  .his  writes  perform'd  on  hay, 

As  on  the  goofe's  fort  and  yielding  down. 

The  fame  impudence,  egotifm,  and  conceit  as  in  the 
fail  Ode. 


TO     MY     BARN. 

T>  Y  Lacedaemon  men  attacked, 

•*•*  When  Thebes,  in  days  of  yore  was  fack'd, 

And  nought  the  fury  of  the  troops  could  hindqr; 
What's  true,  yet  marv'lous  to  rehearfe, 
So  well  the  common  foldiers  rtlifrYd  verle, 

They  fcorn'd  to  burn  the  dwelling-houfe  of  PLNDA*. 

With  awe  did  ALEXANDER  view 
The  houfe  of  my  great  coufiu,  too, 

And,  gazing  on  the  building,  thus  he  figh'd — 
14  General  PARMBNIO,  mark  that  houfe  before  ye  ! 
**  That  lodging  tells  a  melancholy  ftory  ! 
"  There  PINDAR  liv'd  (great  bard  !)  and  there  he  ^ 

*  T'ie  King  of  Syracufe,  all  nations  know  it, 
«*  Was  celebra'ed'by  this  lofty  Poet, 

44  And  made  immortal  by  his  (trains : 
14  A'i !  could  I  find  like  him*  bard  to  (ing  me,. 
u  Would  any  man,  like  htm  a  poet  bring  me ; 

"  I'd  give  him  a  good  penfion  foe  his  pains. 

**  But,  ah!  PARMRNIO,  'mongft  the  tons  of  mi 
44  This  world  will  never  fee  his  like  agen  ; 

"  Thegreateft  bard  that  ever  breath'd  is  dead! 
**•  General  PARMENIO,  what  think  >w/ ?"— 
44  Indeed  'tis  true,  my  liege,  'tis  very  true," 

P ARMtNio  cry'd,  and,  fighing,  fhook  his  head : 

E  3 


IC;8  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

Then  from  his  pocket  took  a  knife  fa  nice, 
With  which  he  chipp'd  his  cheefe  and  onions, 

And  from  a  rafter  cut  a  handfome  flice, 
To  make  rare  toothpicks  for  the  Macedonians  ; 
Juft  like  the  toothpicks  which  we  fee 

At  Stratford  made,  from  Shakefpear's  mulb'ry-tree^ 

What  pity  that  the  'fquire  and  knight 
JCnew  not  to  prophecy  as  well  as  fight  ; 

Then  had  they  known  the  future  men  of  metre  5 
Then  had  the  General  and  the  Monarch  fpy'd, 
In  FATE'S  fair  book,  our  nation's  equal  pride. 

That  very  PINDAR'S  coufin  PJETER  ! 

DAUGHTER  of  thatch,  and  ftone,  and  mud,. 
When  I  (no longer  flefh  and  blood) 

Shall  join  of  lyric  bards  fome  half-a-dozen ; 
Meed  of  high  worth,  and,  'midftth*  Eiyfian  plains^, 
To  Horace  and  Alcaeus  read  rri'y  itrains, 

Anacreon,  Sappho,  and  my  great  old  coufin.. 

Ontfac  fliall  rifing  generatioas  ftare, 

That  come  to  KingfBridge  and  to  Dodbrook  Fain* 

For  fuch  thy  hiftoiyr  and  mine  ihall  learn  ; 
Like  ALEXANDER  fhallthey  ev'ry  one 
Heave  the  deep  figh,  and  fay,  <*'  Since  PETER'S 

u  Withrev'rence  let  usrlook  upon  his  Barn." 

*  Held  annually  at  tbofe  places*. 


TiK 


A,    ROWLAND    FOIL    AN    OLIVER. 


The  following  Ode  of  Mr.  PINDAR'S  is  what  rheto 
ricians  would  call  ironical.  The  leading  feature 
fcems  to  be  impudence. 

ODE   TO  AFFECTATION. 

"^J  YMPH  of  the  mincing  mouth,  and  languid  eye, 
^•^    And  lifping  tongue  fo  fofr,  and  head  awry, 

And  flim'ring  heart,  of  leaves  of  afpin  made ; 
Who  were  thy  parents,  blulhful  Virgin  !  fay — 
Perchance  DAHE  FOLLY  gave  thee  to  the  day, 

With  GAFFER  IGNORANCE'S  aid. 

Say,  Virgin,  where  doft  thou  delight  to  dwell? 
With  Maids  of  Honour,  ftartful  Virgin  ?  tell — 

For  I  have  heard  a  deal  of  each  fair  M 
How  wicked  LOHDS  have  whifper'd  wicked  things 
Beneath  tl.c  nofes  of  good  Qiieens  and  Kings, 

And  figh'd  for  pleafures  tar  beyond  a  k:fs  ! 

Great  ic  thy  delxacy,  <!ainty  Maid  ; 

At  flighted  thin^,  tnv  cheek  with  crimfon  glo.* 
S.iy,  trtt  on  locathani'd,  abafh'd,  afraid, 

When'er  tiiou  ftealeft  forth  topluci  a  rofc? 

Or  liaft  thou  loft,  O  Nymph,  thy  pretty  gall ; 
So  wever  pluckeft  any  rofe  at  all  ? 

I'm  tol  eepeft  not  a  (Ingle  male  r 

./ng  but  iemales,  at  thy  board  to  cram,- 
That  no  i,.   i  near  thee  wags  his  tail, 

Nor  ram. 

I've  heart!  *  if  e'er,  by  dire  mifhnp, 

Some  ra\  ifi     -  (lu)uld  make  thy  fov'ntcs  wh — s± 

Staring  as  itri-   .en  by  a  thunder-clap^ 
Thy  modeity  hadi  kick'd  them  out  of  doors. 


l6o  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVE*. 

*Tis  faid,  when  wag-tails  thou  behold'ft,  and  doves? 
And  fparrows  bufy  with  their  feather'd  loves ; 

Lord  !  thou  haft  trembled  at  their  wicked  tricks  j, 
And,  {hatching  up  thy  bin fh-  concealing  fanr 
As  if  it  were  a  lady  and  a  man, 
.    Haft  only  peep'd  upon  them  through  the  flicks*. 

And  yet  fo  varioufly  thou'rt  faid  to  aft, 
That  I  have  heard  it  utter'd  for  a  fact, 

That  often  on  old  Thames's  funny  banks, 
Where  ftriplings  fwim,  with  wanton  pranks, 

On  bladders  fome  outftreteh'd,  and  fome  on  corks.^ 
Thou  fquinting,  moft  indifferent  girl,  art  feen, 
In  contemplation  of  each  youthful  fkin, 

Admiring  God  Almighty's  handy-works. 

I'm  told,  thou  wilt  not  meddle  with  cod's  head ; 

Nor  gitlefs  tafter  nor  innocent  Iambus-fry — 
This  is  a  very  ftrange  affair  indeed  ! 

I  wonder,  fqueamilh  MAID,  thereafon  why  ! 

Some  men  have  got  grange  names y  that  raife  thy  blujh  f- 
(Pity  a  name  ihould  fo  difturb  thy  cheek  !.) 

Then  doft  thou,  fimpering,.  beat  about  the  bufh, 
When  to  thofe  men  thou  art  iuclin'd  to  fpeak.. 

At  length  thou  biddeft  SUSAN  (with  fweet  fhame) 
**  Go  fetch  the  fellow  with  the//My  name" 

I've  heard,  that  breeches,  petticoats,  and  fmock,. 
Give  to  thy  modeft  mind  a  grievous  fhock  j 
And  that  thy  brain  (fo  lucky  its  device) 
Chnft^netbthem  inexprejjjllas,  fo  nice  ! 

Prim  Maid,  thou  art  no  fav'rite  with  the  world  > 
I  hear  the  direft  curfes  on  thee  hurl'd  ! 

Sorry  am  I,  fo  ill  thy  manners  fuit: 
*Tis  faid,  that  if  a  moufe  appear  to  view, 
We  hear  a  formidable  fcree^h  enfue, 

As  if  it  wereifome  huge  devouring  bruterj 

And. 


A    HOWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER,  it)  I 

And  if  beneath  thy  petticoat  he  run, 
Thou  bcl lowed  as  if  thou  wert  undone, 

And  kicked  at  a  co\v-like  rate,  poor  foul ! 
When,  if  thou  wert  to  be  a  little  quiet, 
And  riot  difturb  die  nibbler  by  a  riot, 

The  moufe  would  go  into  his  proper  hole. 

I've  heard  it  fworn  to,  Nymph,  tint  in  the  ftrerts, 
When  running,  dancing,  capering  at  thy  tide, 

Thy  Chloe  other  dogs  fo  brazen  m 

That,  wriggling,  afk  thy  birch  to  he  their  bride, 

Quick  haft  thou  caught  up  Chloe  in  thy  amis, 

From  violation  to  preierve  her  charm>  ;  .  ' 

And,  bouncing  wildly  from  the  view 

Of  thofe  fame  fancy  canine  crew, 

Haft  op'd  fo  loud  and  tunefully  thy  throat, 

(Seemiug  as  thou  had  ft  learnt  to  fcream  by  note) 

Loud  as  the  Sabinc  girls  that  try'd  to  'fcape 

The  fpeechlefs  horrors  of  a  Roman  rape. 

No  novels  readeft  thou,  O  Nymph^  in  fight ; 
And  yet  again  I'm  told  that  ev'ry  night, 
Injecrft,  thou  art  much  inclin'd  to  doat 
On  rhymes  that  ROCHESTER  fo  warmly  wrote* 

Oft  doft  thou  wonder  how  thy  fex,  fo  fweef, 

Can  fellows,  thofe  greEt  two-legg'd  monfters,  mfet, 

And  fwoon  not  at  each  Caliban ; 
And  wonder  how  thy  fex  can  fancy  bliflfes 
Contain'd  within  fhe  black  rough-bearded  kifles 

Of  fuch  a  horrid  bear-like  thing  as  man. 

Thy  morals,  virtuous  Maiden,  are  fo  chafte, 

I'm  told,  that  e'en  for  all  the  mint 
No  man  fhould  ever  take  thee  round  the  waift, 

And  on  thy  lips  a  &ucy  kifs  inipriiit ! 

Inform  me,  is  it  fo,  moft  dainty  maid  ? 
Are  thy  two  lips  of  kifles  thus  afraid ij 

Tit 


162  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER, 

'Tis  alfo  faid,  that  if  a  flea  at  night, 

Pert  rogue,  hath  dar'd  thy  lufcious  lip  to  bite, 

Or  point  his  fnout  into  thy  fnowy  breaft, 
At  once  the  houfe  hath  been  alarm'd — the  maids 
Call'd  idle,  nafty,  good-for-nothing  jades ; 

Who,  Eve-like,  rufhing  to  thy  room,  undreft,. 

Have  thought  fbme  fecret  raviflier  fo  dread, 
On  LOVE'S  delicious  viands  to  be  fed, 

Had  feiz'd  thee,  to  obtain  forbidden  joys ; 
Which  had  he  done,  a  moft  audacious  thief, 
Of  ev'ry  maid  it  was  the  firm  belief 

Thou  wouldft  not,  Nymph,  have  made  a  greater  noife^ 

And  yet  'tis  faid,  again, 

Thou  fleep'ft  with  John , 

Vile  tales  !  invented  to  deftroy  thy  fame, 
For,  wert  thou,  fearful  Lafs^  this  inftant  married, 

At  night,  thy  modeft  cheek  would  burn  with 
Nor  wouldft  thouj-o,  but  to  the  bed  be  carried 

There,  when  thy  STREPHON  rufh'd,  in  white  array'd> 
To  clafp  with  kifles  fweethis  white-flol'd  maid. 

And  riot  in  the  luxury  of  charms ; 
Flat  as  a  flounder,  feeing,  hearing  gone- 
Mute  as  a  fifti,  and  fairly  turn 'd  to  ftone-— 

O  Damfel !  thou  wouldft  die  within  his  arms. 


O  Nymph  fo  bright, 

the  coachman  ev'ry  night — 


More 


A    ROWLAND    POR    AN    OUTER.  l6j 

More  impudence,  with  n  1:«  k  at  one  of  the  Ten  Com- 
Iments.  He  talks  too  of  his  paflions  as  having  left 
him — I  do  not  believe  a  word  on't:  all  PETER'S  colt's- 
tceth  are  not  yet  gone — Oh,  that  I  had  the  drawing  them ! 
Oh,  that  my  pincers  could  get  amongft  them  !  the  world 
fhould  then  lee  him  make  up  many  a  pretty  wry  nice. 
44  Pretty,"  did  I  fry?  not  pretty  neither,  for  the  fellow 
is  as  ugly  as  fin.— Oh,  that  I  had  him,  like  the  types  for 
nagazine,  in  my  printing-prefs !  I  would  give  his 
bones  a  moil  glorious  fqueeze !  But  he  is  a  liar,  and  I 
can  prove  it,  lor  he  keeps  a  girl  at  this  moment ;  and  a 
beautiful  girl  too,  that  he  makes  verfes  upon— but  it  is 
VuLCAN,and  VENUS.  The  Jack-afs,  perhaps,  -wants  a 
bunch  of  nettles,  I  fuppofe,  for  ;.;  fomething 

A. \traor dinar})  to  give  a  fillip  to  liis  languid  Lnfpinttiojlf. 


TO    FORTUNE. 

O  AD  loit'ring  FORTUNE,  thou  art  come  too  late: 
*^  Ah  !  wherefore  give  me  not  thy  (miles  before ; 

When  all  my  youthful  paflions  in  a  roar, 
Rare  hunters,  fearlefs  leap'd  each  five-bar  gate? 

Unknown  by  thee,  how  often  did  I  meet 
The  lovelieft  forms  of  nature  in  the  ftreet, 

The  fair,  the  black,  and  lading  brown  ! 
And,  while  their  charms  enraptur'd  I  furvey'd, 
This  pretty  legend  on  their  lips  I  read — 

4*  Kifles,  O  gentle  Ihepherd,  for  a  crown." 

How  oft  I  look'd,  and  figh'd,  and  look'd  agen, 
Upon  the  fmiling Loves  of  ev'ry  PHILLIS  ! 

How  wiuYd  myfclf  a  cock,  and  her  a  hen, 
To  crop  at  once  her  rofes  and  her  lilies  ! 

Not  only  gratis,  buf  with  perfect  eafe— 

Without  ib  much  as,  "  Aladam,  if  you  pleafe." 


At 


164  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER, 

"  At  Otaheite,"  I  have  faid  with  tears, 
"  No  gentleman  a  jail  fo  horrid  fears 

"  For  taking  loving  liberties  with  lafles  : 
tf  Soon  as  they  heard  how  LOVE  in  England  far'd, 
*'  The  glorious  Otaheitans  all  were  fcar'd, 

"  And  call'd  us  Englishmen  a  pack  of  afles. 

^  But  they,  indeed,  are  heathens — have  no  fouls, 
"  But  fuch  as  muft  be  fried  on  burning  coals; 

"  But  I'm  a  Chnftian,  and  abhor  a  rape : 
"  Yet  if  a  lafs  \\o\i\dfell  her  lean  and  fat, 
**  I'm  not  fo  great  an  enemy  to  that — 

*'  Though  that  might  whelp  a  little  kind  of  fcrape; 
*'  Since  'tis  believ'd  &zi\fmple  fornication 
"May  ftep  between  a  man  and  his  falvation." 

Damn'd  FORTUNE  '  thus  to  make  the  Poet  groan ; 

To  offer  MOW,  forfooth,  thy  fhining  pieces  j 
For  now  my  paffions  nearly  all  are  flown, 

Departed  to  my  nephews  and  my  nieces ! 


Mere,  indignant  Reader,  is  impudence  with  a  ven 
geance!  When  certain,  J "acred  pa>-fs  of  our  moft  glorious 
ROYAL  FAMILY  determined  in  their  great  wifdoms  and 
anger  to  quit  ungrateful  England,  what  does  this  foul- 
moutiTed  Poet  do,  but  give  them  a  farewell  laugh  in  verfe, 
when  it  Ihould  have  been  the  moft  lamentable  elegy— 
jlelik  cafmen!  But  PETER  PINDAR  is  a  Caliban.  I  do 
not  believe  that  ever  he  cried  in  his  life,  excepting  when 
he  was  flogged  at  fchool — Mcnjlrum  horrendum,  informe, 
ingtns — I  wifli  I  could  add  too,  cut  lumen  ademptum  ;  for 
his  eyes  are  hunting  for  nothing  but  deformity:  let  him 
look  in  the  glafs  then,  and  he  will  fpy  a  fufficient  mafs,; 
or  open  his  brain-box,  an^l  he^will  there  find  a  rarr 
cargo. 

r  ODE 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVEi.  165 

ODE  TO    MADAM   SCHW—  G  AND  CO. 
On  their  intended  Fey  age  to  Germany. 

WRITTEN    IX    THE    YEAR    1789. 


VJI7 
*  * 


you  a  good  voyage  to  lhat  fhore 
Where  all  your  friends  are  impudent  and  poor  ; 
Oblige  us,  Madam  —  don't  again  come  over  — 
To  ufe  a  cant  phrafe,  we've  been  finely  fMd\ 
Indeed  have  very  dext'roufly  been  robb'd  — 

You've  liv'd  juft  eight  and  twenty  years  in  clover. 

Pray  let  us  breatlie  a  little  —  be  fo  good  ; 
We  cannot  fpare  fuch  quantities  of  blood  : 

At  leaft  for  fome  ten  years,  pray  crofs  the  main  ;         ' 
Then,  cruel,  fliould  ye  think  upon  returning, 
To  put  us  Britons  all  in  fecond  mourning, 

\Ve  may  fupport  phlebotomy  again. 

To  you  and  your  lean  gang  we  owe  th*  Excifc  : 
PITT  cannot  any  other  fcheme  devife, 

To  pay  the  nation's  debt  and  fill  your  purfft, 
With  great  refpect  I  here  affiire  you,  Ma'am, 
Your  name  our  common  people  loudly  damn  ; 

Gentcelcr  folks  attack  with  fiLent  curfes. 

Madam,  can  jvir  fpeak  Latin  ?  —  No,  not  much— 
I  think  you  principally  fpew  *  High-Dutch  : 

But  did  you  Latin  underftand  (God  blefs  it) 
I'd  offer  up  the  pithieft,  prettieft  line 
Unto  your  Avarice's  facred  flirine  — 

"  Crtfcit  am*-  nummi  quantum  Ipfa  pecunla  crefiit.* 

*  The  author  thinks  the  exprcflTion,  though  a  dirty  ODC,  more  de« 
fcriptirc  than  any  other  of  the  guttural  German  ;  and  therefore  choofe* 
not  to  (acrificc  truth  to  a  little  bi(n[eunct% 

VOL.  JL  Q  The 


'1 66  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVET. 

The  which  tranflation  of  this  Latin  line 
Js  this — '  Alas  !  that  maw  profound  of  thine 
*  May  like  the  ftomach  of  a  whale  be  reckoned 

*  Throw  into  it  the  nation's  treafury, 

*  But  for  a  minute  it  will  plea fu re  ye  ; 

'  That  gullet  would  be  gaping  for  a  iecond.' 

Madam,  we  wifli  you  a  long,  long  adieu — 
Good  riddance  of  the  fnuff  and  di'mond  crew  ! 

Your  abfence,  all,  alone  the  State  relieves  j 
For,  hungry  Ladies,  as  I'm  here  alive, 
A  houfe  can  never  hope  to  thrive, 

That  harboureth  a  ueft  of  thieves. 


An  infupportable  apology  for  keeping  Miftrefles,  and 
a  laugh  at  that  moil  refpectable  ftate,  Matrimony. 

ODE. 

n^HAT  I  have  often  been  in  love,  deep  love, 
-*-    A  hundred  doleful  ditties  plainly  prove. 

By  marriage  never  have  I  been  disjointed ; 
For  matrimony  deals  prodigious  blows : 
And  yet  for  this  fame  ftormy  ftate,  God  knows, 

I've  groan'd — and,  thank  my  flars,  been  difappointed. 

With  LOVE'S  dearpaffion  will  I  never  war: 

Let  ev'ry  man  for  ever  be  in  love, 
E'en  if  he  beats,  in  age,  old  PAR  : 

'Tis  for  his  chilly  veins  a  good  warm  glove ; 
It  bids  the  blood  with  brifker  motion  ftart, 
Thawing  TIME'S  icicles  around  his  heart. 

WEDLOCK'S  a  faucy,  fad,  familiar  ftate, 
Where  folks  arc  very  apt  to  fcold  and  hate : 
LOVE  keeps  a  modeft  diftance,  is  divine, 
Obliging,  and  fays  ev'ry  thing  that's  fine, 

LOVE 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER.  l67 

Lo*v  E  writes  fweet  fonnets,  deals  in  tender  matter ; 
MARRIAGE,  in  epigram  fo  keen,  and  fati  re  : 

LOVE  ieeketh  always  to  oblige  the  fair  ; 
Full  of  kind  wifhes,  and  exalted  hope  : 

M  A  R  R  A  c;  B  defires  to  fee  her  in  the  air, , 
Sufpended  at  the  bottom  of  a  rope. 

LOVE  wifties,  in  the  vale  or  on  the  down, 
ive  his  dear,  dear  idol  a  green  gown  : 
MARRIAGE,  the  brute,  fo  fnappifh  and  ill-bred, 
Can  kick  his  fighing  turtle  out  of  bed  ; 
Tiirns  bluCly  from  the  charms  that  tafte  adores, 
Then  pulls  his  night-cap  o'er  his  eyes,  and  fnores. 

WEDLOCK  at  firft,  indeed,  is  vaftly  pleafent; 
A  very  fliowy  bird,  a  fine  cock-pheafant : 
By  time,  it  changed*  to  a  ditf'rcnt  fowl ; 
Sometimes  a  cuckoo,  oiVner  a  horn-owl. 

WEDLOCK'S  a  lock,  however,  large  and  thick, 
Which  ev'ry  rtfcal  has  a  key  to  pick. 

O  LOVE  !  for  heav'n's  fake,  never  leave  my  heart » 
No  !  thou  and  I  will  never,  never  part : 
Go,  WBDLOCK,  to  the  men  of  leaden  brainy 
Who  hate  variety,  and  figh  for  chains. 


A  bare-faced  apology  for  leaving  a  loving  Wife. 
TO    CHLOE. 

AN     APOLOGY     FOR     GOING     INTO    THE    COUNTRY. 


we  muft  not  always  be  in  heav'n, 
For  ever  toying,  ogling,  kiffing,  billing  ; 
The  joys  for  which  I  thoufcmds  would  have  giv'n, 
Will  prefently  be  fcarcely  worth  a  {lulling. 

Qj*  Thy 


l68  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

Thy  neck  is  fairer  than  the  Alpine  fnows, 

And,  fweetly  fwellhig,  beats  the  down  of  doves  ; 

Thy  cheek  of  health,  a  rival  to  the  rofe  ; 
.Thy  pouting  lips  the  throne  of  all  the  LOVES  ! 

Yet,  though  thus  beautiful  beyond  expreffion, 

That  beauty  fadeth  by  too  much  pofTeflion. 

Economy  in  loxre  is  peace  to  nature, 
Much  like  economy  in  worldly  matter  : 
We  mould  be  prudent,  never  live  too  fait, 
Profulion  will  not,  cannot  always  laft. 

Lovers  are  really  fpendthrifts  —  'tfs  a  'fliame  : 
Nothing  their  'thoughtlefs,  wild  career  can  tame, 

Till  pen'ry  ftares  them  in  the  face  ; 
.  And  when  they  find  an  empty  purfe,  . 
Grown  calmer,  wifer,  how  the  fault  they  curfe, 

And,  limping,  look  with  fuch  a  fneaking  grace 
Job's  war-horfe  fierce,  his  neck  with  thunder  bung 
Sunk  to  a  humble  hack  that  carries  dung. 

Smell  to  the  queen  of  flowers,  the  fragrant  rofe  — 
Smell  twenty  times—  and  then,  my  dear,  thy 
Will  tell  thee  (not  fo  much  for  fcent  athirft) 
The  twentieth  drank  lefs  flavour  than 


LOVE,  doubtlefs,  is  the  fweeteft  of  all  fellows; 

Yet  often  mould  the  little  God  retire  — 
Abfence,  dear  Chloe,  is  a  pair  of  bellows, 

That  keeps  alive  the  facred  fire. 


Tm 


A1   ROWLAND    FOX.    AN    OLIVER.  l6f 

f 

In  the  fame  impudently  ironical  ftyle. 

ODE    TO    LAIS. 

f\  NYMPH  with  all  the  luxury  of  flun, 
*^  Pea-bloom  breath,  and  dimpled  chin  ? 

Rofe  cheek,  and  eyes  tliat  beat  the  blacked  floe ;. 
With  flaxen  ringlets  thy  foft  bofom  (hading, 
So  white,  fo  plump,  fo  lufcioufly-perfuading ; 

And  lips  that  none  but  mouths  of  Cherubs  know  ! 

Oh,  leering,  lure  me  not  to  Charlotte-ftreet, 
That  too,  too  fair,  feducing  form  to  meet ; 

Warm,  unattirM,  and  breathing  rich  delight ; 
Where  thou  wilt  pra&ife  ev'ry  rogui(h  art, 
To  bid  my  fpirits  all  unbridled  ftart, 

Run  off  with  me  full  tilt,  and  fteal  my  fight. 
Then  (hall  I  trembling  fail,  for  want  of  gnue, 
And  die,  yes,,  die  perhaps  upon  my  face T 

Ah  !  ceafc  to  turn,  and  look,  and  leer,  and  fmile, 
Wy  too  imprudent  fenfes  to  beguile  ! 

Ah.  1  keep  that  taper  leg  fo  tempting  from  me; 
Ah !  form'd  to  foil  a  Phidias's  art ; 
So  much  unlike  that  leg  in  ev'ry  part 

By  me  abhorr'd  indeed4  aud  chriflen'd  gummy. 

Tn  vain  I  turn  around  to  run  away : 

Thine  eyes,  thofe  bafiliflcs,  command  my  (lay : 

Whilft  through  its  gauze  thy  fnowy  bofom 'peeping, 
Seems  to  that  rogue  interpreter,  my  eye, 
To  heave  a  foft,  defponding,  tender  figh— 

lake  goflamer,  my  thoughts  of  goodnefs  1  weeping, 

Pity  my  dear  religion's  dread  debility, 

Aixd  hide  thofe  orbs  of  fweet  inflammability  !' 

CL3  Abound, 


I^O  A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

Abound,  I  fay,  abound  in  grace,  my  feet ; 
And  do  not  follow  her  to  Charlotte-ftreet. 

Alas  !  alas !  you  have  no  grace,  I  fee, 
But  wifh  to  carry  off  poor  ftruggling  me  ; 

Yes,  the  wild  bed  of  Beauty  wifh  to  feek  ! 
Yet,  if  ye  do — to  make  your  two  hearts  ake,    fc 
A  fweet,  a  fweet  revenge  I  mean  to  take ; 

For,  curfe  me  if  you  mall  not  flay  a  week* 

Yet  let  me  not  thus  pond'ring,  gaping,  ftand  ; 
But,  lo  !  I  am  not  at  my  own  command :. 
Bed,  bofom,  kifs,  embraces,  ftorm  my.  brainsv 
And,  lawlefs  tyrants,  bind  my  will  in  chains. 
O  lovely  Lafs !  too  pow'rful  are  thy  charms^ 
And  fafcination  dwells  within  thy  arms. 

The  Pafiions  join  the  fierce  invading  hoft ; 
And  I  and  VIRTUE  are  o'erwhelm'd  and  loftt- 
Paflions  that  in  a  martingal  mould  move; 
Wild  horfes,  loofen'd.by  the- hands  of  LOVE. 

I'm  off— alas !  unworthy  to  be  feen — 
The  BARD,  and  VIRTUE  a  poor  captive  Queen 
O  LAI'S,  fliould  our  deeds  to  fats  amount, 
Juft.Heav'n  will-place  them  all  ta  thy  account* 


The 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER* 

The  following  Stanza,  on  the  death  of  Lady  MOUNT 
E  —  P—'S  favourite  Pie  CUPID,  is  verily  exceeded  by  no 
thing  in  the  annals  of  impertinence.' 

A  CONSOLATORY  STANZA 

TO  LADY  MOUNT  E  -  , 

ON    THE    DEATH    OF    HE*    PIG    CUPID. 

f\  DRY  that  tear,  fo  round  and  big  ; 

^  Nor  wafte  in  fighs  your  precious  wind  ! 


Btath  only  taftes  a  fingle  Pi 

Your  Lord  and  Son  are  ftill  behind. 


Superlatively  impudent,  and,  I  hope,  untnie;  fentma 
two  days  after  jfny  publication  of  my  Quern  Elizabeth's 
Progress,  one  of  which  is  now  actually  in  his  Majefty'i 
glorious  Library  at  Buckingham- Houfe. 

tO    MR.    J.    NICHOLS,, 

ON    HIS 

/ 

•y  »/  the  Progrefs  of  Queen  Elixalctli. 

JOHN",  tnough  it  afks  no  fubtilty  of  brain 
**  To  write  QUEEN  BKSS'S  Pro^refs  through  the  land; 
Excufe  the  freedom,  if  I  dare  maintain 

The  therne  too  high  for  tiec  to  take  in  hand. 

On  VANITY'S  damn'd  rock  what  thoufands  fplit ! 

Thou  fhouldft  have  labour'd  on  fome  humbler  matter ; 
One  fomewhaton  a  level  with  thy  wit — 

For  uilbccc— -when  her  Majeity  made  w— . 

To 


173  A    ROWLAND   FOR    AN    OLIVER. 

To  fliow  that  I  can  be  candid,  even  to  people  of  no- 
candour,  I  (hall  conclude  this  Firft  Part  with  a  few 
Songs  that  are  not  totally  deftitute  of  merit. 

TO    DELIA, 

^IX^HILE  poets  pour  their  happieft  lays,, 

And  call  thee  ev'ry  thing  divine  j 
Not  quite  fo  lavffh  in  thy  praile, 
To  cenfure  be  the  province  mine. 

Though  born  with  talents  to  furprife, 

Thou  feldom  doft  thofe  porw'rs  difplay  r 
Thus  feem  they  trifling  in  thine  eyes ! 

Thus  heav'n's  beft  gifts  are  thrown  away  ! 

Though  rich  in  charms,  thou  know'ft  it  not  j; 

Such  is  thine  ignorance  profound  : 
And  then  fuch  cruelty  thy  lot, 

Thy  fweeteft  fmile  inflicts  a  -wound 


TO    FORTUNE. 

XT'ES,  FORTUNE,  I  have  fought  thee  long,, 
•*•    Tnvok'd  thee  oft,  in  profe  and  fong ; 
Through  half  Old  England  woo'd  thee; 
Through  feas  of  danger,  Indian  lands, 
Through  Afric's  howling,  burning  fands : 
But,  ah !  in  vain  purfu'd  thee  ! 

Now,  FORTUNE,  thou  would!!  fain  be  kind 
And  now  I'll  plainly  fpeak  my  mind— - 

I  care  not  ftraws  about  thee : 
For  DELIA'S  hand  alone  I  toil'd ; 
Unbrib'd  by  wealth,  the  Nymph  has  fmil'd ; 

And  blifs  is  our's  without  thee. 


A    10WLA210    F01    AM    OUVtfc,  173 


TO    CHLOE. 

CHLOE,  a  thoufand  charms  arc  thine, 
That  give  my  heart  the  conftant  figh ' 
Ah !  wherefore  let  thy  Poet  pine, 

Who  canft  with  cafe  his  wants  fupply  ? 

Oh,  hafte,  thy  charity  cWphy  ; 

With  little  I'll  contented  be : 
The  khTes  which  thou  throw'it  away 

Ujxiii  thy  &&  will  do  for  me. 


I  cannot,  however,  conclude  this  Firft  Part  of  Mr. 
PKIFR'S  Uicubra  ions  without  a  fevere  rewrehenfion 
of  hi*  want  of  loyaltv,  as  well  as  want  of  refpect,  for  that 
firft  of  Courts,  ST.  JAMES'S;  and,  moreover,  to  prove 
that  difloyalty  and  difrefpeft,  I  give  the  following  Ode, 
which  he,  with  all  his  impudence,  dares  not  deny  that 
he  wrote.  I  fuppofe  that  it  was  hatched  in  the  l*ft  rcjgn, 
iince  it  is  impoffible  that  it  ihould  be  in  thc.prcfent.  One 
•word  more  with  him.  Should  his  infolence  mean  his 
prfftnt  MAJESTY,  he  is  an  ungrateful,  as  well  as  infolent 
fellow  ;  as  his  Majefty  has  got  his  books  bound  in  heft 
morocco  leather  (Oh,  that  PETER'S  own  hide  had  been 
ftripped  cff,  and  tanned  for  the  purpofe!)  which  are 
[now  in  the  library  at  Buckingham-  houfe:  nay,  more, 
I  his  Majefty  has  condescended  tour/'/tr  notes  on  the  varlet's 
works ! — yes !  with  his  ni-n  molt  royal  hand  !  Thus  has 
this  moft  unloyal,  moft  difreipcAful,  moft  ungrateful, 
and  moft  pitiful  rhymer, — a  KING  FOR  A  COMMENTA 
TOR  !  !  ! — His  Majefty  is  pleafed,  with  a  fmile,  to  call 
him  the  "  Meny  Wight."  Might  I  offer  an  emendation, 
•  to  M  A  j  i:  s  T  \ ,  it  fliouid  be  the  vicM  Wight. 

4  TO 


A    ROWLAND    FOR    AN    OLIVER, 


TO  A  FRIEND  OUT  OF  PLACE. 

OO  then,  thy  SOV'REIGN  turns  away  his  face  ! 
^  Thank  God,  with  all  thy  foul,  for  the  dif grace. 

This  inftant  down  upon  thy  knee, 

And  idolize  the  man  who  makes  thee  free ; 

No  more  endeavour  FOLLY'S  hand  to  kifs  ! 
At  firft  I  look'd  with  pity  on  thy  ftate ; 
But  now  I  humbly  thank  the  foot  of  FATL> 

That  kindly  kicks  thee  into  blifs. 

Fve  been  difgrac'd  too— felt  a  Monarch's  frown, 
And  confequeutly  quitted  town  : 

But  have  my  fields  refus*d  their  fmiles  fo  fweet  ? 
Say,  have  my  birds  grown  fulky,  with  the  King  ? 
My  thrufhes,  linnets,  larks,  refus'd  to  fmg  ? 

My  winding  brooks,  to  prattle  at  my  feet  ? 

No !  no  fuch  matter !  Each  unclouded  day 
On  dove-like  pinions  gaily  glides  away  ; 

In  fhort,  all  Nature  feems  difpos'd  to  pleafe— 
Then  prithee  quit  thy  qualms  \  look  up  and  laugh  j, 
The  rural  pleasures  let  us  largely  quaff, 

And  make  our  r*g/  to  the  Gods  of  Eafe, 

By  day,  (hall  NATURE'S  fimnle  voice 
Our  walks,  and  rides  of  health  rejoice, 

Far  from  an  empty  Court  where  TUMULT  howls  j 
And  iliould  at  night,  by  chance,  an  hour 
Be  with  ennui  inclin'd  to  low'r, 

We'll  go  and  liften  to  our  owls ; 

Birds  from  whofe  throats  'tis  fajd  that  wifdom  fprings — 
How  very  diff'rent  from  the  throats  of  Kings  / 


ADVICE 

THE     FUTURE      LAUREAT 
AN      ODE. 


/f»,  Cffar^  tiki  vellf  fl 
Nee  J.  ire  utrum  Jit  mJhtt  an  atrr  k*»». 

CATULLUS. 

So  little,  Gaefai  's  humour  claims  my  care, 
I  ku«w  not  if  the  orm  be  black  or  fair. 


ARGUMENT. 

THE  Poet  expreffeth  wonderful  curiofity  for  knowing  the 
future  Laurent- — reporteth  the  Candidates  for  the  fublime 
office  of  Poetical  Trumpeter — recommendeth  to  his  Mufe 
the  praifes  of  economy,  poultry,  cows-pens,  pigs,  dung 
hills,  &c. — advifeth  the  mention  of  his  prefent  money- 
loving  Majefty  of  Naples,  alfo  of  the  great  people  of 
Germany. — PETER  gently  criticifeth  poor  THOMAS,  and 
wttereth  ftrange  things  of  Courts — he  exclaimeth  fud- 
denly,  and  boafteth  of  his  purity — he  returneth  fweetly 
to  the  unknown  Laureat,  afketh  him  pertinent  qiie 
and  informeth  him  what  a  Laureat  fhould  refemble. 


PART    II. 

THE  Poet  feeleth  a  mod  uncommon  rnetKmorphofe— 
breaketh  out  into  a  kind  of  poetical  delirium — ta4keth  of 
court-reformation,  the  arts  and  fciences;  and  ieemeth  to 
coRtinue  mad  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 


(     '77    ) 


ADVICE 


TO 


THE    FUTURE    LAUREAT. 


ODE. 

VffHO  (hall  refume  St.  James's  fife, 
And  call  ideal  virtues  into  life? 
On  tiptoe  gaping,  Jo,  I  (land, 
To  fee  the  luture  Laureat  of  the  land  ! 

Dread  rivals,  fplaflnng  through  the  dirty  road, 
With  thund'ring  fpecimens  of  Ode, 
The  lyric  bundles  on  each  Poet's  back, 
Intent  to  gain  the  (Upend  and  the  Sack, 
See  MASON,  HAYLEY,  to  the  Palace  fcampcr, 
Like  porters  fweating  underneath  a  hamper1. 

And  fee  the  hacks  of  NIC  HO  LS'  Magazine 
Rufli,  loyal,  to  berhyme  a  King  and  Queen ; 
And  fee,  full  fpeed,'  to  get  the  tuneful  job, 
The  bellman's  heart,  with  hopes  of  vicVry,  throb, 

O  thou,  whate'er  thy  name,  thy  trade,  thy  art, 
Who  from  obfcurit'y  art  doom'd  to  ftarf, 
Call'd,  by  the  Royal  mandate,  to  proclaim 
To  diftant  realms  a  Monarch's  feeble  fame — 
For  fame  of  Kings,  like  cripples  in  the  gout, 
Demands  a  crutch  to  move  about— 

VOL.  II.  R  Whoe'er 


17$  ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAVREAT. 

Whoe'er  thou  art,  that  winn'fl  the  envied  prize, 
Oh,  if  for  Royal  (mile  thy  bofom  fighs, 
Of  pig-economy  exalt  the  praife  ; 
Oh,  flatter  flieep  and  bullocks  in  thy  lays  1 
To  faving  wifdom  boldly  ftrike  the  firings, 
And  juftify  the  grazier-trade  in  Kings. 

.Defcarit  on  ducks  and  geefe,  and  cocks  and  hens, 
Hayftacks  and  dairies,  covvhoufes  and  pens-j 
Defcant  on  dunghills,  ev'ry  fort  of  kine  ; 
on  the  pretty  article  of  Twine. 


Inform  us,  without  lofs,  to  twig 

The  flomach  of  a  feeding  calf,  or  cow; 

And  tell  us,  economic,  how 
To  fteal  a  dinner  from  a  fatt'ning  pig  ; 
And,  Bard,  to  make  us  ftill  more  bleft,  declare 
How  hogs  and  bullocks  m&y  grow  fat-on  air. 

Sing  how  the  King  of  Naples  fells  his  fim, 
And  from  his  flomach  cribs  the  <3aintieft  diih  ; 
Sing,  to  his  fubjefts  how  he  fells  his  game  ; 
So  fierce  for  dying  rich,  the  Monarch's  flame  j 

Sing  of  th'  economy  of  German  quality  ; 

Emp'rors,  Electors,  dead  to  hofpitality  ; 

Margraves,  and  miferable  Dukes, 

Who  fqueeze  their  fubje&s,  and  who  ftarve  their  cooks  : 

Such  be  the  burthen  of  thy  birth-day  fong, 

And,  lo,  our  Court  will  liilen  all  day  long. 

TOM  prov'd  unequal  to  the  Laureat's  place  ; 
Lucklefs,  he  warbled  with  an  Attic  grace  : 
The  language  was  not  underilood  at  Court, 
Where  bow  and  curt'fy,  grin  and  fli  rug,  refort; 
Sorrow  for  ficknefs,  joy  for  health,  fo  civil  ; 
And  love,  that  wjfivd  each  other  to  the  devil  ! 


To* 


ADVICB    TO    THE    FUTURE    LftUREAT.  179 

TOM  was  a  fcholar — lucklefs  wight ! 

Lodg'd  with  old  manners  in  a  mufty  college  •, 
He  knew,  not  that  a  Palace  hated  knowledge, 

Ana  aeem'd  it  pedantry  to  fpell  and  write. 
TOM  heard  of  royal  libraries,  indeed, 
And,  weakly,  fancied  that  the  books  were  rtad : 

II f  knew  not  that  an  author's  fenfe 

Was,  at  a  Palace,  not  worth  finding ; 
That  what  to  notice  gave  a  book  pretence, 

Was  folely  paper,  print,  and  binding ! 

Seme  folks  had  never  known,  with  all  their  toif, 

Old  PINDAR'S  name,  nor  occupation, 
Had  not  /  flartcd  forth — a  lucky  hit, 

And  prov'd  myfelf  the  Theban  Bard's  relation. 

The  names  of  Dau M  M o N  n,  Bo  L  n  E R  o,  and  Ho  A  R  E, 
Though  (Grangers  to  APOLLO'S  tuneful  ear, 

Are  difcords  that  the  Palace-folks  adore, 
Sweet  as  fincerity,  as  honour  dear; 

The  name  of  HOMER,  none  are  found  to  know  it, 

So  much  the  Banker  foars  beyond  the  Poet ; 

For  Courts  prefer,  fo  clafiicaUy  weak, 

A  Guinea's  mufic  to  the  noife  of  Greek  : 

Men  in  aeide  The  a,  empty  founds, 

How  mean  to— u  Pay  the  bearer  fifty  pounds !" 

Angels,  and  minifters  of  grace,  what's  here ! 
See  fuppliant  S  AL'SB'R  Y  to  the  Bard  appear ! 
He  fighs — upon  his  knuckles  he  is  down  !— 
His  Lordfhip  begs  I'll  take  the  Poet's  crown. 

A  vaunt,  my  Lord! — Solicitation,  fly! 
I'll  not  be  Zany  to  a  King,  not  I : 
I'll  be  no  Monarch's  humble  thrufti, 
To  whittle  from  the  laurel  bum  j 
Or,  rather,  a  tame  owl,  to  hoot 
Whene'er  it  (hall  my  mafters  fuit. 

R  a  J  have 


I$0  ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAUREAT. 

I  have  no  flatt'ries  cut  and  dried — no  varnifii 

For  Royal  qualities,  fo  apt  to  tarnifh, 

Expos'd  a  little  to  the  biting  air  : 

I've  got  a  foul,  and  fo  no  lies  to  fparey 

Befides,  too  proud  to  fing  for  hire, 

I  fcorn  to  touch  a  venal  lyre. 

A  vaunt,  ye  fcepter'd  vulgar — purpled,"  ermin'd ; 
The  Mufe  mall  make  no  mummies,  I'm  determined. 
World,  call  her  proftitute,  bawd,  dirty  b — , 
If  meanly  once  fhe  deals  in  fpice  and  pitch, 
And  faves  a  carcafe  by  its  lyric  balm, 
So  putrid,  which  the  very  worms  mult  damn. 

Again  to  thee  I  turn,  from  dear  digreflion ; 
To  thee,  ambitious  of  the  Sack-potfeflion ! 
O  thou,  the  future  Laureat,  yet  unknown, 
The  nightingale  or  magpie  of  a  Throne  ! 

Reveal  the  fituation  of  thy  brain. 
Or  clear,  or  muddy  is  its  fountain  ? 
Of  molehills  can  it  make  a  mountain, 

So  ftrong  the  magic  of  its  wizard  ftrain  ! 

Laureats  mould  boaft  a  bufliel  of  invention, 
Or  yield  up  all  poetical  pretention  : 

Lo,  flatt'ries  form  a  Monarch's  firft  delights ! 
A  folar  microfcope  the  Bard  fbould  be, 
That  to  a  camel's  fiz'e  can  fwell  a  flea, 

And  give  the  guts  of  aldermen  to  mites. 


TART 


ADVICE    T«    THE    FUTURE    LAUREAT. 


PART          II. 


MY  foul  aflumes  a  loftier  wing ; 
I'm  chang'd,  I  feel  myftlf  a  King! 
I'm  fceptred — on  my  head  the  crown  defcends ! 
To  purple  turn'd  my  coat  of  parfon's  grey, 
Now  let  my  Majeft'v  itfelf  difplay, 

And  fliow  that  Kings  and  glory  may  be  friends* 

Yet  though  I  feel  myfelf  a  King, 

I  hope,  untainting,  that  the  crown  defcends— 
Not  on  my  people's  fhouldets  bids  me  fpring ; 

And  cry,  forgetful  of  myfelf  and  friends, 
**  Blood  of  the  Gods  within  my  veii\s  I  find  ; 
**  Not  the  mean  puddle  of  that  mob,  mankind." 

Low  at  my  feet  the  fj>aniel-courtiers  cow'r ; 

Curl,  wheedle,  whine,  paw,  lick  my  (hoe,  for  pow'r ; 

Prejwr'd  for  ev'ry  infult,  fervile  train, 

To  take  a  kicking,  and  to  fawn  agaih  ! 

Off,  PITT  and  GRENVILLE  !  you  are  not  yet  men  j 
Go,  children,  to  your  leading- ft  rings  agen ; 

Make  not  a  hobby-  horfe  of  this  fair  Ifle : — 
Yet,  were  no  danger  in  the  childifli  fway, 
A  Kingdom  might  permit  a  baby's  play, 

And  at  its  weaknefles  indulge  a  fmilc. 
Off,  then  !— once  more  upon  your  letters  look—' 
Go,  find  of  politics  the  loll  horn-book. 

Off  with  EXCISE  your  Imp,  with  lengthened  claw?. 
And  fangs  deep-rooted  in  his  hydra-jaws ; 

H  3  That 


&fo  ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAUREAT. 

That  monfter,  damping  FREEDOM'S  facred  joys  ; 

Fed  by  your  hands,  ye  pair  of  foolifh  boys  ! 

My  foul,  to  FREEDOM  wedded,  FREEDOM  loves; 

Then  blaft  me,  lightnings,  when  fo  coldly  cruel, 

I  to  pomatum  facrifice  the  jewel, 
Rouge,  pigtail,  and  a  pair  of  gloves. 

Off,  J !  fome  demon  did  create  thee : 

Oh,  form'd  to  fawn,  to  kneel,  to  lie,  to  flatter ! 

**  Perdition  catch  my  foul,  but  I  do  hate  thee  ! 
w  And  when  I  hate  thee  not,"  I  war  with  NATURE. 

Such  reptiles  dare  not  midft  my  radiance  fport — 

Curs'd  be  fuch  fnakes  that  crawl  about  a  Court. 

Difgracenot,  fimp'ring  fycophants,  my  throne  !— 

E ,  and  pigmy  V T,  begone  ! 

BR ,  thou  ftink'ft  ! — weazel,  polecat,  fly  ! 

Thy  manners  {hock,  thy  form  offends  my  eye. 
As  for  thy  principles — they're  gone  long'fince  ;• 
Loft,  when  a  poor  deferter  from  thy  PRINCE. 

— — ,  a  vau  nt !— ^tbou'rt  cowardly  and  mean; 
Thy  foul  is  fable,  and  thy  hands  unclean. 
Yet  to  minutise  to  defcend,  what  need  ? 
Enough,  that  thou  art  one  of  Charles's  breed. 

Out  with  that  SAL'SBURY  ! — DUNDAS,  avaunt ! 

Off,  water-gruel  WESTMORELAND,  and  LEEDS  I 
You,  verily,  are  not  the  men  I  want — 

My  bounty  no  fuch  folly  feeds. 

Off,  HARCOURT,  who  wouldfr.  ftarve  my  kine, 
Or  make  them,  poor  lean  devils,  dine 

On  vile  horfe-chefnuts — 'tis  a  curfed  meal — 
Jnftead  of  turnips,  corn,  and  hay  : 
Thou  fhalt  not,  l5y  this  avaricious  way, 

Into  my  royal  favour  fteal. 

Off,  UXBRIDGE  ! — LEEDS,  too,  once  more  get  along  ! 
You  lhall  not  beLord-Prefidents  of  long  j 

You 


ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAUREAT.  183 

You  throw  poor  St.  Cecilia  into  fits : 
You've  ears,  but  verily  they  do  not  hear, 
Juft  as  you've  tongues  that  cannot  fpeak,  I  fear ; 

And 'brains  that  want  their  corr.pl iment  of  wits. 

Off,  W  A  LSI  KG  HAM  ! — thou  putt'ft  mt  in  a  fweat  : 

I  hate  a  jack-in-oflke  martinet — 

For  ever  fomething  moft  important  brewing ; 

For  ever  bufy,  bufy,  nothing  doing. 

Thou  plague  of  Pod-office,  the  teazer,  .fretter ; 
Informing  clerks  the  way  to  feal  a  letter ; 
Who,  full  of  wifdom,  hold'ft  thyfelf  the  broonv 
luftnifling  Sufan  how  to  fweep  the  room  ; 

The  letter-man,  to  hold  his  bag; 
The  mail- guard  (funk  in  ignorance  forlorn  !) 
To  load  his  blunderbufs,  and  blow  his  horn ; 

Off,  off!— of  confequence  thou  rag! 
Go  to  to  the  fields,  and  gain  a  Nation's  thanks ; 
Catch  grafshoppers  and  butterflies  for  BAN  K 

I  want  no  fellows  that  can  only  prate ; 
1  want  no  whirligigs  of  ftate; 
No  jack-a-lanterns,  imitating  fire, 
Skipping,  and  leading  men  into  the  mire: 

Thou  fervile copyift,  WEST,  begone! 
With  nought  worth  faving  of  thy  own  ; 
Vhillis  and  Chloe,  dancing  dogs* 
PINETTI,  and  the  fortune-telling  hogs, 
Toymen  and  conj'rors,  from  my  prelence  fly  ! 
I  liave  no  children  to  amufe — not  I. 

Off,  Sw G!  thou  lean,  old,  wicked  cat; 

Reftlefs  and  fpitting,  -biting,  mewing,  mean,  , 

Thou  malt  not  in  my  chimney  corner  iquat ; 

Thou  (halt  not,  harridan,  be  Queen : 
Off,  to  thy  country,  by  the  map  forgot, 
Where  TYRANNY  and  FAMINE  curfe  the  fpot ! 


I4  ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAUREATV 

Yet  empty  firft  thy  bags  of  plunder'd  gain, 

Wages  of  vile  political  pollution  ; 
Then  vanifli,  thou  OLD  FISTULA  !  a  drain 

Enervating  our  glorious  Conftitution  ! 

Off,  HASTIN^'  Wife  !  thy  di'monds  bode  no  good  ; 
They  fhall  not  taint  us— lo,  they  fmell  of  blood  ! 
Off,  off,  old  GILBERT'S  fpawn  !--now EDGECOMBE'S  furyy 
In  manners  coarfer  than  the  dames  of  Drury ! 

O  forrn'd  for  Uglinefs  kfelf  a  foil ! 
Sprung  from  the  Church,  the  world  might  well  fuppofe 
Thy  blood  with  fome  few  drops  of  meeknefs  flows- 
No,  vitriol ! — 'not  one  particle  of  oil ! 

I'll  have  no  Laureat — facred  be  the  Ode  j 

Unfullied  let  its  torrents  roll ! 
Few  merits  mine,  the  Mufe's  wing  to  load  ; 

Small  grace  of  form,  and  no  fublime  of  foul  : 
And  yet,  whate'er  the  merits  that  are  mine, 
By  verfe  unvarnifh'd  fhall  they  fliine. 

The  real  Virtues  dare  themfelves  difplayr 
And  need  no  pedeftal  to  fhow  away : 
Each  from  herfelf  her  own  importance  draws,- 
And  fcorns  a  chatt'ring  Poet's  mock  applaufe. 

Have  niggard  Nature,  and  my  ftars,  unkind^ 
Of  fenfe  and  virtue's  ftript  my  defert  mind ; 
My  name  let  SILENCE,  with  her  veil,  invade,, 
And  cold  OBLIVJON  pour  th'  eternal  (hade. 

Obliged  not  to  an  author's  rhyrme, 
Important,  down  the  ftreamof  TiMEy 

O  let  me  fail,  or  not  at  all ; 
Too  proud  for  Bards  to  take  in  tow  my  name,, 
Juft  like  the  Victory,*  or  Fame,* 

That  drag  about  "the  jollyboat  or  yawl. 

*  Ships  of  ihe-Iinc. 

4  Away,, 


ADVICE    TO    THE    FUTURE    LAURF.AT.  IB 

Away,  the  little  fniv'ling  fpirit ! 
Away,  the  hate  of  riling  merit ! 

Thy  heav'n-ward  wing,  afpiring  GENIUS,  wave; 
I  will  not,  lev'ling  with  a  jaundic'd  eye, 
The  fecret  blunderbufs  let  fly, 

To  give  thee,  O  thou  royal  bird  !  a  grave. 

I'll  have  no  poet-perfecution — no ! 
Proud  of  its  libertv,  the  verfe  (hall  flow  ; 

The  mouth  of  Fegafus  (hall  feel  no  curb : 
If,  idly  wanton,  Poets  tax  me  wrong, 
Theirs  is  the  infamy,  for  theirs  the  long ; 

Such  blafls  (hall  ae'er  my  foul's  deep  calm  difturb. 

But,  (hould  fair  TRUTH  to  SATIRE  lend  an  edge, 
Bid  with  more  force  defcend  her  thundering  (ledge, 

Myjuftice  dares  not  break  that  poet's  pipe; 
And,  like  a  fchool-boy,  to  the  tiger's  den, 
Who  wanton  flings  a  cat,  a  cock,  or  hen, 

I  will  not  give  him  to  *  MAC  DONALD'S  gripe. 

Wife,  let  me  hufli  of  prejudice  the  florm, 
Difarm  him  for  the  Future,  and  reform  ; 

Yes  ;  '(lead  of  giving  him  a  Itna-jcbation^ 
Revenge  the  blow  by  reformation. 

To  TEOS,   ..hichof  vore  was  reckon'd  far, 
HIPPARCHUS  really  (ent  a  man  of  war, 
To  bring  AVACREON,  honied  bard,  to  court; 
So  PLATO  fays,  a  man  of  good  report. 

How  different,  Monarchs  of  the  prefent  day  ! 

From  modern  Kings  each  bee-like  minftrel  fculk^ 
Whofe  love  would  clap  the  bards  on  board  the  hulks, 

Or  fend  them  out  to  warble  at  fTHiEVEs  BAY. 


*  The  Attorney- General. 
:uorUy  called 


Conic 


t       ADVICE  TO  THE  FUTURE  LAUREAT. 

Come,  Science,  and  the  Arts,  around  me  bloom  ; 

Thrice-welcome,  half  my  empire  claim  : 
The  eye  of  GENIUS  fhall  not  wear  a  gloom, 

Nor  BOY  DELL  dafh  my  cheek  with  fhame. 
Hiftorians,  Poets,  Painters,  ev'ry  merit, 
Shall  feel  King  PETER'S  foft'ring  fpiHt. 

Yes,  men  of  genius,  be  my  equals,  free- 
Imperious  confequence  ye  (hall  not  feel ; 

For  mow  collected,  juft  to  bend  the  knee, 

And  grace,  like  (laves  of  yore,  a  chariot-wheel, 

A  vaunt,  the  parafitic  dedication ! 

A  trap  to  catch  my  fmile,  deceive  the  Nation, 

And  make  the  wide-mouth'd  million  blefs  my  name. 
Ah  !  let  my  deeds  alone,  inftead  of  //<?/, 
Proclaim  me  open,  gen'rous,  good,  and  wife  j 

Thofe  manly  heralds  of  a  virtuous  fame. 

Here,  from  your  hovels,  fons  of  fcience.  come: 
Oh,  hafte !  and  call  King  PETER'S  -noafe  your  fcome  t 
Your  huts,  your  folitary  mountains,  quit  j 
And  make  my  court  a  galaxy  of  wit. 

"  Come,  VIRTUE,  though  a  dungeon  hide  thy  face, 

(For  to  thy  lot  too  oft  misfortune  falls) 
Whofe  angel -form,  from  jails  can  blot  difgrace. 
And  cafi  a  facred  fplendor  o'er  the  walls.  ..- 

Thus  (hall  our  moments  glide  on  golden  wings ; 

Thus  will  we  triumph  with  expanded  hearts  j 
At  times  be  merry  upon  thrifty  Kings, 

And  fmile  at  Majefty  that  ftarves  the  arts. 
Ambitious,  if  with  wifdom  thus  we  wed  j 
A  Farthing  fhall  not  blufh  to  bear  OUR  head  t 


COMPLIMENTARY    EPISTLE 


TO 


JAMES      BRUCE,      Efy. 

THE   ABYSSINIAN    TRAVELLER. 


Fatv/a  menefuv. 

tj) 


•EPIS'I  LE      DEDICATORY. 

TMOUS    SIR, 

a  poor  fon  of  Apftllft  to  mnke  an  offering 
of  his  pamphlet  (a  fort   of  widow's  mite),  for  t1  e 
;  le.ifure  received -from  your  five  quartos.     Aware  of  the 
L*rs  of  launching  into  th*  foaming  fea  of  \ifnal  dedi 
cation,  in  uliich  many  an  unfortunate  author  has  been 
drowned,    I  tremble  at  my  prefent  attempt.      K  \alted 
c  too  frequently  incurs  the  fnfpicion  of  a  fneer. 
Your  dedication,    illuftrious  Sir,    to  the' 1*41  of   Kin^s, 
.e-s  me  as  the  mo#  perfpft  model  of  imitation— Ft  is 
a  column  of  Attic  elegance  and  (implicit},  n-efted  to  a 
defervin^  Monarch.     Fray,  Sir,  did  his  a'nguft  Majefty 
honour  it  with  a  penifal" before  publication?    It  truly 
forms  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  human  panegyric  ;  and  w  hat  is 
marvellous,  cannot  be    fufpefted    of  achilation.      Pray, 
Sir,  how  much  might  his  Majefty  give  you  for  kf 

What  a  Similarity,  illuftrious  Sir,  between  yourfelf 
and  Mr.  JAMES  BOSWELL!  and  yet  what  a  diftance ! 
i?oth  gloriwufly  ambitious,  both  great  ftholars,  both  in- 
telleftu.-.lly  adorned,  both  popular  geutlt-men,  both  dealers 
in  hiftory,  and  both  dtfcended  from  Kings !  But  Mr. 
JAMES  BOSWELL*S  ambition  \vas  not  of  fo  bold  a  wing 
nir's.  He  was  content  with  a  journey  to  Scotland, 
to  exhibit  Dr.  SAMUEL  JOHNSON,  the  lexicographer, 
to  the  literati  of  that  country :  yow  more  exalted  ideas 
could  only  be  fatisfied  with  a  difplay  of  the  head- quarters 
of  the  IMMORTAL  NILE,  who  had  puzzlexl  the  purfuits 
of  men  for  feven  thoufcnd  years.  Whilft  Mr.  Bos- 
•WBLI.  entertains  only  witli  a  breakfaft  on  fpaldings  (ilia* 
dried  whitings),  the  fublimer  BRUCE  treats  us'  with  a 
difti  of  lion.  Whilft  Bo  SWELL  brings  us  acquainted 
with  plain  Scottifh  gentlewomen  only,  the  gallant  BRUCE 
charms  us  with  romantic  tales  of  Queen  SIITINIA,  &c. 
Whilft  Mr.  BOSWELL  prefents  us  only  with  an  anecdote 

VOL.  JJ.  S  of 


E?ISTLE    DEDICATORY. 

of  a  flannel- nightcap  made  by  Mifs  M*LEOD  for  the 
I>o&of'.s  bald  head;  the  fublimer  BRUCE  tells  us  of  a 
piece  of  fattin,  and  fix  handfome  crimfon  arid  green 
handkerchiefs,  moft  gallantly  tranfmitted  to  the  beautiful 
AISCAH  of  TEAWA.  Whilit  Mr.  BOSWELL  amufes  us 
only  with  his  drunken  bout,  and  confequently  a  fimple 
emetic  fcene,  the  foaring  BRUCE  greets  us  with  the  more 
important hiftory  of  a  thundering  DIARRHCEA.  Whilft 
Mr.  BOSWELL  prides  himfelf  only  upon  his  defcent  from 
a  Scottifli  King,  the  penetrating  BRUCE  difcovers  an 
origin  from  KING  SOLOMON  and  the  QUEEN  OF  SHEBA; 
which,  under  the  rofe,  mull  be  eftablifhing  a  baflardy  in 
the  family,  as  the  Abyflinian  Queen  could  be  nothing 
more  than  Solomon's  concubine,  their  marriage  having 
never  been  proved. 

Pray,  Sir,  what  may  his  Majefty  intend  to  do  with 
your  invaluable  drawings,  &c.  &c.  ?  Are  they  to  be  en 
graved,  pro  bono  publico,  at  the  expence  of  the  royal 
purfe;  or  kept  cautioujly  locked  up  in  a  drawer  at  Buck- 
ingham-houfe,  to  induce  the  dilettanti  to  figh  for  the 
publication  ?  Poflibly  they  are  deftined  to  be  a  pofthu- 
rnous  work  of  the  greateft  of  Kings ;  but  n«t  like  poft- 
liumous  works  in  general,  to  difgrace  the  dead. 

I  ,am,  ILLUSTRIOUS  SIR, 

P,  P. 


A 

COMPLIMENTARY  EPISTLE. 


O  VVEET  is  the  tale,  however  ftrange  its  air, 

'  That  bids  the  public  eye  apnifltt  fUrt ! 
Sweet  is  the  tale,  howe'er  uncouth  its  fhape, 
That  makes  the  world's  wide  mouth  with  wonder  gape ! 
Behold,  our  infancies  in  tales  ddizht, 
That  bolt  like  hedgehog-quills  die  hair  upright. 
Of  ghofts  h6w  pleas'd  is  evrry  child  to  hear! 
To  fuch  is  Jack  the  Giant-killer  dear  \ 
Dread  monfters,  ifluing  from  the  ffeme  or  flood, 
Charm,  though  with  horror  cloth'd  they  chill  the  blood  ! 
What  makes  a  tale  fo  fleepy,  languid,  dull  ? 
Things  as  they  happen'd — not  of  marvel  full. 
What  gives  a  zeft,  and  keeps  alive  attention  ? 
A  tale  that  wears  the  vifage  of  invention  : 
A  tale  of  lions,  foeftret,  ftiipwreck,  thunder; 
A  wonder,  or  firlt  coufin  to  a  wonder. 
My fteriouv  conduct !  yet,  'tis  NATURE'S  plan 
To  fow  with  wonder's  feeds  the  foul  of  nian, 
Tliat  every  where  in  fweet  profufion  rile, 
And  fprout  luxuriant  through  the  mouth  and  eyes ! 

What  to  the  vajfy  deep  *  SIR  JOSEPH  gave, 
As  of  the  world,  the  fport  of  w>d  and  wave  ? 
What  bade  the  Knight,  amid  thofe  fcenes  remote, 
Skep  with  Queen  Oberea  in  tne  boat  ? 

*  Sir  Jofeph  Banks. 

S  2  What, 


l<)2  A    COMPLIMENTARY    EP1ST££ 

What,  imconfoimded,  leap  to  Newton's  chair  * 
What,  but  to  make  a  world  with  wonder  flare  ? 
What  bids  a  KING  on  Wimbledon,  Blackheath, 
So  oft  rejoice  the  regiments  of  death? 
While  Britain's  mightier  bulwark  flighted  lies,. 
And,  vainly  groaning,  for  its  Csefar  lighs  ? 
What,  with  the  vulgar  pigs  of  Afcot  taken,- 
Devour  on  *  Afcot-heath  his  annual  bacon  ? 
What  bade  that  great,  great  man,  a  goodly  fight, 
Watch  his  wife's  di'mond  petticoat  all  night ; 
And  what  that  wife,  of  great,  great,  great  renown, 
Make  her  own  caps,  and  darn  a  thread-bare  gown  ?• 
What  bade  the  charming  f  LADY  MARY  fly 
MARCHES i 'sfqueeze,  for  PACCHIEROTTT'S  figh? 
What  MASTER  EDGECUMBE  deal  in  rhiming  ware? 
What,  but  to  put  all  J  Cawfand  in  a  ftare  ? 
Sweet  child  of  verfe,  who,  with  importance  big, 
Pleas'd  its  own  felf,  and  eterniz'd  a  pig;§ 
Whilft,  mad  an  equal  weight  of  praife  to  mare, 
OLD  MOUNT  plays  Punchinello  to  a  hair. 
What  makes  a  girl  the  fhops  for  novels  rove  ? 
The  fweet  impol^bilities  of  love; 
Quixotic  deeds  to  catch  the  flying  fair? 
To  pant  at  dangers,,  and  at  marvels  flare. 
What  promptetn  Chloe,  confcious  of  the  charms 
That  crowd  the  fouls  of  fwains  with  wild  alarms, 


*  Conftantly,  yeaf  with  annual   corrftancy  do  their  aug 

devour   the  fine  fat  bacon  of  Afcot  at  the  time  of  she   races,  anJ,  after 
deeply  loading  their  royal  ftornachs  with  this  favoury  meat,   in  giatefu'l 
return  load  Alcot  and  the  bacon  with  royal  approbation. 
f  Lady  Mary  Dxincan. 

*  A  frnall  fifhilig-town  near  Mount  EJgecumVe. 

§  This  pig,  Cupid,  who  many  yeais  ago  fell  in  love  with  the  Eail, 
Jias  z  monument  ere£lcd  to  his  memory,  with  an  infcription  on  it  by 
Lord  Valletort,  the  Earl's  fon, — It  is  faid,  that  his  Majefty,  when  at 
Mount  Edgecymbe,  -happening  to  be  gravely  pondering  near  his  grave, 
the  Queen,  who  was  at  fome  diftance,  afked  him,  what  he  was  looking 
at  fo  ferioufly.  His  Majefty,  with  a  great  deal  of  humour,  imme 
diately  replied,  «  The  family  vaultf  Charly ;  family  vault,  family 
«  vault." 

To 


TO    JAMES    BRUCE,    ESQ^  IQ3 

To  give  the  fwelling  bofom's  milk-white  fkir> 

A  veil  of  gauze  fo  marveloufly  thin  ? 

What  but  a  kind  intention  of  the  fair 

To  treat  the  eyes  of  fhepherds  with  a  (tare  ? 

Behold!  RELIGION'S  (elf,  ccleftial  dame, 

Founds  on  the  rock  of  miracles  her  fame  : 

A  (acred  building,  that  defies  decay, 

That  fin's  wild  waves  can  never  wafli  away ! 

What  made  *  JOHN  ROLL R  (except  from  EXON'S  fare) 

Drill-ferjennt  to  the  aldermen  and  may'r, 

E'er  from  the  hall  he  led  his  chofen  bands, 

To  view  the  KING  OF  NATIONS,  and  kifs  hands? 

How  rarely  man  the  haunts  of  wifdom  feeks, 

Pleas'd  with  the  life  of  cabbages  and  leeks ! 

Though  form'd  to  plough  the  (oil,  divinely  ftrong, 

'Tis  famine  goads  him,  like  an  ox,  along  : 

But  BRUCE,  on  CURIOSITY'S  wikf  wings, 

Darts,  hawk- like,  where  the  game  of  marvel  fprings, 

Let  envy  kindle  with  the  blu(h  of  lhame, 

That  dares  to  call  thee,  BRUCE,  a  thief  of  fame. 

Pleas'd  to  thy  wonder's  vortex  to  be  drawn, 

A  thoufand  volumes  could  not  make  me  yawn : 

And  (O  accept  a  falutary  hint) — 

The  world  will  read  as  faft  as  thou  canft  print. 

Curs'd  by  the  goofe's  and  the  critic's  quill, 
What  tortures  tear  us,  and  what  horrors  thrill ! 
Thus  that  fmall  imp,  a  tooth,  a  fimple  bone, 
Can  make  fair  ladies  and  great  heroes  groan ; 

*  Mr.  Jqhn  Rolk's  dread  of  a  failure  in  the  etiyHtftt  of  prefentmenl- 
to  his  Majetty  when  at  Exeter,  prevailed  on  himfclf  to  t.r<c  a  >i 
trouble  with  gentlemen  who  were  to  be  introduced  to  the  Levef  :  bir,  in- 
fpite  of  all  his  intellectual  powers,  which,  like  his  corj*>re.il,  arc  of 
more  trun  ordinary  feature,  much  difordcr  happened  ;  indeed  the  l*ft 
of  Kings  vras  three  or  four  times  nearly  overturned.  Many  were  the 
gentlemen  that  Mr.  R  >llc  wai  foixed  to  place  himfelf  behind,  trf  pull 
down  pcnperly  on  their  knees;  ;md  many  were  the  gen;  le  inert  he  w.is 
1C  £scc  to  the  right  about,  who  uncourtc- 

oufly,  tbou.  ..jly,  in  quitting  die  prcCcncr,  h.iJ  tu.nc  J  their 

unjilifheduiljon 

S  i  Tear 


1Q4  A   'COMPLIMENTARY    EFISTL2 

Tar  hopelefs  virgins  from  their  happy  dream, 

And  bid  for  doftors  'ftead  of  fweethearts  fcream ; 

In  tears  the  tender  tolling  infant  fteep, 

And  from  its  eyelids  bruth  the  dews  of  fleep ; 

Where,  with  a  cheek  in  cherub  blufhes  dreft, 

It  feeks,  with  fruitlefs  cries,  its  vanifli'd  reft. 

Far  difF 'rent,  THOU,  ereft  in  confcious  pride, 

Coloffal  dar'ft  the  critic  hoft  beftride ; 

Like  yelping  coward  curs  canft  make  them  fkip, 

And  tremble  at  the  thunder  of  thy  whip. 

How  hard  that  thou,  a  bufy  working  bee, 
Shouldft  range  from  flow'r  to  flow'r,  from  tr.ee  to  tree  •. 
Fly  loaded  home  from  fhrubs  of  richeft  prime, 
Egyptian,  Nubian,  Abyflinian  thyme ; 
And  plundering  *  drones  upon  thine  honey  rhrive, 
Who  never  gave  an  atom  to  the  hive ! 
Huge  WHALE  of  marvel- hunters,  further  fay, 
And  glad  the  prefent  and  the  future  day ; 
Speak  !  did  no  angel,  proud  to  intervene, 
Bear  thee,  like  Habbakuk,  from  fcene  to  fcenej 

Lo !  moon-ey'd  WONDER  opes  her  lap  to  thee: 
How  niggardly,  alas !  to  lucklefs  me  ! 
Where'er  through  tracklefs  woods  thy  luckier  way, 
Marvels,  like  dew-drops,  beam  on  ev'ry  fpray. 
Hleft  mgn  !  whate'er  thou  wifheft  to  behold, 
Nature  as  ftrongly  wifhes  to  unfold  ; 
Of  all  her  wardrobe  offers  ev'ry  rag, 
Of  which  thy  /kill  hath  form'd  a  conj'ror's  bag. 
Thy  deeds  are  giants,  covering  our's  with  fhame ! 
Poor  wafted  pigmies  !  fkeletons  of  fame  ! 
To  thee  how  kindly  hath  thy  genius  giv'n 
The  maffy  keys  of  yonder  ftar-clad'heav'n  ; 
With  leave,  whene'er  thou  wilheft  to  unlock  it, 
Tp  put  a  few  eclipfes  in  thy  pocket ! 
NATURE,  where'er  thou  tread'ft,  exalts  her  form ; 
The  whifp'ring  zephyr  fwells  a  howling  ftorm ; 

*  Alluding  to  nn  Abridgement  of  Mr.  Bruce's  Travels. 

Where 


to  JAMBS  BRUCE,  ttOi  J9> 

Where  pebbles  lay,  and  riv'lets  purl'd  before, 

Huge  promontories  rife,  and  oceans  roar. 

Thrice-envy'd  man  (if  truth  each  volume  fings,) 

Thy  life  how  happy  !  hand  and  glove  with  kings ! 

A  ample  fwain,  a  ftranger  to  a  throne, 

I  ne'er  fat  down  with  kings  to  pick  a  bone  ! 

For  fmiles  I  gap'd  n<*»  crouch'd  not  for  affiftance  ; 

But  paid  my  falutations  at  a  diftancc  : 

Yet  live,  O  KINGS,  to  fee  a  diftant  date, 

Becaufe  I've  got  a  pretty  good  eftate ; 

A  comely  fpot  near  Helicon,  that  thrives  ; 

A  leafehold  though,  that  hangs  upon  your  lives ; 

SettoGeoROE  RBMMLKY,  ata  moderate  rent; 

Enough  for  me,  poor  fwain,  it  brings  content. 

Were  neav'n  to  place  a  crown  upon  mv  head, 

So  meek,  fo  modeft,  I  mould  faint  with  dread  ; 

And  like  fome  honeft  bifhop,  with  a  figh, 

•'  Pity  my  greatnefc,  Lord  !"  would  be  my  cry. 

Poets,  like  foiders,  now-a-days  muft  fpin, 

E'en  from  ticmfelveS)  the  threads  of  life  fo  thin. 

Nought  pleafeth  now  the  rulers  of  great  nations, 

But  books  of  wonders,  and  fweet  dedications. 

Kings,  like  the  mountains  of  the  moon,  indeed, 

Proud  of  their  ftature,  lift  a  lofty  he  .d  ; 

Heads,  like  the  mountains  alfo,  cold  and  raw, 

That  ice-en velop'd,  feldom  feel  a  tiiaw. 

Oh,  may  the  worft  of  ills  my  Cbul  betide, 
For  me  if  ever  love-fick  lady  dy'd ! 

If  fatal  darts  from  thefe  two  eyes  of  mine, 

Play'd  havock  with  fair  ladies  hearts,  like  thine  : 

No>  no !  I  ever  a  hard  bargain  drove, 

And  purchas'd  ev'ry  atom  of  my  love. 

O  BRUCE,  I  own,  all  candour,  that  I  look 

With  envy,  downright  envy,  on  thy  book ; 

A  book  like  Pfalmanazar's,'  fornVd  tolaft, 

That  gives  th'  hiftoric  eye  a  fweet  repaft  ; 

A  book  like  Mancleville's,  that  yields  delight,  * 

And  puts  poor  probability  to  flight ; 

A  book  that  e'en  Pontopidan  would  own ; 

A  book  mod  humbly  offer M  to  the  Throne : 

2  A  book, 


19^  A    COMPLIMENTARY    EPISTLE 

A  book,  how  happy,  which  the  King  of  Ifles 
Admires  (fays  rumour)  and  receiv'd  with  fmiies ! 

The  fool,  with  equal  gape,  aftonifh'd  fees, 
Through  WONDER'S  glafles,  elephants  and  fleas; 
But  thou,  in  WONDER 'sfchool  long  bred,  full  grown, 
Art  pleas'd  indeed  with  elephants  alone  : 
Hadft  thou  been  GOD,  an  infult  to  thy  fight, 
Thy  majefty  had  fcorn'd  to  make  a  mite. 
Know,  where  th'  Atlantic  holds  th'  unwieldy  whale, 
My  heart  has  panted  at  the  monitor's  tail : 
Had  BRUCE  been  there,  th'  invincible,  the  brave, 
How  had  he  dafh'd  at  once  beneath  the  wave  ! 
Bold  with  his  dirk  the  mighty  fifh  purfu'd, 
And  ftain'd  whole  leagues  of  ocean  with  his  blood ; 
Then  riling  glorious  from  the  great  attack, 
Grac'd  with  the  watry  tyrant  on  his  back  ! 

'Mid  thofe  fair  *  ifles,  the  happy  ifles  of  old, 
Plains  that  the  ghoils  of  kings  and  chiefs  patrol'd, 
Thefe  eyes  have  feen ;  but,  let  me  truth  confefs, 
No  royal  fpeclre  came,  thefe  eyes  to  blefs : 
To  no'  one  chieftain-phantom  too,  I  vow, 
With  rev'rence,  did  I  ever  make  my  bow  : 
Gone  to  make  room,  poor  ghofts,  fo  FATE  inclines, 
For  gangs  of  lazy  Spaniards  and  their  vines. 
But  had  thy  foot,  illuflrious  Trav'ler,  trod, 
Like  me,  the  precin&s  of  th'  Elyfian  fod  ; 
Full  of  inquiry,  eafy,  unconfounded, 
By  fpectres  had  ft  thou  quickly  been  furrounded  j 
Then  had  we  heard  thy  book  of  wonder  boaft, 
How  BRUCE  the  brave  Ihook  hands  with  ev'ry  ghoft  f 
In  vain  did  I  phenomena  purfue, 
For  Wonder  waits  upon  the  chofen  few. 
Whate'er  I  faw  required  no  witch's  florin — 
Slight  deeds,  that  NATURE  could  with  eafe  perform! 
Audacious,  to  purloin  my  fiem  and  fifli, 
No  golden  eagles  hopp'd  into  my  difh  ; 

#  The  Canaries,  or  the  Infuhe  Foitunst*  of  the  Ancient*. 

Nor 


TO    JAKES    BRUCE,    Ksr*.  I9X 


<  rocoJiles,  by  love  of  knowledge  led, 
figure,  left  their  oozy  lied  ; 
riiels,  to  provoke  my  ftarr, 
Sublimely  whirl'd,  like  ftraws,  amid  the  air; 

,  happy  in  a  iiomach  form'd  of  fteel, 
On  roaring  lions  have-  1  made  a  m< 

i.al  mint  with  lions'  bones  to  cope  ; 
T/.y  jaws  can  only  on  fuch  viands  ope. 

.  had  ft  thou  trod,  like  me,  the  happy  ifle, 

•fe  *  mountain  treats  all  mountains  with  a  fmile; 
Bold  i.adft  thou  climb'd  th*  afcent,  an  eafy  matter, 
And,  nobly  daring,  fous'd  into  the  crater  ; 
Then  out  agen  hadft  vaulted  with  a  hop, 
Quick  as  a  (weeper  from  a  chimney-top. 
Oh,  had  thy  curious  eye  beheld,  like  mine, 
The  t  Me  which  glads  the  heart  with  richcft  wine  ! 
Heneath  its  vines,  with  common  clutters  crown'd, 
At  eve  my  wand'ring  fteps  a  pafTage  found, 
Where  rofe  the  hut,  and,  neither  rich  nor  poor, 
The  wife  and  hu(band,  (bated  at  the  door, 
TouchM,  when  the  labours  of  the  day  were  done, 
The  wire  of  mufic  to  the  felting  fun  ; 
Where,  bleft,  a  tender  offspring,  rang'd  around, 
foin'd  their  fmal!  voices  to  the  filver  found. 
Tut  had  thir.e  c\c  thib  finiple  fcene  explor'd, 
The  man  at  once  had  fprung  a  fcq>tred  lord  ; 
Princes  and  princefTcsthe  beam  had  b;?en  ; 
The  hut  n  prhce,  and  the  wife  a  queen  ; 
Their  golder,  har,)s  had  ravifli\  ir^, 

And  be^ar'd  ;.ll  the  inuiic  of  the  fphcre;  ; 
\fuRe  always  pleas'd  to  be, 

i  vifittd  bv  favourites,  like  tkrt  ! 

;  •  !  tl  on  h  .A\  feen  the  land,  that,  to  its  fhaine, 
Ne'er  heard  our  good          *s  virtues,  nor  his  name  \ 
I've  only  feen  thofe  regions,  let  me  fay, 
Where  his  great  virtues  never  found  tiieir  way. 

*  TVncrSc.  f  MtJcira. 

Alas, 


198  A    COMPLIMENTARY    EPTSItE 

Alas,  I  never  met  with  royal  fcenes  ! 
No  vomits  gave  to  Abyffinian  queens  ! 
Drew  not  from  royal  arms  the  purple  tide, 
Nor  fcotch'd  with  flames  a  fceptred  lady's  hide ; 
Nor,  in  anatomy  fo  very  flout, 
Ventur'd  to  turn  a  princefs  infide  out ; 
Nor,  blu  filing,  ftripp'd  me  to  the  very  Ikin, 
To  give  a  royal  blackamoor  a  grin. 
I  never  faw  (with  ignorance  I  own)  I 

Mule- mounted  Monarchs  feek  th'  imperial  throne  ; 
Which  mule  the  carpet  fpoil'd — a  dirty  beaft  ! 
Firft  ftall'd  ;  then— What  ?— OBLIVION  cloud  the  refL 
I  faw  no  king,  whofe  fubjects  form'd  a  riot, 
And,  imp-like,  how  I'd  around  him  for  his  quiet. 
Nor  have  I  been  where  men  (what  lofs,  alas  !)*• 
Kill  half  a  cow,  and  turn  the  reft  to  grafs. 
Where'er,  great  Trav'ler,  thou  art  pleas'd  to  tread, 
The  teeming  fkies  rain  wonders  on  thy  head  : 
No  common  birth  to  greet  thine  eye  appears, 
But  facred  labours  of  a  thoufand  years. 
Where'er  the  Nile  mall  pour  the  fmalleft  fluice, 
The  rills  (hall  curl  into  the  name  of  BRUCE. 
And,  lo  !  a  univerfe  his  praife  (ball  utter, 
Who,  firft  of  mortals,  found  the  parent  gutter ; 
And,  let  me  add,  of  gutters  too  the  QUEEN, 
Without  whofe  womb  the  Nile  had  never  been.. 
Thus  many  a  man,  whofe  deeds  have  made  a  pother, 
Has  had  a  fcurvy  father  or  a  mother. 
O  form'd  in  arts  and  fciences  to  furpafs  ; 
To  whom  e'en  VALOUR  is  an  arrant  afs; 

0  BRUCE,  moil  furely  TRAVEL'S  ekleft  fon  • 
Tell,  prithee,  all  that  thou  haft  feen  or  done  ! 

1  fear  thou  hideft  half  thy  feats,  unkind; 
A  thot.fand  wonders,  ah  '   remain  behind  ! 
Where  is  the  chariot- wheel  with  PH  A  ROAM'S  name, 
Fifh'd  from  the  old  Red  Sea  to  fwell  thy  fame  ? 
Where  the  horfe-fhoe  with  PH  AROAH'S  arms,  and  found 
Where  wicked  PHAROAH  and  his  hoft  were  drown'd  ? 
Where  of  that  ftone  a  flice,  and  frefh  account, 

Giv'n  by  the  LORD  to  Mo sts  on  the  Mount  ? 

And 


TO    JAMES    BRUCE,    ESQ^  199 

And  where  a  (lice  of  that  ftone's  elder  brother, 

That,  broken,  forc'd  th'  ALL-  WISE  t'  engrave  another  > 

Where  of  the  cradle  too,  a  (acred  rufti  ? 

Where  a  true  charcoal  of  the  burning  bufli  > 

And  oh,  the  jewel,  curious  gem,  dilclofe, 

That  dangled  from  the  Queen  of  Sbeba's  nofe, 

When,  with  hard  aueftions,  and  two  roguilh  eyes, 

She  rode  to  puzzle  Solomon  the  Wife  ! 

Sagacious  Terrier  in  DISCOVERY'S  mine, 

Shall  NATURE  form  no  more  a  nofe  like  thine? 

No  more  difplay'd  the  pearls  of  wonder  beam, 

When  thou,  great  man,  art  pad  thy  Stygian  ftream  * 

To  Afric  wilt  thou  never,  BRUCE,  return? 

Howl,  Britain !  Europe,  Abyiftnia  mourn  ! 

Droop  (hall  DISCOVERY'S  wing,  her  bofom  figh, 

And  MARVEL  meet  no  more  the  ravifti'd  ey« ; 

NATURE  outftep  her  modefty  no  more; 

Her  cataracts  of  wonder  ceafe  to  roar, 

Forc'd  to  a  common  channel  to  fubfide, 

And  pour  no  longer  an  abounding  tide? 

O  bid  not  yet  the  lucky  labours  ceafe ; 

Still  let  the  Land  of  Wonder  feel  increafe : 

Thy  loads  of  dung,  delightful  ordure,  yield, 

And  bloflbm  with  fertility  the  field  : 

"Gates,  hedges  mend,  that  IGNORANCE  pull'd  down, 

And  bring  in  triumph  back  each  kidnapp'd  town. 

Though  ENVY  damns  thy  volumes  of  lurprife, 

Bled  I  devour  them  with  unfated  eyes ! 

What  though  four  JOHNSON,  cry'd,  with  cynic  fneer, 

"  I  deem'd  at  firft,  indeed,  BRTCE  had  been  there  ; 

**  But  foon  the  eye  of  keen  inveftigation 

14  Prov'd  all  the  fellow's  tale  a  fabrication." 

But  who,  alas  I  on  JOHNSON'S  word  relies, 

Who  faw  the  too  kind  North  withjaundic'd  eyes; 

Who  rode  to  Hawthornden's  fair  fcene  by  night, 

For  fear  a  Scottifh  tree  might  wound  his  fight ; 

And,  bent  from  decent  candour  to  depart, 

Allow'd  a  Scotchman  neither  head  nor  heart  ? 

Grant  fiction  half  thy  volumes  of  furprife, 

High  in  the  fcale  of  merit  (halt  thc-u  rife : 

Still 


A    COMPLIMENTARY 

Still  to  FAME'S  temple  doft  thou  boaft  prctenfion^ 

For  thine  the  rara  avis  of  invention  f 

And,  lo  !  amiclft  thy  work  of  iab'ring  years,. 

A  dignity  of  egotifm  appears : 

A  ftyle  that  claffic  authors  flionld  purfue ; 

A  ftyle  thatpeerlefs  *  KATERFELTO  knew  ! 

Thou  dear  man-mountain  of  difcovery,  run; 

Again  attempt  an  Abyffinian  fun  ! 

Yes,  go;  a  fecond  journey,  BRUCE,  purfue; 

More  volumes  of  rich  hift'ry  bring  to  view. 

O  run,  ere  TIME  the  fpe&red  tombs  invade, 

And  feize  the  crumbling  wonders  from  the  {hade; 

Crowd  with  fair  columns,  ftruok  by  TIME,  thy  page, 

And  fnatch  the  falling  grandeur  from  his  rage^ 

Give  that  old  TIME  a  vomit  too,  and  draw, 

More  of  Egyptian  marvels  from  his  maw  ; 

Bid  him  difgorge  (by  moderns  calt'd  a  hum) 

Scratched  by  ten  thoufand  trav'lers,  Memnon's  bum  ; 

And,  what  all  rarities  muft  needs  furpafs, 

The  tail,  the  curious  tail  of  Balaam's  afs. 

Say,  what  fhould  ftop,  O  BRUCE,  thy  grand  career ; 

Of  FAME  the  fav'rite,  and  no  child  of  FEAR  ? 

DANGER'S  huge  form,  fo  dread  to  vulgar  eyes, 

Pants  at  thy  prefence,  and  a  coward  flies. 

Where  other  travelers,  fraught  with  terror,  roam, 

Lo!  BRUCE  in  Wonder-Land  is  quite  at  home; 

The  fame  cool  eye  on  NATURE'S  forms  looks  down ; 

Lions  and  rats,  the  courtier  and  the  clown. 

Whote'er  thine  a&ion,  wonder  crowds  the  tale  ; 

It  fmells  of  Brofodignag — it  boafh  a  fcale ! 

Fond  of  the  lofty,  BRUCE  no  pigmy  loves — 

Who  likes  a  pigjrw,  that  a  giant  moves  ?  ' 

Again — what  pigmy,  with  a  form  of  lath, 

Loft  in 'his  lhadow,  likes  the  MAN  OF  GATH  ? 

The  bow-erly  hoftefs,  for  a  cart-horfe  fit, 

Scorns  DAPHNE'S  reed- like  fhape,  and  calls  herr>5//; 

Whilft  on  the  rough  robuftiom  lump  of  Nature, 

Contemptuous  DAPHNE  whifpers,  "  What  a  creature  1" 

*  A  celebrated  philofofher  aiul  conjuror. 

Pity! 


TO    JAMES    1JRUCE, 

purfuits  like  thine  fliould  feel  a  paufe"  ! 
•  than  half-fmother'd  by  fair  FAME'S  applanfe, 
I  fee  thcf  fafe  rerun, 'd  from  .  mine, 

Whole  gems  in  e-'ry  rock  fo  precious  fliiiie; 
Proud  of  the  p:oduel  of  a  world  unknown, 
Unloading  a'l  thy  troafure  at  the  throne ; 

h  one  accord, 

•fb  marv'lous'is  the  reign  of  (reorge  the  Third  !" 
Ho\v  like  the  butchers  hoys  v.  ics  meet, 

Stuck  rou i>d  with  bladders,  in  a  London  ftreet; 
In  full-blown  majefty  who  move,  and  drop 
,-Ioated  burden  in  an  OILMAN'S  flion; 
While  country  bnmpkins,  gazing  at  the  cloor, 
they  **  ne'er  zeeJ  a»  vine  a  xight  bcvorc  f" 

I  fee  old  NILE,  the  king  of  flood?,  arife, 

hand.s,  and  welconie  thee  with  happy  n-rs; 
Otters  and  alligators  in  his  train, 

.-  by  thy  live  immortal  volumes  vain ; 
Weafelsaiul  poUxat<,  Iheregrigs,  carrio 

:uul  iinelt  only  by  thine  eyes  and  nole. 
i  of  the  Art^  and  Coufm  of  a  King, 
**  Loud  as  a  kettle-drum  whofc  atfions  rinR," 

iaims  the  king  of  floods,  "  thy  books  I've  read, 
**  And,  for  thy  birth-place,  envy  Brother  TWEED.'* 
O  DRUC;  rever  to  be  fung; 

Job's  war-horfc  tierce,  thy  neck  with  thunder  hung: 

Kill  put  thee  in  the  ftable, 

Snipp'dJii  •  iwve  been  a  table ; 

to  tliy  mem'i-y  ihail  the  marble  iwell, 
ige,  and  all  thy  actions  tell! 
Here,  in  fnir  fculpture,  the  recording  ftones 
!  give  thee  elorious,  cracking  lions  bon^s ; 
e,  which  the  fqueamim  fouls  of  Britain  flux 
Rich  ileaks  devouring  from  the  living  ox : 
Here,  ftaring  on  thee  from  the  reakn  of  water, 
Full  many  a  virtuofo  alligator  ; 
There,  BRUCE  informing  queens,  in  naked  pride, 
The  feel  and  colour  of  a  Scotsman's  hide; 

VOL.  IL  T  Her? 


2O2  A    COMPLIMENTARY     IiP*3TLE 

Here  of  the  genealogy  a  tree, 
Branching  from  SOLOMON'S  wife  tvjnk  to  thee  ; 
There,  with  a  valour  nought  could  t!\re  withftand, 
BRUCE  fighting  an  hyaena  hand  to  hand: 
Which  dread  hyaena  (what  a  bead  uncoufh  !) 
Fought  with  a  pound  of  candles  in  his  mouth  : 
Here  temples  burfting  glorious  to  the  view, 
Which  HIST'RY,  though  a  goffip,  never  knew; 
There  columns  darting  from  the  earth  and  flood, 
Juft  like  the  razor-fifh  from  fand  and  mud  : 
Here  a  wife  IVlonarcb,  with  voracious  looks, 
Receiving  ail  thy  drawings  and  thy  books; 
Whilft  FAME  behind  him  all  fo  folemn  fings 
The  lib'rai  fpirit  of  the  belt  of  Kings. 

Man  fays,  O  BRUCE,  that  thou  wert  hardly  us'd  ; 
That  our  great  King  at  firft  thy  book  refus'd  ;"" 
Indeed  look'd  grimly  'midfl  his  courtier  crew, 
Who,  gentle  courtiers !  all  look'd  grimly  too! 
Thus  when  in  black  the  lofty  SKY  looks  down, 
The  fympethizing  SEA  i-efle<fts  a  frown  ; 
Vale,  cattle,  reptile,  infect,  man  and  maid, 
All  mope,  and  feem  to  forrow  in  the  {hade. 

Steep  is  th*  afcent,  and  narrow  is  the  road, 
Ah  me  !  that  leads  to  FAME'S  divine  abode : 
Yet  thick  (through  lanes,  like  pilgrimaging  rats, 
Unaw'd  by  mortals,  and  unfcar'd  by  cats) 
What  crawling  hofts  attempt  her  facred-^pe, 
And  dizzy,  drunk-like,  tumble  back  again; 
Faft  as  the  fwains,  whofearms  the  damfels  fill, 
Embrace  of  elegance !  down  Greenwich-Hill ; 
Whilft  thou,  Briareus  like,  with  dauntlefs  air, 
Refolv'd  to  ravifti  FAME,  immortal  Fair, 

Juft  like  our  London  bullies  with  the  w , 

Haft  fcal'd  the  cloud-capt  height,  and  forc'd  her  doors ! 
O  form'd  the  travelers  of  the  eaft  to  fcare, 
Although  thy  pow'rs  are  mighty,  learn  to  fpare : 
Dog  fhould  not  prey  on  dog,  the  proverb  fays  : 
^.llow  then  brother- trav'lers,  crumbs  of  praife; 

Like 


TO    JAMES    BRUCE,    E^  1O3 

Like  thee,  let  others  rap  applaufe,  and  rife 

By  da:  to  Egyp:- 

Hut  calmly,  lo  !  thou  canil  not  fee  them  pafs  ; 

"  This  is'a  rogoc  or  fool,  and  that 

Thus  on  a  tne,  whene'er  tlie  weather's  fine, 

TACK  KETCH,  the8i-iD>.  R,  weave- the  ft  tailing 

Beneath  a  leaf  hehide*  with  watchful  eye, 

No.v  darts,  and  roping  hangs  the  trav'iing  FLY. 

Again,  nioft  tircfonie,  let  me  fay,  Go,  go, 

Proceed,  and  c!l  c.bout  it  let  us  knoxv : 

I^eil  falcly  by  thins  catetprifing  ftar, 

.^  ftiall  not  wi:!.  :icy  war: 

Uneat  by  tigers,  dare  the *foreft's^!t»o:r», 
To  bid  the  barren  field  of  knowledge  bloom  i 
Wave  o'er  new  pyramids  thine  eagle  wings; 
And,  hound- like,  fcent  frefli  tombs  of  ancient  kings. 
Which  TIMK  had  buried  with  the  mightv  dead, 
And  cold  OBLIVION  fwallow'd  in  licr  made: 
And  mind  ('tis  HIST'RY'*  piovince  \$f*w(k) 
Tliit  taici  Arc  fwccttfl,  that  found  moil  Ukc  ihs. 


2*4  A    COMPLIMENTARY    EPISTLE 


jfs  the  CQnftJfed  fupenority  of  Miflcr  BRUCE  to  Mifier 
BOS.WELL  entitles  him  to  a  more  eminent  mark  of  dif- 

i  tinclion^  I  have  addtd  an  ODE,  in  my  be  ft  manner,  to 
this  Complimentary  Epiftle,  which  tie  Congratulatory 
Epiftle  to  Mifter  Bos  WELL  cannot  bodft. 


ODE  TO  JAMES  BRUCE, 

f\  BRUCE,  for  this  his  fhort  and  fweet  Epiftle, 
*~f  Perhaps  thou  bid'ft  the  gentle  bard,  "  go  whiftle  ;** 

Or  fomewhat  worfe,  perchauncc,  that  rhymes  to  knight ; 
That  is  to  fay,  knights  of  the  blade, 
One  time  fo  bufy  in  the  dubbing  trade, 

That,  like  to  filver,  it  was  fhoulder'd  bright. 

Pity  !  by  hungry  critics  thou  fhouldft  fall, 
So  clever,,  and  fo  form'd  to  pleafe  us  alkp 
Thou  too,  by  royal  favour  ali-furrounded, 
As  balm  fo  rich,  like  cloves  and  nutmegs  pounded? 
Thus  the  BAG  Fox  (how  cruelly,  alack  !) 
Turn'd  out  with  turpentine  upon  his  back, 
Amidfl  the  war  of  hounds  and  hunters  flies ; 
Shews  fport;  but,  lucklefs,  by  his  fragrance  dies ! 

Safe  from  the  fury  of  the  critic  hounds, 

O  BRUCE,  thou  treadeft  Abyflinian  grounds; 

Nor  can  our  Britiih  nofes  hunt  thy  foif: 
Indeed,  thou  need'ft  not  dread  th'  event ; 
Surrounding  clouds  deftroy  the  fcent, 

•  And  mock  their  molt  iagacious  toil : 
Yes,  in  thy  darknefs  thou  flialt  leave  the  dogs ;; 
For  hares,  the  hunters  fay,  run  belt  in  fogs. 

Of  thee  and  me,  two  great  phyficians, 
Hew  different  are  the  difpofitious  ! 

Jfe 


TO    JAMES    BRUCE,    ESQ.  205 

77- y  foul  delights  in  wonder,  pomp,  and  buftle; 
Mine  in  th'  wnmarvelious  and  placid  fcenc, 
Plain  as  the  *  hut  of  our  good  King  and  Queen ; 

1  imitate  the  ftationary  mufcle. 

Vet,  boldly  thou,  O  BRUCE,  again  proceed  , 
Of  wonder  ope  the  fountain  head  ; 

Deluge  the  land  with  Abyflinian  ware; 
Whilft  I,  a  fimple  fort  of  peace, 
The  world  of  t>a£aicllc  increafe, 

By  love  fick  fonuets  to  the  fair  : 

Now  to  Sir  JOSEPH,  now  a  Duke,  now  Wren, 
Now  Robin  Red-brcaft,  dedicate  the  pen ; 

Now  Glow-worm,  child  of  (hade  and  light,  not  flame ; 
To  whom,  of  wicked  wits  the  tuneful  art, 
So  very  apt,  indeed,  from  truth  to  dart, 

Compares  the  nightly  ftreet-mcand'ring  dame. 

Mild  INCEST,  harmlefo  as  myfelf,  I  ween; 
Thou  little  plan  net  of  the  rural  fcene, 
When  fummer  warms  the  vallies  with  her  rays ; 
Accept  a  trifling  fonnet  to  th\  praife. 


ODE  TO  THE  GLOW-WORTVI. 

T>RI(iIIT  ftraneer,  welcome  to  my  field,. 
•*-*  Here  feed  in  lafety,  here  thy  radiance  yield  ; 

To  me,  oh,  nightly  be  thy  fplendor  giv'n  ! 
Oh,  could  a  \vi(h  of  mine  the  fkies  command, 
How  would  I  gem  thy  leaf  with  lib'ral  hand,. 

With  ev'ry  fwettefi  dew  of  Heav'n  ! 

dofl  thoa  kindly  light  the  Fairy  train,. 
their  gambols  on  the  ftilly  plain, 


A  houfcclofc  by  thr  gloriout  caftlc  of 

T  3  H.inginf> 


2O6  A    COMPLIMENTARY    EPISTLE. 

Hanging  thy  lamp  upon  the  moiften'd  blade  ?• 
What  lamp  fo'fit,  fo  pure  as  thine, 
Amidft  the  gentle  elfin  band  to  ihine, 

And  chafe  the  horrors  of  the  midnight  ihade  f 

Oh  !  may  no  feather'd  foe  difturb  thy  bow'r, 
And  with  barbarian  beak  thy  life  devour  ! 

Oh  !  may  no  ruthlefs  torrent  of  the  iky, 
Overwhelming,  force  thee  from  thy  dewy  feat ; 
Nor  tempefts  tear  thee  from  thy  green  retreat, 

And  bid  thee  'midft  the  humming  myriads  die  !' 

QUEEN  of  the  infeft  world,  what  leaves  delight  ? 

Of  fueh  thefe  willing  hands  a  bow'r  fhall  form, 
To  guard  thee  from  the  milling  rains  of  night, 

And  hide  thee  from  the  wild  wing  of  the  ftorm. 

Sweet  Child  of  Stillnefs,  'midft  the  awful  calm 
Of  pauimg  NATURE  thou  art  pleas'd  to  dwell; 

Jn  happy  iilence  to  enjoy  thy  balm, 

And  flied  through  life  a  luftre  round  thy  cell. 

How  diff'rent  man,  the  imp  of  noifeand  flrife, 
Who  courts  the  ftorm  that  tears  and  darkens  life ; 

Bleft  when-  the  paflions  wild  the  foul  invade  ! 
How  nobler  far  to  bid  thofe  whirlwinds  ceafe,. 
To  tafte,  like  thee,  the  luxury,  of  peace, 

And,  filent,  fhine  in  folitude  and  fliade  !'. 


THE 


T  !•;  R 


RIGHTS    OF    KINGS, 

O* 

LOYAL    ODES 

TO 

DISLOYAL   ACADEMICIANS* 


TK  uatt*  9i^ov  (KTlon  AN  ACR  BON. 

TjfciM  for  a  MIOHTY  MONARCH  to  be  le:  ( .' 

f  ray  were  you  drunk,  or  nu«l,  Sir?,  or  b--.'eviir 


TO    THE    READER. 

GENTLE    READER, 

T^HE  foundation  of  the  following  Odes  is  {imply  this— 
•**  The  President  of  the  Royal  Academy  %  happy  to  be 
able  to  gratify  our  amiable  Monarch  in  the  minuteft  of 
his  predilections,  reported  lately  to  the  Academicians  his 
Majefty's  defire,  that  a  Mr.  LAURENCE  might  be  added 
to  the  lift  of  R.  A.'s,  his  Majefty,  from  his  fuperior 
knowledge  in  painting,  being  -perfeftly  convinced  of  this 
young  Artift's  uncommon  abilities,  and  confequently  fair 
pretenfions  to  the  honour.  Notwithstanding  the  Royal 
wifh,  and  the  wifh  of  the  Prefident,  and  (under  the 
rofe !  ! !)  the  wifh  of  Mr.  BEN  j  AM  IN  WEST,  the  Windfor 
oracle  of  paint,  and  painter  of  hiftory,  the  R.  A.'s 
received  the  annunciation  of  his  Majefty's  wim,  Sir 
JOSHUA'S  wifh,  Mr.  WEST'S  wifh,  with  the  moft  ineffable 
fang-froid,  not  to  call  it  by  the  harder  name,  difguft. 
The  annunciation  happening  on  the  night  of  an  election 
of  Aflbciates,  at  which  Mr.  LAURENCE  ought  to  have 
been  elected  an  AfTociate  (a  ftep  neceflary  to  the  more 
exalted  one  of  R.  A.) — behold  the  obftinacy  of  thefe 
Royal  mules  ! — the  number  of  votes  in  favour  of  Mr. 
LAURENCE  amounted  to  juft  three,  and  that  of  His  op 
ponent,  Mr.  WH,EATLEY,  to  fixteen  !  !  ! — Indignant  and 
loyal  Reader,  the  Lyric  Mufe,  who  has  uniformly  at 
tacked  Meannefs,  Folly,  Impudence,  Avarice,  and  Ig 
norance,  from  her  cradle,  caught  fire  at  the  above  impor 
tant  event,  and  moft  loyally  poured  forth  the  following' 
Odes,  replete  with  their  ufual  fublimity. 


( 


P  R  O  E  M  I  U  M. 


TO    THE    PUBLIC. 

/?«  ENTLES  !  behold  a  poor  plain-fpoken  man  ! 
^    Modeft  as  ADDIHGTON  our  SPBA.KEK, 
Amid  ft  Saint  Stephen's  patriotic  clan, 

Where  INNOCENCE  io  meek  did  ne'er  look  meeker; 

When  with  much  palpitation,  and  much  dread, 
He  turn'd  about  his  pretty  Speaker's  head, 

One  leg  juft  rais'd  to  hop  into  the  chair  ; 
Tuft  like  a  CAT  in  rain  amid  the  ftreet, 
That  fears  to  wet  her  white  and  velvet  feet, 

Which  for  a  haudfome  gutter-leap  prepare  I 

M  I  fear  I  am  a  moft  unworthy  choice," 

Said  Mifltr  SPEAK  lift,  with  4  lamb-like  voice  ! 

44  I  have  but  one  itep  more,"  he  c: 
Keeping  his  head  coquettiflii 

How  much  like  CHRISTIE,  with  his  hammer  raised, 
(CHRISTIE,  a  public  Speaker  too,  fo  prais'd) 
Looking  around  him,  limbering,  fmiling,  bowiitg, 
Then  crying  —  "  Gem  men,  going,  going,  going!'* 


•  Gentles  all,  a  modeft  Bard  and  ftiv, 
With  dove-like  mien,  and  ground  -exploring  eye; 
Modeft  as  Afiyfor  SPEAK  EI  at  tl.e  LORDS, 

When  lowly  he  did  Majefty  befeech 
T*  allow  his  humble  COMMONS  ufe  of  words; 
That  is  to  fay,  a  liberty  of  fpcech  : 

Alf* 


21O 

Alfo  to  have  at  times  a  tete-a-tete^ 
Becaufe  a  confab  royal  is  a  treat ; 
Indeed  forfubjefls  much  too  rich, 
As  wife  KING  JAMES  aflerted  the  itch : 

ijkewife  to  have  the  privilege  of  TICK, 

Becaufe  a  BAILIFF  is  a  meddling  rogue, 
Who,  with  a  hand  of  iron,  or  a  (tick, 

Stoppeth  the  travels  of  our  men  of  vogue  ! 
Barbarian  act,  that  men  of  worfbip  frets  ! 
Who  think  of  Joftier  things  that  idle  debts ; 

Deep  pond'ring  ever  on  the  NATION'S  good, 
Not  oil  great  greafy  butchers,  taylor  knaves, 
Mercers  and  clammy  grocers — compter  Haves, 

Who,  by  their  {linking  fweat,  procure  their  food. 

Tradefmen  !  a  fet  of  vulgar  fwine ; 
Crutches  for  FORTUNE  irra  deep  decline  : 
Lo !  what  a  tradefman's  good  for,  and  la  all— 
A  wooden  buttrefs  for  a  tott'ring  wall  I 

With  tears  have  I  beheld  full  many  a  'S  QUIRE 
Moft  brutally  by  Bailiffs  dragg'd  along; 

For  turnpike,  furniture,  or  houle's  hire, 

Horfe,  wages,  coach,  or  fome  fuch  idle  fong  I 

Now  SQUIRE'S  a  title  of  much  reputation — • 
Belongs  to  people  of  no — occupation ; 
Who  cannot  (in  their  looks  we  read  it) 
Get,  for  a  mutton-chop,  a  little  credit ! 
Poor  Gentlemen  !  how  hard,  alas !  their  fate, 
To  knuckle  to  fuch  nuifances  of  State  ! 

Gentles,  to  you,  well  pleas'd,  I  turn  again, 
Quitting  my  fav'rite  rambling  ftrain  ; 
Leaving  belov'd,  admir'd,  ador'd  digrefiion, 
So  praftis'd  by  us  men  of  cde-profejfion, 
When  we  have  fcarcely  aught  to  fing  or  fay, 
Andiheaking  FANCY  quits  the  lyric  lay. 


I  da 


PKOEMIUM.  Ill 

I  do  remcmbe r ! — Wh.v  ? — That  tm:s  my  pen. 
Licentious,  flander'd  crovn-and-fceptre  men  ! 
44  Readers,  one  moment  look  me  in  the  face; 
44  A  Poet  not  quite  deftitute  of  grace ; 

I  anfwer  mte  not  bred  in  H.ATT'KY'«;  fchools— 
'•   Arc  you,  or  are  you  not,  a  fet  of  fools  > 
'*  1'i  iming  your  faith  on  G*  ANDKUR'S  flccve— 
44  Say,  do  yon,  in  your  conferences,  believe, 

44  That  M s  never  can  be  weak  nor  mean ; 

"  And  that  a  M 's  wife,  yclept  a , 

4<  May  not  (and  why  not  •)  be  a  downright  fl-y, 
44  Form'd  of  the  coarfeft  rags  of  NATURE'S  (hop.* 
44  I  read  the  anfwer  in  each  vifagc— "  Nor" 
••  O  Jefu  !  can  it  be  ?  and  if  it  fo  ? 
*4  Put  down  n»v  lxx>k— 
"  Give  it  not  onr  contaminating  look  : 
'*  I  ftare  on  you  with  pity — nay,  with  pain  — 
"  Ki:  \K-.I.EY  mall  tols  your  m<  n;y  back  ajpiin  : 
**  ( Jet  your  crowns  flwv'd,  poor  foul's — I  wilii  you  well ; 
**  And  hear  me — Bedlam  lias  a  vacant  cell." 

Such  were  the  ftanzas  thnt  I  wrote  of  yore, 

When  tainted  by  a  King-deriding  Clan  : 
But  uow  I  curie  thofe  tf»ffso°er  and  o'er — 
invert  quite — a  fweet  and  alter'd  man  : 

The  facred  force  of  SOV'REIONTY  I  feel — 
To  ROY  A  1.1  Y'S  ftcrn  port  I  lenrn  to  kneel : 

For  Royalties  are  deem'd  mod  facred  things  ; 
So  facred  by  tha  Courtiers  that  the  fit/tit 

>e  inform 'd  «gaiiill,  and  prov'd  a  libel, 

For  faying — "  P;u  no  confidence  in  Kings!" 

Though  this  indeed  may  be  Interpolation, 

iiuch  as  coin'd  by  Popiih  priefts  and  f  *ar$; 
For,  ah  !   how  hard  'tis  for  imagination 

Monarchs  hypocrites  and  liars  ! 


(       212       ) 

.    THE 

RIGHTS   OF    KINGS. 


ODE  TO  THE  ACADEMICIANS. 

A  M  I  awake,  or  dreaming,  O  ye  Gods  ? 
*^    Alas  !  -in  waking's  favour  lie  the  odds  ! 

The  dev'l  it  is  !  ah  me  !   'tis  really  fo  ! 
How,  Sirs  !  on  Majefty's  proud  corns  to  tread  ! 
Meffieurs  Academicians,  when  you're  dead, 

Where  can  your  Impudencies  hope  to  go  ? 

Refufe  a  Monarch's  mighty  orders  !— 

It  fmells  of  treafon  —  on  rebellion  borders! 

'Sdeath,  Sirs  1  it  was  the  QUEEN'S  fond  wifli  as  v/e!l, 

That  *  Mafter  LAURENCE  fhould  come  in  ! 
Asjainft  a  Queen  fo  gentle  to  rebel! 

^This  is  another  crying  fin  1 


!  —  not  oblige,  in  fuch  a  trifling  thing, 
So  fweet  a  Queen,  and  fuch  a  goodly  King  ! 

A  Queen  uttus'd  to  oppoQtion  weather  — 

At  difappointment  fo  unused  to  ftart  — 

So  full  of  dove  -like  gentleness  her  heart, 
As  if  the  dove  had  lent  its  fofteft  feather, 

That  heart  o-f  gentlcnefs  to  form, 

Unused  (as  I  have  faid)  to  oppofition-ftorm  ! 

*  A  young  portrah-pr.intcr  of  fome  merit. 

4  Ofet 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS..  tt!3 

me  juft  inform  you,  one  and  all, 
Tiiat  Kings  and  Potentates,  both  great  an/i  fmall, 

Horn  to  beliumour'd,  for  ibtilicnct  battle : 
Moft  inftantaneous  too  nmft  be  compliance; 
K  efufal  is  moft  damnable  defiance ; 

Tirey  ftniggle  for't,  like  children  for  the  ratrte. 

IV.it  in  Q\\rftmiJt  fome  diff'rence  lies — 
We  whip  a  bantling  when  it  kicks  and  cries, 

Fully  determin'd  not  to  pleufe  it : 
But,  lo !  the  children  that  polFefs  a  crowa 
(Young  Herculeses)  knock  us  down. 

And,  angry  for  the  bauble,  fitm  it. 

Each  of  you,  Sirs,  has  kept  a  cur,  fxrcliavxce  : 
Poor  wretch,  how  oft  his  eves  with  lightnings  danc^; 

How  he  looks  up  to  Matter  for  a  fmile ! 
Shakes  his  imploring  head  with  wriggling  tail, 
Now  whining  yelps,  now  pawing  to  prevail, 

Eager  with  fuch  anxiety  the  while ; 

And  if  a  pat >#«///«/  blefs  the  whining  fcraper, 
Lord,  how  the  animal  begins  to  caper ! 

Thus  (hould  it  be  with  fubjefhand  great  Kings — 
But  you  are  (hangers  to  thefe  humble  things. 
For  lhame  !  upon  the  courtier's  creed  go  look — 
And  take  a  leaf  from  humble  HA  WKSR'RY'S  book; 
Or  fweet  neck-bending  water-gruel  LEEDS, 
Who  Majeiry  with  pap  of  fiatt'ry  feeds; 

ich  pnp,  if  highly  reliflfd,  will  of  courfe, 
rdcd,  make  hi:  a  OF  THE  Hu. 

Where  was  PREROO  \TIVE  ? — afleep  ! 
A  blockhead,  not  a  better  watch  to  keep 

In  tins  moft  folemn,  nioft  important  hour  ! 
Why  heard  we  not  the  thunder  of  his  voice ; 
Saw  down  your  gullets  crarnm'd  the  royal  choice, 

So  eafy  to  the  iron  arm  of  Power  ? ' 

VOL.  IF,  Why 


OF    KINGS. 

Why  flept  his  fledge,  the  guardian  of  a  crown, 
So  form'd  to  knock  unruly  rafcals  down  ? 
Ah  me  !  PREROGATIVE  feems  nearly  dead  ! 
Behold  his  tott'ring  limbs  and  palfied  head ; 

Sunk  in  their  orbits  his  dim  eyes ; 
Bis  teeth  dropp'd  out ;  and  hark !  his  voice  fo  weak  ; 
A  moufe  behind  the  wainfcot — eunuch  fqueak! 

"  Ah  !  nonfum  qualis  eram"  liow  he  fighs. 
To  ev'ry  body's  call,  ah  !  now  fo  pliant  1 
Sad  fkeleton  of  once  a  fturdy  giant ! 

Poor  bending  fhrivell'd  form,  but  juft  alive, 

Art  thou  that  bully  once — PREROGATIVE  ? 

Where  is  the  mien  of  MARS,  the  eye's  wild  ftare, 

A  meteor  darting  horror  with  its  glare  ? 

How  like  a  BRANDY-DRINKER,  who  on  name 
Feeds  with  a  rofy  beacon-face  at  firft  * 
But,  by  his  enemy  INTEMP'RANCE  curft, 

Yields  to  thatviclorof  mankind  with  (hame; 
Pale,  hobbling,  voicelefs,  crawling  to  decay, 
Juft  like  a  paffing  fhadow,  links  away  ! 

Bedchamber  Lords  are  all  in  ire — 

The  Maids  of  Honour  all  on  fire  ; 

Nay,  though  defpotically  ftrav'd,  the  Cooks, 

Bluff,  on  th'  occalion,  put  on  bull's-beef  looks : 

And  really  this  is  very  grand  behaving, 

So  nobly  to  forgive  the  famous  lhavmg  ! 

•See  Madam  SCHWELLENBERG  moft  cat-like  Hare; 

And  though  no  fav'rite  of  the  King, 
She  cries,  li  I3y  G0/,  //  fnock  and  make  my  hair 

Upright — //  is  fo  Jam  dam  fancy  ting" 

STANHOPE,  perchance,  will  clafp  you  in  his  arms; 
And  PRICE'S  Ghofl,  with  eloquence's  charms, 

Will,  from  his  tomb  upfpringing,  found  applaufe: 
But  know,  I  deem  not  fo  of  EDMUND  BURKE  : 
He  nobly  ftyles  the  deed  "  a  d-nm'd  day's  work  j" 

Superior  he  to  cutting  royal  claws. 


THB    JUGJiTS    OF    KING*.  115 

veryjuftly  thinks  tl>e  human  back 
Should  be  to  Kings  a  fort  of  humble  hack ; 
That  ev'ry  fubjeft  ought  to  wear  a  faddle, 
O'er  which  thofc  great  rough-riders,  Kings,  may  ftraddlc. 


ODE    II. 

'T'HE  fam'd  Aflembly  of  the  French  will  fmile 
•*•    At  this  difgrace  of  our  fair  ifle  : 
Meflieurs  FAYBTTE,  tbe  Great,  and  Co. 
With  tears  of  joy  will  overflow, 
And  order  the  Aflembly  of  the  Nation 
To  fend  you  fwect  congratulation. 

,What  haft  thou  to  complain  of  each,  thou  imp  ? 
Bffcnpar'd  to  Kings,  a  grampus  and  a  mrimp  '. 

!  when  from  Wiodfor  mighty  Kings  arrive, 
.Like  London  mack'rel,  all  alive! 
Terrenes  of  flatt'ry  are  pcepar'd  fo  hot 
By  courtiers — a  deJiuou:>  pepper-pot; 
Which,  to  be  fure,  the  royal  maw  devours, 
Kings  boaftingvery  ftroug'digeitive  pow'rs. 

A  POINTER  thus,  lock'd  up  a  week, 
Half  ftarv'd,  and  longing  fora  (leak; 
Behold  him  now  turn'd  loofe  fo  wild  to  eat — 
Gods !  how  he  gobbles  down  the  broth  and  meat ! 
Yes,  flatt'ry-foups  are  all  prepar'd  fo  hot, 
As  I  have  hinted,  a  fine  pepper  pot : 

Side-di flies  too,  of  qurtfies,  bows,  ar<d  fcrape§, 
With  flare  and  wonder  in  all  forts  of  fliapes ; 
Attentions  darting  from  the  full  ftretch'd  eye, 
That  not  a  roj  al  glance  ,  deeded  by  : 

U  2  Attentions 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 

Attentions  fliarp  asthofe  of  LUMPY,  SMALI-, 
At  cricket  fkill'd  to  catch  the  flying  ball  j 
Whilft  you  fijrvey  (abominable  thing  !) 
With  cold  contempt  the  character  of  King ! 

Think  by  what  royal  bounty  you  are  bleft  ! 

Think  of  the  patronage  to  Painters  all ! 
Not  a  poor  fhallow  rill  confin'd  to  WEST, 

But  torrents  that  like  Niagara  fall ; 

Yes  ;  GEORGE  is  gen'rous — watches  all  your  wants — 
And  pours  his  foil'ring  rains  upon  his  plants. 
Then,  meeting  fuch  a  friend,  ye  ought  to  cryy 
"  Glory  be  to  GEORGE  on  high! 

Thus,  when,  two  clouds  approach,  a  wand'ring  pair, 
As  oft  it  happens,  'mid  their  walks  in  air ; 
Though  one  be  rich,  the  other  poor, 

In  rare  elefh-ic  matter,  how  they  greet  I 

With  what  delight  they  feem  to  meet ; 
And,  pleas'd,  with  all  the  fire  of  friendmip  roar  ! 

GEORGE,  O  ye  ragamuffins,  loves  you  dearly; 
Sends  you  rare  pictures  for  improvement  yearly ; 

Buys  up  your  works,  and  much  commiflion  gives 
To  Hift'ry,  Portrait,  Landfcape-men — 
Careful  as  of  a  chicken  a  good  hen : 

Thus  like  an  Alderman  each  Limner  lives. 

Yes;  a  good  hen — I  fee  her  wing  difplay'd, 
To  warm,  protect  you  with  parental  made  : 

But  you,  a  ilock  of  vile  rebellious  chicken, 
Are  all  for  mounting  on  your  mother's  back, 
With  threat'ning  beak  and  noify  faucy  clack, 

Her  eyes  out  trying  to  be  picking  ; 

Againfl  her  blafphemoufly  fwearing : 
This  is  undutiful  beyond  all  bearing. 

Where'ci 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 

Where'er  the  plaintive  cry  of  WANT  appears, 

Cock'd,  like  a  greyhound's,  are  the  King's  two  ears  : 

Ready  for  fuch  poor  wights  to  bake  and  brew  ! 

A  cir  cum  ft  a  nee  believ'd  by  very  few ! 

Thus,  to  PHILOSOPHY'S  furprife, 

A  pin  can  lead  the  lightning  of  the  /kies ! 


ODE      HI. 

T5EHOLD,  his  Majefty  is  in  a  paffion  ! 

•*-*  Tremble,  ye  rogues,  and  tremble  all  the  nation  ! 

Supnofe  he  takes  it  in  his  royal  head 

To  ftrike  your  Academic  Idol  dead ; 

Knock  down  your  HOUSE,  diflblve  you  in  his  ire, 

And  drip  you  of  your  boafted  title—  'Sou IRE  ! 

To  bend  a  piece  of  iron  to  your  will, 
You  always  make  that  iron  hot ; 

For  then  it  a'fks  but  little  force  and  (kill- 
Its  fturdinefs  is  quite  forgot : 

But,  lo  !  it  is  quite  otherwife  with  man ! 
Make  him  red-hot,  and  bend  him  as  you  can  : 
So  widely  different  are  the  metals, 
Compofing  man,  or  kings  indeed,  and  kettles  ! 

Oft  has  he  left  his  Queen  and  Windfor  tow'rs, 

Oft  from  the  fafcinating  Dairy  flown, 
To  raife  the  Arts  with  all  his  mighty  pow'rs, 

And  hold  high  converfe  with  the  folks  of  TOWN  : 

From  lofty  CARTHAGE  thus,  by  JOVE'S  decree, 
On  nobler  works  than  thofe  of  love,  intent, 
TINEAS  from  the  widow  DIDO  went, 

And,  full  of  piety,  put  off  to  fea! 

U  3  Va  n 


THE    RIGHTS    Of    KINGS.. 

Vain  of  your  'academic  honours,  vain, 

I  fay -again, 
Idly  you  deem'd  yoiirfelves  the  firft  of  men  ; 

And  then, 

You  fpurn'd  the  hand  which  rais'd  you  into  notio— 
By  all  the  Gods,  unfortunately,  fo  'tis  ! 

Full  oft,  by  FORTUNE,  man  is  play'd  a  trick  j 
Too  often  ruyi'd  by  her  glitt'ring  toys, 

Juft  like  the  candle's  lucklefs  wick 

Surrounded  by  the  Ivvfcre  that  deftroys. 


ODE    IV. 

T3ESISTANCE  turns  me,  like  a  napkin,  .pale ; 
AV     REBELLION  chilis  me  into  ftone; 
44  Tell  not  in  Gath  the  trie, 

"  Nor  publifh  in  the  ftreets  of  Afcalon." 

Copy  the  manners  of  a  Court : 
There  (thanks  to  EDUCA  i  ION  for't) 

SUBMISSION  cow  'ring  creeps,  with  fearful  eye9 
TJnceafing  bends  the  willowy  neck  to  ground, 
In  rev'rence  abje<5t  and  profound, 

Too  humbly  modeft  to  behold  the  fky : 

There,  all  ajive  too,  HAWK  ATTENTION  fits, 
To  ftudy  Royal  HUMOUR'S  various  fits; 

With  wings  expanded,  ready  to  fly  poft, 
To  Eaft,  to  Weft,  to  North,  or  South, 
To  cater  for  a  Monarch's  mighty  mouth, 

To  get  him  bak'd,  or  grill'd,  or  boil'd,  or  roaft : 

Now  fcampers  to  pick  -up  each  bit  of  news, 
Which  full-fed  London,  ev'ry  moment  fp— si 

Tten 


THE  '.RIGHTS  OF  QCCKOS. 

Then  to  the  Pabce  the  rich  treafure  bean, 
And  pours  the -whole  into  the  royal  ears. 

There  ADULATION,  with  her  filvertongu?, 
Sweeter  than  Philomela's  fweeteft  fong, 

Says  unto  Majefty  full  things  ! 
Tells  him  that  C^SAR  won  not  half  irY&mt; 
That  ALEXANDER  was  a  childHh  name, 

Compar'd  to  his — the  King  of  KINGS  ! 

Now  finiling,  flaring  huge  furprife, 

With  fuch  a  brace  of  wonder-looking  eves, 

On  all  the  words  from  Majefty  that  dart; 
As  if  bright  gems,  as  large  as  eggs  of  pullet, 
Flow'd  from  the  King's  Golconda  gullet, 

Enough,  indeed,  to  load  a  cart : 
IJer  mouth  fo  pieas'd  the  treasures-  to  devour  ' 
Wide  as  the  port-hole  of  a  Seventy-four ! 

Such  is  the  plfture  of  a  Palace  fcene, 
Drawn  by  an  amateur,  I  ween  : 
The  outline  chaile,  and  eafy  flowing ; 
The  colouring  not  a  whit  too  glowing. 
Such,  fuch  is  ADULATION,  charming  maid  ! 
Whofe  couduft  you -won't  copy,  I'm  afrakl. 


ODE      V. 

A  T  opposition,  to  !  the  foul  demurs  r 
•^*>     At  fuch  the  royal  mind  revolts; 
Hates  it  as  much  as  fticks  the  cats  and  curs, 
Or  curbs,  and  whips,  and  fpurs,  high-mettled  colt?, 


Toe 


220  THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 

Too  well  I  know  that  you  the  great  defpife ; 
Molehills,  inftead  of  mountains,  in  your  eyes : 

'Tis  wrong ! 
I  often  rev'rence  GRANDEUR  in  my  foiig. 

Go,  Sirs,  to  Court,  upon  a  gala  day : 

Soon  as  the  foldiers  cry  aloud,  "  Make  way  !" 

How  glorioufly  the  Courtiers  ftrut  it  by, 
In  gorgeous  clothes  of  filk  and  gold, 
With  luch  an  elevated  front,  and  bold, 

With  fuch  ftate-confequence  in  either  eye ; 

So  much  above  the  ground  on  which  they  ftrut, 
So  ftiff,  fo  ftake-like,  all  the  pompous  pack, 

As  though  Dame  NATURE  had  forgot  to  put 
The  joints  of  manners  to  the  neck  and  back. 

O  glorious  fight !  this  no  one  dares  deny : 

And,  lo  !  I'd  lay  confiderable  odds, 
That  man  who  ne'er  divinities  did  fpy, 

Would  really  take  them  for  a  pack,  of  gods ! 

Grant  that  the  Great  are  ignorant — what  then  ? 
Still  are  they  folks  of  worfhip— Kill  great  men  j 
Though  flogg'd  through  fchools,   and  bamnYd  from  a 
college, 

Although  not  one  inch  broad  their  minds,  I  ween ; 
The  utmoft  boundary  of  all  their  knowledge, 

The  Game-aft  and  JOHN  NICHOLS'  ~ 


Still  men  of  worfhip  muft  they  all  appear, 
BEINGS  we  little  people  fliould  revere  ! 

'Tis  nat'ral  to  revere  the  folk  on  high ; 
To  rev'rence,  lo  !  our  infancies  are  led ! 

Well  do  I  recoiled  how  oft  my  eye 
Ador'd  the  Kings  and  Queens  of  Gingerbread : 

King  David,  Solomon,  and  that  brave  Queen  * 
Who  rode  fo  far  to  fee,  and  to  be  feen : 

*  Her  Majefty  of  Sheba. 

Though 


THE  RIGHTS  OF  KINGS.          221 


Though  hungry  as  a  hound,  with  pence  in  (lore, 
When  in  their  glory  on  the  flails  I  meet  'em; 

Though  longing  to  devour  them  o'er  and  o'er, 
I  deenYd  it  facrilcge  to  cat  'em  ! 


ODE      VI. 

'"PHE  light  of  REASON  is  a  little  ray, 
•*•    But  ftill  it  (hows  us  the  righ*  way  : 
Indeed,  the  GENTLEWOMAN' makes  no  blaze, 
No  bonfire  tempting  a  fool's  eye  to  gaze — 
A  modefl  dame,  remote,  and  calm,  and  coy, 
And  never  playeth  gambols,  to  deftroy. 

But  ERROR,  what  a  meretricious  jade, 
Amidft  her  tracklefs  wilds  immcrs'd  in  (hade, 

To  tempt  the  filly  and  unwary  ! 
Her  meteor,  lo  !  flic  lights  here',  there, 
Up,  down,  (he  dances  it — now  far,  now  near, 

In  mad  and  riotous  vagary. 

On  the  fools  wander,  in  purfuit  fo  (lout, 
And  love  of  this  (ame  garifli  light? 

All  on  a  fudden  £oes  this  meteor  out ; 

And  caught,  hke  badgers,  inthefack  of  night, 

Blimd'ring.  and  trying  to  get  back  age*, 
They  roll  about  in  vain,  poor  men. 

Thus  your  Academicians  all  proceed  ! 
You  are  thofc  BADGERS,  Gentlemen,  indeed! 
There  feems  an  ardent  (pint,  to  my  mind, 
A  Revolution  fpirit,  'mongft  mankind  : 
A  fpark  will  now  fet  kingdoms  in  a  blaze, 
That  would  not  fire  a  barn  in  former  days ; 
So  lately  turn'd  to  touchwood  is  each  State — 
So  whimfical,  indeed,  the  ways  of  FATE  ! 


Pray, 


222,  THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 

Pray,  Sirs,  both  old  and  voting,  ye  bright  and  madefy, 
Did  ever  you  make  cuckoldom  your  fludy  ? 
P'rhaps  «o/,  if  rightly  I  divine- 
But,  Gentlemen,  I've  made  it  mine. 

This  ftate  of  man,  and  let  me  add  obfcenity, 
Is  not  a  fituadon  of  betweenity, 

As  fome  word  coiners  are  difpos'd  to  call't — 
Meaning  a  mawkifh,  as-it-ivere-ifli  ftate, 
Containing  neither  love  nor  hate — 

A  fort  of  water-gruel  withouf  fait. 

Know  then,  that  CUCKOLDOM'S  all  eye,  all  ear, 
All  fmeli,  all  tafte,  and,  faith  !  all  feeling: 

His  fenfes  (harp  as  thofe  of  cats  appear, 

To  right,  to  left — as  quick  as  foldier's  wheeling, 

To  catch  a  wife's  bad  fame,  alas  !  not  praife!  J 

Thus  fetting  traps  to  fqueeze  his  future  days ; 

Watering  whh  one  eternal  tear  the  eye,. , 
And  making  lovely  LIFE  one  lengthen'd  figh: 
A  pair  of  antlers  his — he  fits  on  thorns — 
He  nothing  lees  but  horns,  horns,  horns  ! 

Nay,  to  the  Cuckold  in  idea,  lo  ! 

On  either  fide  his  head  a  horn  appears 
Tremendous !  but  which  all  his  neighbours  know 

Are  only  one  huge  pair  of  afs's  ears. 

Then  pray  difmifs  your  jealoufies  and  frights ; 

Our  M h  means  not  to  invade  your  rights ; 

It  never,  never  was  a  .Royal  plan — 

"  For  BRUTUS  is  an  honourable  man  *•" 

Greater  from  CHAMBERS  fLouLd  be  all  your  fears, 

Whofe  Ho  USE  4s  tumbling  frft  aboyt  y.our  ears. 


ODE 


THE    RIGHTS    OP    KlKOS.  22J 


ODE      VII. 

King  (God  grace  him)  wiflies  you  toflirtc  : 
He  rais'a  the  building  with  your  cafli  and  mine. 
But  what  is  wealth  ?  what,  thoufands  ?  trifling  things ! 
To  fwell  the  mighty  volume  of  its  fame, 
He  call'd  it  ROYAL— thus  he  gave  the  name; 
Which  provcth  the  munificence  of  Kings — 
Heav'ns,  what  a  prefent !  ah,  well  worth  pofleffing ! 
Lo,  on  a  level  with  a  Bifliop's  bleflitig  ! 

DOMITIAN  (fo  fays  HIST'RY,  with  a  figh) 
Would  quit  affairs  of  ftate,  to  hunt  a  fly  : 
But  we  have  no  fuch  trifle-hunting  Kings- 
Europe  knows  no  fuch  miferable  things  ! 
Her  Princes  gallop  on  a  larger  fcale ; 
No  flippant  minnow,  but  the  flound'ring  whale  ! 

GEORGE  wiflies  not  to  give  the  dome  a  grave ; 

Not  to  deftroy,  he  cometh — but  to  fave : 

Not  like  Dame  NATURE,  who  com pofes  forms 

The  faireft  for  the  fafcinated  eye; 
Then  fends  her  lightnings,  floods,  and  ftorms, 

To  bid  the  beauteou^  flowrets  die  ! 

When  once  a  woman's  handfome,  fmart,  and  clever, 

od's  name  let  her  bloom  for  ever ! 
Ah  !  could  I  f natch  TIME'S  ploughfhare  from  his  hand, 
Who,  with  that  eafe  a  farmer  fldrts  his  land, 
Furrows  fo  cruelly  o'er  the  faireft  face! 

Helen tlefs  as  i  Mohawk,  on  he  goes, 

Cuts  up  the  lily  and  theroie, 
Roots  upeacu  :rl,  and  bends  tbe  neck  of  grace-t- 

Ah  !   could  I  fimply  do  but  this, 
,  The  fweeieft  lips  would  give  nae  many  a  kifs. 

2  By 


£24  THE  RIGHTS  OF  KINGS* 

By  raifing,  then  deftroying,  like  a  Turk, 
if  feems  as  though  TIME  did  not  like  his  work ; 
As  though  he  wanted  fomething  better  dill, 
Than  e'er  was  manufaclur'd  at  his  mill. 

And  yet  how  exquifite,  of  charms  the  crop 
In  Mefdames  *  JOHNSON'S,  *  KELLY'S,  *  WINDSOR'S 
{hop, 

Or  rather  hot-houfe ! — Lprd,  if  fond  of  billing, 
What  grace,  for  guineas  we  may  find  ! 
Nay,  in  the  ftreets,  if  cheapness  fuits  our  mind ! 

We  purchafe  Cleopatra's  for  a  fhilling ! 

0  BEAUTY,  how  thou  ftealeft  fife  away  ! 

Born,  thou  fweet  WITCH,  thy  POET  to  beguile! 
Thy  fool,  idolater,  by  night,  by  day, 

He  feels  a  chain  in  ev'ry  imile. 
Thou  Tyrant  of  my  heart,  let  go  my  pen — 

1  muft,  will  fpeak  to  Academic  men. 

Sks  !  fhould  the  ROYAL  EAGLE,  from  his  height, 
Dart  on  your  puny  forms,  his  eye  of  flame, 

And  wanton,  juft  to  exercife  his  might, 
(Deeming  you  no  igno&Ie  game) 

Should  pounce  on  your  owl  backs,  fo  flout, 

How  would  i  cloui  of  feathers  fly  about ! 

The  thunder  of  his  beak,  for  falling,  ripe, 

What  figures  you  would  cut  within  his  gripe! 

This  can  the  KING  OF  ISLES  perform — I  know  it: 
Yet,  though  of  pow'r  fo  full,  he  will  not  mow  it. 
Too  foon  your  band  its  weaknefs  would  deplore  ! 
A  crab  in  a  cow's  mouth — no  more ! 

Say,  don't  ye  tremble  at  th'  affronted  name  ? 
Where  lurks  the  burning  blulh  of  fhame  ? 
Alas !  that  fymptom  of  remaining  grace 
Knows  not  to  tinge  an  Academic  face  ! 

*  The  PritftefTes  of  the  Cyprian  Goddefs. 

Sons 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KIXO8. 

Sons  of  the  Dev'11ike\^u,  rebellious,  hear— 
It  is  for  Kings  to  burden — us  to  bear. 

I  own  I've  faid  (and  glory  in  the  advice),   . 

**  Be  not,  O  king,  as  ufual,  over  nue  : 

"  Dread  Sire,  (to  take  a  phrafe  from  CALIBAN) 

"  Bite  'em"— 
"  To  pour  a  heavier  vengeance  on  the  clan, 

«  Knight  'em." 


ODE      IX. 

'TMIE  modern  French  deem  Monarch?  much  like  fire, 
•*•    Which  a  good  looking-after  doth  require- 

Too  much  inclin'd  to  prove  an  evil  ; 
A  fire  that  needeth  to  be  well-fecur'd, 
WHliron'cl,  pinion'd,  and  imraiir'd, 

Which  otherwife  would  play  the  devil  : 
Yet  if  on  politics  a  barj  may  prate, 
I  deem  their  Monarch's  jacket  rather  (trait. 
MESDAMES  POISSARDES,  'twas  (hockingly  ill-bred, 
To  fling  your  flounders  at  your  MONAICH'S  head. 
Though,  "YEN  us-like,  descended  from  the  flood, 
'Twa<?  bafe,  ye  fweet  DIVINITIES  of  Mud. 
To  this  great'  truth,  a  UNIVERSE  agrees, 
44  He  who  lies  tltxn  "Jt'tth  Jogs,  ivilt  rt/c 


How  applicable  !  lo,  you  took  advice, 
Ton  fure,  from  that  ARCH-DEVIL,  DOCTOR  PRICE, 
And  STANHOPE  —  whofo  praife  the  French  and  clap, 
For  catching  Kings,  like  pole-cats,  in  a  trap. 

Oh,  may  I  never  be  —  but  iixre  I  King, 

Like  ropes  fliould  I  confider  laws  ; 
Preventing,  when  I  wifli'd  it,  a  good  fpring  — 

Hand-  cuffs  to  bind  my  lion  claws. 

VOL,  II.  X  Afet 


THE  RIGHTS  OF  KINGS., 

A  fet  of  articles  implies  miftruft — 

How  can  the  LORD"*  ANOINTED  be  unjufl  > 

We  never  fhould  believe  fuch  things 

As  doubt  the  wifdom  of  the  K$NG  OF  Kifrcs :    s 

What  the  LORD  choofes  mujl  be  good, 

Although  he  fend  us  but  a  piece  of  wood. 

Ev'n  *  CHESTERFIELD,  that  atheiflic  dog, 

Declares  he  has  a  rev'rencefor  KING  LOG. 

"  When  will  that  lucky  day  be  born  that  brings 
"  A  bridle  for  the  arrogance  of  Kings  ? 

*'  Too  flowly  moves,  alas  !  the  loit'ring  hoirr. 
*£  When  will  thofe  tyrants  ceafe  to  fancy  Man 
"  A  Dog  in  PROVIDENCE'S  lev'lling  plan, 

"  To  crouch  and  lick  the  blood- flain'd  rods  of  POW'R  ?" 
Such  is  your  mod  unkindly  cry; 
Arid  to,  I  tell  it  with  a  figh  ! 

Rank  is  in  man  the  itch  of  oppofition, 
Which  wanteth  a  good  whip  for  a  phyfician. 

You  keep  bad  company  that  turns  your  head- 
So  hungrily  you  ev'ry  thing  devourf 
That  tends  to  clip  the  wings  of  royal  pow'r, 

Which  like  the  eagle's  pinion  ought  to  fpread ; 
So  greedily  fuck  in  REBELLION'S  breath, 
That  wafts  the  feeds  of  IMPUDENCE  and  DEATH. 

Thus,  hound-like,  at  a  Lord-Mayor's  feaft, 
A  COMMON-COUNCILMAN,  abeafl, 
On  ev'ry  feafon'd  difh  fo  hungry  fluffs — 
Uubuttoris,  wipes  the  fweat  away,  and  puffs. 

Poor  fool !  he  fwallows  rheumatifm  and  gout, 

Afthma  and  apoplexy — and  more  ills 
Than  Doctors,  with  their  knowledges  fo  flout, 

Can  vanquifh  with  their  bolufes  and  pills ! 

*  «<  I  confefs  I  have  fome  regard  for  KING  LOG."  Vide  his  Letters. 

But, 


THE    miGHT*    Of    KINGS.  227 

But,  Sirs,  you  muft  be  cautious  how  you  act ; 

Attorney-General  is  no  reafoning  thing  ! 
'Tis  an  indubitable  fael, 

This  fellow  is  the  creature  of  a  King ; 
His  eagle — thunder-bearer — loud  his  try — 
And  "  Inftant  vengeance"  is  his  fole  reply. 
'Th  dangerous  to  (hake  hands  with  fuch  hard  claw?, 
His  gripe  enough  to  make  the  braveft  paufc ! 

Then  be  not  at  your  midnight  orgies  feen, 
Buzzing  opinions  upon  King  and  Queen. 
Ah  !  fliould  he  fally  forth  fo  ftrong,, 
Amidft  your  wantonntfs  of  fpeech  and  fong; 
TJulii.'d  by  mercy,  \ou  will  fee  I  hi*"  gripe, 
Stopping  the  melody  of  many  a  pipe. 
Thus,  at  the  folemn,  ftill,  and  funlefs  hour, 
When  to  their  fports  the  infeft  nations  pour : 

In  airy-tumult  blefs'd,  the  light-wing'd  throng, 

Thoughtlefs  ot  enemies  in  ambufcade, 
Hums  to  NIGHT'S  liit'ning  ear  the  choral  fong, 

And  wantons  through  the  boundiefs  fields  of  (hade ; 
When,  lo!  the  moufe-Uc'd  DEMON  of  the  gloom. 
Efpying,  Limgry  meditates  their  doom ! 

Bounce,  from  his  hole  fo  fecret  burfts  the  BAT, 
.  To  i.o         .        :  cy,  moderation,  loft  ! 
Behold  him  Tally  on  the  humming  hoft, 
And  rn'ird'rous  overturn  the  tribes  of  GN>AT  ; 
Nimbly  from  ,i^ht  to  left,  like  TIPPOO,  wheel, 
And  fnap  ten  tboufand  prisoners  at  a  meal ! 


X  2 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 


O  D  E    X. 

TTOW  plcafant  'tis  the  Courtier  clan  to  fee ! 

1  *  So  prompt  to  drop  to  Majefty  the  knee  j 

To  ftart,  to  run,  to  leap,  to  fly  ; 

And  gambol  in  t-he  Royal  eye  ! 

And,  if  expe&ant  of  fome  high  employ, 

How  kicks  the  heart  againfl  the  ribs,  for  joy  ! 

How  rich  the  mcenfe  to  the  Royal  nofe  ! 

How  liqnidly  the  oil  pf  FLATTERY  flows ! 

But  mould  the  Monarch  turn  from  fwcet  to  four, 

Which  cometh  oft  to  pafs  in  half  an  hour, 

How  alter'd  inftantly  the  CourtieV  clan ! 

How  faint !  how  pale  !  how  woe-begone,  and  wan  ! 

Thus  CORYDON,  betroth'd  to  DELIA'S  charms, 
In  fancy  holds  her  ever  in  his  arms*. 

In  mad'ning  fancy,  cheeks,  eye?,  lips  devours ; 
iPlays  with  the  ringlets  that  all  flaxen  flow 
Jn  rich  luxuiance  o'er  a  brtall  of  fnow, 

And  on  that  breali  the  foul  of  rapture  pours. 

NIGHT  too  entrances — SLUMBER  brings  the  dream- 
Gives  to  his  lips  his  IDOL'S  fweeteft  kifs; 

Dids  the  wild  heart,  high  panting,  fwells  its  flream, 
And  deluge  every  nerve  with  blifs : 

But  if  his  NYMPH  unfortunately  frowns, 

Sad,  chapfall'n,  lo  ]  he  hangs  himfelf,  or  drowns ! 

Oh,  try  with  blifs  his  moments  to  beguile  : 
Strive  not  to  make  your  Sov'reign  frown — but  fmile  : 
Sublime  are  Royal  nods— -moft  precious  things  I— 
Then,  to  be  ivlnijlhd  to  by  Kings ! 

To  have  him  lean  familiar  on  one's  moulder, 
Becoming  thus  the  royal  arm-upholder^ 

A  heart 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS.  22<) 

A  heart  of  very  ftone  muft  ghd  ! 
Oh  !  would  fome  King  fo  far  himfclf  demean, 
As  on  my  fhoulder  but  for  once  to  lean, 

Th'  excefs  of  joy  would  nearly  make  me  mad  ! 
How  on  the  honour'd  garment  I  fliould  dote, 
And  think  a  glory  blaz'd  around  the  coat ! 

Bleft,  I  (hould  make  this  coat  my  coat  of  arms, 
In  fancy  gltit'ring  with  a  thoufand  charms ; 

And  (how  my  children's  children  o'er  and  o'er  : 
44  Here,  Babies,"  I  fliould  fay,  "  with  awe  behold 
14  This  coat — worth  fifty  times  its  weight  in  gold  : 

44  This  very,  very  coat,  your  grandfire  wore ! 

44  Here,"  pointing  to  the  moulder,  I  mould  fay, 
44  Here  Majelh  *s  wn  hand  fo  facred  lay  :'' 

Then  p'rhaps  repeat  fonje  fpeech  the  King  might  utter ; 
As — "  Peter,  how  go  the  (heep  a  fcore  ?  what  ?  what  ? 
44  What's  cheapeft  meat  to  make  a  bullock  fat  ? 

44  Hae  ?  hx  ?  what,  what's  the  price  of  country  butter.?" 

Then  fliould  I,  ftrutting,  give  myfelf  an  air, 
And  deem  my  houfe  adorn'd  with  immortality  : 

Thus  Ihould  I  make  my  children,  calf-like,  Hare, 
And  fancy  grandfather  a  man  of  quality  : 

And  yet,  not  (tupping  here,  with  cheerful  note, 

The  Mufe  fhouid  ting  an  ode  upon  the  coat. 

Poor  loft  AMERICA,  high  honours  miffing, 
Knows  nought  of  fmile  and  nod,  and  fweec  hand-kiffing ; 
Knows  nought  of  golden  promifes  of  Kings ; 
Knows  nought  of  coronets,  and  liars,  and  firings : 

In  fplitude  the  lovely  REBEL  fighs  !  * 
But  vainly  drops  the  penitential  tear — 

Deaf  as  the  adder  to  the  Woman's  cries, 
We  fuffer  not  her  wail  to  wound  ou*  ear  : 
For  food,  we  bid  her  hopelefs  children  prowl, 
Ami  wi  h  the  favage  of  the  dt* fere  howl. 


OI>E 


t#E    RIGHTS    OF 


ODE      XI. 

"  IX/TANT  may  be  happy,  if  he  will :" 

1>a  I've  fai'd  it  often,  and  I  think  fo  ftill : 
Do  brines  to  make  the  MILLION  frare; 

K no ^'  then,  each  MORTAL  is  an  aftual  JOVE  ; 

Can  brew  what  weather  he  fhall  moft  approve, 
Or  wind,  or  calm,  or  foul,  or  fair. 

But  here's  the  mifchief— Man's  an  afs,  I  fay ; 

Too  fond  of  thunder,  lightning,  ftorm,  and  rain; 
He  hides  the  charming,  cheerful  ray 

That  fpreads  a  fmile  o'er  hill  and  plain  ! 
.Dark,  he  rnuft  court  the  feu  11,  and  fpade,  and  ihroud— 
The  miftrefs  of  his  foul  muft  be  a  CLOUD  ! 

Who  told  him  that  he  muft  be  curs'd  on  earth  ? — 
The  GOD  of  NATURE  ? — -No  fuch  thing  ! 

HEAV'N  whifper'd  him,  the  moment  of  his  birth, 
"  Don't  cry,  my  lad,  but  dance  and  ling  ; 

'*  Don't  be  too  wife,  and  be  an  ape  : 

•'  In  colours  let  thy  foul  be  drefs'd,  not  crape. 

*'  ROSES  fhall  fmooth  LIFE'S  journey,  and  adorn; 
"  Yet,  mind  me — if,  through  want  of  grace, 
M  Thou  mean'H  to  fling  the  bleffing  in  my  face, 

"  Thou  haft  full  leave  to  tread  upon  a  thorn." 

Yet  fome  there  are,  of  men  I  think  the  worft, 
3?oor  imps !  unhappy,  if  they  can't  be  curs'd-*— 

Fof  ever  brooding  over  MIS'RY'S  eggs, 
As  though  I  ife's  pleafure  were  a  deadly  fin; 
Moufing  for  ever  for  a  gin 

To  catch  their  happinefles  by  the  legs. 

Jy/'n  at  dinner,  fome  will  be  unblefs'd, 
However  gcod  the.  viands,  and  well  drefs'd  : 

They 


TUB    RIGHTS    OF    KINSS. 

They  always  come  to  table  with  a  fcowl, 
Squint  with  a  face  of  verjuice  o'er  each  dim, 
F.uilt  the  poor  flefl),  and  quarrel  with  the  filh, 

Curfe  cook  and  wife,  and  loathing,  eat  and  growl. 

A  cart-load,  lo  !  their  ftomachs  /leal, 
Yet  fwcar  they  cannot  make  a  meal. 

I  like  not  the  bluc-devil-huntiug-crew  ! 
I  hate  to  drop  the  difcontented  jaw  ! 

O  let  me  NATURE'S  iimple  fmile  purfue, 
And  pick  ev'n  pleafure  from  a  ftraw  ! 


ODE      XII. 

HHREAT  SOV'REIGNS,  Sirs,  with  more  reijped,  I  beg 
•*>    To  Thrones,  with  due  d«.orum%  make  a  le«?  ; 

Ev'n  tkofe  are  iacred,  though  but  empty  chain  : 
There  lurks  in  Thrones  ^fomcthin^  thoueh  but  wood, 
That  thrill*  with  awet^e  vulgar  mats  of  blood, 

And  fills  the  mouth  and  eye  with  gapes  and  ftares  : 

WUhing  by  no  means  to  affront, 
I  wonder  what's  the  meaning  on't  ! 

Louis  QUATOIZB  was  quite  the  Frenchman's  GOD; 
Who  made  all  nations  tremble  at  his  nod  ; 

Married  Sc  AKRON'S  OK!  widow,  dry  and  froufy  ; 
Got  deep  in  debt,  the  conftable  out-ran  ; 
And,  to  complete  the  farce,  ihisGoD-jmuz  MAN 
Died—  lou    /» 


The  CROWN,  fo  powerful,  made  him  every  thing  ! 

There's  fomething  marv'loui  in  it,  I  muft  own  ! 

For  folly  is  not  folly  on  a  Throne; 
For  whiting's  eyes  are  di'monds  in  a  King  ! 


*  He  afluaay 

I  dare 


233  THE    RIGHTS    GP    KINGS. 

I  dare  not  fay  that  no  exception  fprings 

Againft  this  mighty  magic  pow'r  of  Kings: 

Not  all  a  MONARCH'S  fmiles,  and  pow'r  of  PLACE, 

Can  wipe  vulgarity  from  BRUDEN  ELL'S  face; 

Nor,  though  a  whole  eternity  they  try, 

Blot  art,  infernal  art,  from  H — KSB— Ry'seye? 

Blot  beaft  from  S-LISB — y,  who  no  legend  needs, 

Pertnefs  fromDicK,  and  vacancy  from  LEEDS. 


O  D,E      XIII. 

T  O !  Majefty  admireth  yon  fair  *  DOME  ; 
-*-^  And'deemeth  that  he  is  admir'd  again  ! 
The  King  is  wedded  to  it — 'tis  his  home; 

He  watche«  it,  and  loves  it,  e'en  to  pain : 
And  yet  this  lofty  Dome  is  heard  to  fay, 
"  Foh!  pohi  p-x  take  your  love — away!  away!" 

To  this,  with  energy  I  anfwer — "  Shame !" 
Such  bad  behaviour  puts  me  in  a  flame : 
This  is  unfeemlv,  nay,  ungrateful  carriage^ 
And  brings  to  mind  a  little  Ode  on  MARRIAGE. 

ODE    TO    HYMEN; 


HECTIC. 

GOD  of  ten  million  charming  things, 
Of  whom  our  MILTON  fo  divinely  lings, 

Once  dove-taiPd  to  a  devil  of  a  wife — 
HYMEN,  how  comes  it  that  I  am  fo  flighted  ?. 
Why  with  thy  myft'ries  am  I  not  delighted, 

Which  I  have  try'd  to  peep,  on  half  my  life  ? 

*  The  Royal  Academy. 

God 


THE  RIGHTS   OF 


-33 


Hod  of  the  down- clad  chairvs,  difpel  the  mid — 
Oh,  put  me  fpeedily  upon  thy  lift  ! 
A  civil  lift,  like  that  of  Kings,  I'm  told, 
:ng  in  fwelling  bags  of  glorious  gold  ! 

iave  I  done  to  lofe  thy  good  opinion  ? 

Againft  theewas  I  ever  known  to  rail; 
And  fay  (abufing  thus  thy  fweet  dominion) 

"  Curfe  me  !  if  this  boy's  trap  fliall  catch  my  tail  :" 
No  !  no  !  I  praife  thy  knot  with  bellowing  breath, 
Which,  like  JACK  KETCH'S,  feldom  flips  till  death. 

Lo  !   'midft  the  hollow-founding  vault  of  Night, 
Deep  coughing  by  the  taper's  lonely  light, 

1  he  hopelels  HECTIC  rolls  his  e've-balls,  fighing ; 
u  Sleep  on,"  he  cries,  and  drops  the  tend'rcft  tear ; 
Then  kifles  his  wife's  cherub  cheek  fo  dear : 

"  Bleft  be  thy  flumbers,  Love !  though  I  am  dying : 
"  Ah  !  whilft  thou  fleepeft  with  the  fweetett  breath, 

/  pump,  for  life,  the  putrid  well  of  death  ! 

/feel  of  FATE'S  hard  hand  th'  onpreflive  pow'r; 
**  /count  the  jron  tongue  of  ev'ry  hour, 
44  That  feems  in  FANCY'S  ftartled  ear  to  fay — 
44  Soon  muft  thou  wander  from  thy  wife  away." 

44  Dread  found  !  too  folemn  for  the  foul  to  bear, 

Murm'ring  deep  melancholy  on  my  ear  : 
**  And  fullen — lingVing,  as  if  loth  to  part, 
**  And  eafe  the  terrors  of  my  fainting  heart. 

Yet,  though  /pant  for  life,  deep  tkuu,  my  dove, 
For  well  thy  conftancy  deferves  my  love." 

And,  lo!  all  young  and  beauteous,  by  his  fide, 
His  foft,  frefli -blooming,  inccnfe- breathing  BRIDE, 

Whofe  cheek  the  dream  of  rapt'rous  kirtes  warms, 

fatfs  her  SPOUSE'S  wi(h  fo  good  ; 
'Feels LOVE'S  wild  ardours  tingling  through  her  blood, 

And  pants  amidft  a  fccond  hufband's  arms ;     * 
Now  o;>es  her  eyes,  and,  turning  rovnd  her  head, 
4<  Wonders  the  filthy  fellow  is  not  dead  1" 


ODE 


234  THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS, 


ODE      XIV. 

"YTE  quarrell'd  with  SIR  JOSHUA  fome  time  flnce ; 
-*•     Of  Painters,  eafily  allow'd  the  Prince — 
The  Emp'roi-)  let  me  fay,  without  a  flattery : 
Yet  wantonly  againft  the  Emp'ror,  lo ! 
An  overflowing  tub  of  bile  to  mow, 
Ye  foolifii  planted  an  infernal  battery. 

The  mind  of  man  is  vaftly  like  a  hive ; 
His  thoughts  fo  bufy  ever — all  alive  : 

But  here  the  Jinnle  will  go'  no  further  ! 
For  bees  are  making  honey,  one  and  all; 
Man's  thoughts  are  bufy  in  producing  gall, 

Committing,  as  it  were,  lelf-murther. 

But  let -the  fpirit  that  furrounds  my  frame 
Sit  eafyon  it,  jir.i  like  an  old  fhoe — 

When  DISAPPOINTMENT  fet   my  houfe  in  flame, 
Ltt  REASON  all  (lie  can  to  quench  it  do  : 

R  RA  SON  h^s  engines  plentiful  and  ftout, 
.  •  .th  wa,.er-at  commaand  to  put  it  out. 

J  hate  to  hear  men  quarrelling  through  life, 
'I  hemleives  the  fabricators  of  tiie  ftrife; 
Vor  fv-.r  hunting,  with  a  hound-like  nofe, 
ThE^.iornet's  neit,  the  tribe  of  woes  : 
And  when  the  woes  invited  greet  'em, 
They  wonder  how  the  dev'l  they  meet  'eat. 


ops 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 


O  D  E    XV. 


A  H  !  could  ve  wifli  your  *  PRESIDENT  to  change  ! 
•**  Ah  i  coufd  ye,  PAGANS,  after  falfe  Gods  range? 

Swop  folid  REYNOLDS  for  that  ,/t  Woa-  WEST  ? 
In  love-affairs  variety's  no  fin  — 
Trav'lers  may  change  at  any  time  their  inn  — 

Here  'tis  Paint-blafpherny,  I  do  proteft. 

In  LOVK'S  warm  regions  I  (hould  like,  I  own, 
'Midft  diff'  rent  climes  to  fix  my  throne: 

DAVID'S  Phyficians  ordered  change  of  f  Dame— 
And,  lo  !  t'  improve  our  cows,  we  bid  'em  pals 
Into  variety  of  grafs  — 

With  lulls,  I  guefs,  th'  advantage  is  the  fame.  ' 

And  as  I  MONSIEUR  CUPIDON  employ, 
To  manufacture  pieces  of  my  joy, 

I  would  not  mad  run  counter  to  the  faftiion  : 
A  little  SYLVIA,  with  the  fweeteft  fmile, 
Poflefles  power  fome  moments  to  beguile, 

And  in  Elyfium  lap  the  prettied  paflion. 

Byt  not  touf'ours  pcrdrix  —  the  vulgar  thing  ! 

Then  PLEASURE  foon  would  fpread  her  wanton  wing: 

No  !  no  !  VARIETY  the  game  muft  ftart— 

Come  oft,  and  make  her  curt'fy  to  my  heart  ; 

And,  like  the  Orange  Girls,  my  tafte  to  fuk, 

Cry,  "  Choice  of  fruit  —  fine  fruit,  Sir  —  choice  of  fruit." 

*  The  Author  has  fame  reafon  to  imagine  that  a  part  of  the  Acade 
mic  Rebellion  was  meant  to  attack  the  Prcfulent  ;  the  difappearancc  of 
whofe  works,  in.  the  prefect  Exhibition,  has  been  f.ttal.  One  Picture 
from  Sir  Jolhua's  hand  \vmild  have  atoned  for  a  hoft  of  Dauls. 

f  Abifhag,  the  fair  Shunamite. 

DuU 


236  THE  RIGHTS  OF  KINGS. 

Dull  CONSTANCY  is  quite  a  Quaker's  hat, 

So  formal ! — ehangelefs  in  its  great  broad  brim  : 

VARIETY'S  a  fine  young  .playful  CAT— 
A  hopeful  imp  of  fpirit,  fport,  and  whim ; 

Who,  when  all  other  objects  fail, 
Runs  after  its  own  tail. 


ODE     XVI. 

DEAD  is  idolatry,  and  faint  the  praife 
That  Sceptred  People,  meet  with  now-a-days  ! 
All  unmolefled,  lo  !  the  VIRTUES  deep  ! 
Their  roof  with  fair  applaufe  but  rarely  rings ; 

Sweet  PANEGYRIC  moves  with  mail-like  creep, 
And  DEFAMATION  on  the  lightning's  wings ! 

Too  pleas'd  to  pluck  the  foaring  plume  of  POW'R, 
-  Yet  blefs  an  Oppofition  hour; 

Too  fond,  alas  !  of  roafting  harmlefs  Kings ; 
Too  well  I  know  what  freedoms  you  would  take- 
Beat  the  dear 'creatures  juft  like  bears  at  flake  ; 

Juft  like  a  poor  tame  GULL'S,  would  clip  his  wings 

Poor  bird  !  whom  FATE  oft  cruelly  affails ; 

Forc'd  from  his  bold  aerial  height, 
Sweeping  the  fun  amidft  his  flight, 

To  hop  a  garden,  and  hunt  mails ! 

Such  is  the  fate  of  Louis  SEIZE, 
Whom  PITY,  with  a  figh,  furveys; 

Whom  FRENCHMEN  daringly  have  laid  a  curb  oa ; 
Who  now  no  more  full  royalty  indites, 
No  more  "  Sic  volo"  to  his  kingdom  writes, 

But,  "  I'm  your  humble  fervant,  Lours  BOURBON. 

Lettres-de-cachet,  now  no  longer  known, 
Shall  lull  no  more  an  EMPIRE'S  idle  groan; 
i 


THE    RIGHTS    OP    KINGS.  237 

thofe  fchools  of  peace  and  fweet  morality, 
Inftruct  no  more  the  mob,  and  men  of  quality  : 


the  haunt  of  philofophic  gloom, 
Surround  the  IMPS  of  Liberty  no  more  : 
In  du  ft  each  iron  and  coloflal  door, 
Which  clos'd  in  thunder  on  a  Rebel's  room  ; 

That  pealing,  with  reverberated  found, 
Rung  through  the  caverns  of  the  dread  PROFOUND  ; 
Where  MEDITATION  ponder'd,  pcnfivemaid! 
And  HORROR,  death-like,  paus'd  upon  the  (hade. 

Oh,  let  us  cherifti,  then,  the  ROYAL  RACE, 
The  fount  of  honour,  freedom,  penfiou,  place! 
On  me  would  KINGS  their  treafure  fling  away, 
Moft  huircbly  grateful  would  I  lay, 

*'  Thus  LYBIA'S  Forefts  a  kind  fhade  fupply, 
**  And  for  the  meaneft  Savage  form  a  den  ; 

41  And  thus  the  Mountains  that  invade  the  fky, 

44  Kind,  in  their  fjiaggy  bofoms  wann  the  WRJEN." 


ODE    XVII. 

A  MID  the  deep'ning  gloom  of  Time 
•**>   Ytur  puny  names  (hall  fcarce  appear; 
While  thole  of  Kin^s,  in  characters  fublime, 

Shall,  blazing,  bid  a  ivorU  revere : 
Their  peerlefs  acts,  with  ev'ry  virtuous  quality, 
Shall  grace  the  PYRAMID  of 'IMMORTALIT 

There  (hall  their  glorious  names  be  feen  fo  bright^ 
As  on  a  Birth  or  Coronation  night, 

Amiclft  the  evening's  honour'd  (hade, 
FaJft  by  the  grocer's,  or  the  chandler's  (hop, 
Or  lace,  or  pinman,  or  the  man  of 

By  loyal  thumb- bottles  difplay'd  ! 

VOL.  IL  V    7 


That, 


3j  THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 

That,  burning  with  a  rival  glow, 
Beam  on  the  gaping  multitude  below. 

Know,  when  we  (lumber,  not  fo  fleeps  the  King : 
He  v/atches  !*— yes,  he  ponders  through  the  night ! 

To  buried  GENIUS  lends  a  fancied  wing, 
And  lifts  him  from  his  darknefs  into  light : 

Thus,  nightly  on  the  *  MEVAGIZZY  more, 

When  HORROR  breathes  upon  the  heaving  DEEP, 

Amid  the  wild  and  folemn  roar, 
Thefe  eyes  have  feen  the  crafty  HERON  creep, 
Now  dart  his  beak  fo  fharp  for  fifh's  blood, 
And  fnatch  a  wriggling  Conger  from  the  flood  ! 

Here  differeth  this  comparifon  of  our's : 
The  King preferveth — but  the  FOWL  devours. 


ODE    XVIII. 

{7<O,  Sirs,  with  halters  round  your  wretched  necks, 
^-*    Which  fome  contrition  for  your  crime  befpeaks, 

And  much-offended  Majefty  implore  ; 
Say,  piteous,  kneeling  in  the  Royal  view— 
44  Have  pity  on  a  fad  abandon'd  crew, 

"  And  we,  great  King,  will  fin  no  more ; 
"  Forgive,  dread  Sir,  the  crying  fin, 
-"  And  Mifter  LAURENCE  mail  come  in." 

n 

Your  hemp  cravats,  your  pray'r,  your  Tyburn  mien, 
May  pardon'  gain  from  our  good  King  and  Queen, 

For  they  are  not  inexorable  people; 
Although  you  thus  have  run  their  patience  hard  ; 
And  though  you  are,  to  fuch  great  folks  compar'd, 

Candle-extinguiihers  to  fome  high  fleeple. 

*  A  Fifhing-town;  in  Cornwall. 

For 


THE    UGHTS    OF    KlKGS.  239 

For  Kings  (I  fpeak  it  to  their  vaft  apnlaufe) 
Can  pardon,  if  you  let  them  gain  their  caufe ! 
So  gracious,  they  will  give  you  fuch  kind  looks, 
As  fell  upon  the  fliav'dand  humbled  Cooks  ; 
Kind  as  a  gard'ner's  charitable  eye 
On  feme  cruftiM  fnail,  or  bird-lim'd  fly : 
Kind  as  the  epicure's,  who,  fond  of  mhos, 
Mingleth  companion  with  his  bites. 

How  vile  to  make  the  front  of  Monarchs  low'r ! 
I  fee  him,  all  like  vinegnr  fo  four, 

Look  black  ! — but,  fill  good- humour's  m  his  foul ; 
And  now  I  mark  it,  dealing  forth  fo  fweet — 
Stream  of  forgivenets — what  a  treat ! 

I  fee  hb  eye,  with  love  rekindling,  roll 

Thus,  when  the  DEMON  of  the  ftorm  has  driv'n 
The  SUN,  that  YOUTH  of  fplendor,  from  his  hrav'n, 

Drown'd  ev'ry  vale,  and  blafted  ev'ry  bloom ; 
Caft  o'er  poor  NATURE'S  fmile  a  fable  fhroud, 
Each  beauty  blotted  with  his  inkieft  cloud, 

And  giv'n  a  cheerful  world  to  gloom ; 

Lo  !  through  the  giant  (hade,  a  lonely  Ray 
Peeps  from  the  op'ning  Weft  with  timid  air, 

(Till  lore 'd  by  fhouldering  clouds  away) 
Informing  man,  "  To-morrow  will  be  fair." 

Oh,  had  you  rev'renc'd  a  great  K— g's  commands, 
What  trouble  he  had  taken  off  your  hands  ! 
For  ART  you  had  not  rang'd  the  realm  around  ! 
His  keener  eye  the  precious  gem  had  found  ! 
Then,  what  an  honour  to  have  feen  appointed, 
Your  very  NIGHTMAN,  by  the  LORD'S  ANOINTED  ! 


OPE 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KINGS. 


ODE    XIX. 

A  LITTLE  more,  and  I  have  done — 
The  Mule's  tittle-tattle  muft  go  on. 

The  world  is  very  fond  of  calling  "  Fool  ;£' 

It  looks  with  rapture  on  a  fimple  head, 

Of  puerilities  the  rich  hot-bed, 
So  pleating  to  the  tafte  of  RIDICULE  : 

Rare  crops  !  that,  thick'ning  into  life, 

Start,  like  afparagus,  to  tempt  the  knife. 

And,  ihould  the  head  belong  to  fome  great  DUKE, 
HAWKE -SATIRE  eyes  it  with  the  keeneft  look  : 
Still,  fhould  the-OwNER.  hap  to  be  a  KING, 
Sharp  for  her  quarry,  how  me  prunes  her  wing  ! 
Such  is  the  pronenefs  to  aflail  great  folk^ 
And  make  high-birth  and  ftate  a  (landing  joke. 

Oh,  for  an  ointment  to  deftroy  the  fcab 

Call'd  ENVY,  which,  alas  !  too  many  know ! 

The  heart  fhould  be  a  medlar,  not  a^crab ; 

Milk,  and  not  verjuice,  from  its  fount  fiiould  flow : 

But  GREATNESS,  fun-like,  from  the  muddy  ftream 

Draws  the  foul  vapour  that  obfcures  its  beam  ! 

Indeed,  the  PEOPLE  are  a  lawlefs  crew ; 

Why  ftrive  I  then,  Quixotic,  to  reform? 
As  foon  a  feather  may  the  waves  fubdue, 

And  fpiders  bind  the  pinions  of  the  ftorm. 

Yet,  'tis  riot  ftrange,  that  Kings  mould  lofe  repute, 
Confid'ring  man's  fo  naturally  a  brute. 

Ev'n  SAINTS  themfelves  have  loft  their  reputation ; 
Rome  formerly  had  thirty  thoufand  gods  ; 
And  now,  I  warrant  ye,  *ris  odds, 

They  own  fcarce  one  through  all  the  Romifti  nation. 

i  Alas 


TH*    AlGHTS    OF    KINGS.  24! 

Aks  !  who  now  believes  in  flicks  and  ftones, 

Old  rags,  and  hair,  and  nails,  and  marrow-bones  ? 

SAINT  AGNES,  that  fweet  lady,  void  of  fin, 
Was  ftripp'd,  poor  gentlewoman,  to  her  fkin, 

And,  for  religion,  carried  to  the  ftews ; 
When,  as  the  lady  was  fo  bare, 
GOD  gave  herfuch  a  quantity  of  hair, 
As  readied  unto  her  very  (hoes. 

When  to  the  bawdy-houfe  arriv'd  the  DAUB, 
An  angel  from  above  commiffion'd  came, 
And  fpread  around  her  fuch  a  heav'nly  light, 
As  dazzled  every  body's  fight. 

However,  a  young  OFFICER,*  a  buck, 
Wifliing  prodigioufly  to  have  a  look, 

Dafh'd  forth,  to  pierce  the  middle  of  the  light, 
Meaning  to  violate  the  DAME  fo  good ; 
Which  meaning,  when  the  DEVIL  understood, 

He  choak'd  the  wanton  ROGUE  out-right. 

Such  is  the  tale !  true  ev'ry  crumb ; 
AVrr,  no  more  heeded  than  TOM  THVM», 


ODE      XX. 
TO    MISTER    PITT. 

T\E  AR  as  a  di'mond  to  the  bed  of  Queens, 
U  Dear  as  to  cormorants,  of  fiih  a  ftioal  ; 
Dear  to  a  German  hog,  as  teds  of  beans  ; 
Dear  as  a  iixpcnce  lav'dr  to  MISERY'S  foul  : 


*  The  fen  of 

^  3  Dear 


242-  THE  RIGHT'S  OF  KINGS, 

Dear  as  REFORM  to  Mifter  PITT  of  yore, 
When  he  and  RICHMOND  made  a  bullock-roar, 

Bellowing  themfelves  into  the  prettieft  places ; 
Dear  K  flam-  fights  to  that  fame  'Squ  IRE  OF  COALS, 
Or  to  his  eyes  a  *  foldier's  coat  in  holes, 

Rent  by  the  flieers  of  TIME  in  fifty  places : 

Dear  as  the  Doctor's  bill  to  this  good  nation, 
Which  Parliament,  with  tears  of  joy,  furvey'd; 

Which  brought  about  a  much-defir'd  falvation, 
For  which  the  Doctors  have  been  poorly  paid : 

Dear  as  the  f  ROYAL  MESSAGE  to  the  NATION, 
By  which  more  money  humbly  is  implor'd — 

"  More  money  for  the  CHILDREN'S  education — 

"  Hard    times !    more  money  for  the  CHILDREN'S 
"  board  :" 

JDear  as  to  valiant  GLO'STER  fword  and  gun  j 

Dear  as  a  dock- leaf  to  a  hungry  afs ; 
Dear  to  the  fam'd  GEORGE  SELWYN,  as  a  pun  j 

Dear  as  to  legs  of  mutton,  caper  fauce  j 

Dear  as  the  voice  of  fiatt'ry  to  the  PROUD  ; 

Dear  as  to  hackney-coachmen  figns  of  rainr 
Who  count  their  (hillings  in  a  coming  cloud,. 

And,  pious,  pray  for  Noah's  flood  again  j.     • 

So  dear  to  Monarchs  is  that  idol  POW'R  ! 

So  dear  is  prompt  obedience  to  a  King  ! 
Far,  of  re(iftance  be  the  trying  hour  ! 

God  blefs  us !  what  a  melancholy  thing  !- 

*   A  poor  invalid,  under  his- Grace's  patronage,  who  (like  the  felcr.s 
hung  in  chains  on  HounflowV  -Baglhot,    Blackheath",  and  ei  few  here)  ' 
wears  his  coat  until  it  d  ops  from  h\i  baek. 

-j-  What  a  niggardly  fet  of  Reprcfentaiives  we  fend  to  Parliament  ! 
To  fuffer  his  Majefty  h  frequently  10  'be  begging  for  a  little  money,  is 
fhameful  in  the  extreme.  In  God's  name,  let  him  have  rlie  Treafury 
at  once.  Had  he  been  worth  tea  or  eleveo  rft^lions,  an  ccoi:omy  would 
have  been  pardonable. 

Yet 


THE    RIGHTS    OF    KIVG8.  243 

Yet  oppofition -fraught  to  Royal  wi 

Quite  counter  to  a  gracious  King's  commands, 

Behold!  th' ACADEMICIANS,  thofc  ftninge  fifliest 
For  *  WHE  ATL  v  lifted  their  unhaiiow'd  hands, 

So  then,  thofe  fellows  have  not  learnt  to  crawF, 

To  play  the  fpanitl,  lick  the  foot,  and  fawn— 
Oh,  be  their  bones  by  tigers  broken  all ! 

Pleas'd,  by  wild  horfes  could  I  fee  them  drawn. 

O  PITT  !  with  thee  I'm  forry,  very  forry  ! 

Not  make  a  poor  ASSOCIATE  ! — fuch  a  thin  ft 
Who  tr\  '.1  to  tarniih  iii  the  Rroyal  Glory? 

What  rebel  balloted  againfl  his  King  ? 

Then,  Sir,  he  is  fo  bountiful  a  man  ! 

A  catarad  of  charity,  I'll  fay — 
Inform  me  any  body,  if  you  can, 

Unmark'd  by  liberality  a  day  ! 

Where'er  he  walks  where'er  his  wild  career, 

Through  CHELT'NAM,  WEYMOUTH,  EXON,.  PLY 
MOUTH,  In! 

With  joy  14  fubjecls  all,  fo  dear, 

See  from  each  frep  a  ftrcam  of  glory  flow. 

Thus,  when  that  pretty  animal  an  — , 

At  night,  on  pavement  gull  ops  like  the  wind ; 

Fire  r.indling  'it  his  hejl-,  be.iold  him  paf> ! 
H«  the  fparkles  that  hop  out  behind  ! 

Nurs'd  on  the  dunghill  of  the  fmiW  of  Kings, 

.lily,  to  furprife  us,  ftart ! 
So  i  ^s; 

Sucii  warmth  prolific,  can  a  iuiiie  impart ! 

-•*  The  rival  candidate  of  Mr,  Laurence. 

Such 


244  THB    RIGHTS    OP    KlNGSr 

Such  is  of  Royalty  the  envied  pow'r ! 

Then  perifti  ev'ry  Academic  Plant ! 
Oh,  may  they  feel  nor  fun,  nor  foft'ring  fhow'r ! 

Blow  round  them,  O  ye  cold,  cold  winds  of  WANT  ? 

What  Nabob's  ftructures  rife,  with  wings  outfpread, 
Whofe  owners'  necks  well  merit  to  be  lopp'd  ! 

With  what  fublimity  they  lift  the  head, 

By  DEATHS  and  Ru IN'S  ATLAS -fhoulders  propped  1 

But  fuch  thy  Matter's  purity  of  foul, 

His  eyes  upon  the  fword  of  Juftice  feaft : 

44  Curfe  on  the  Pearl  (he  cries)  by  R  A  PIKE  flole  j 
u  Curfe  on  the  di'monds  of  the  bleeding  Eaft  ! 

**  Curfe  on  the  villains  that  whole  realms  defpoil  I 
"  Curfe  on  the  cruel  hand  (we  hear  him  cry) 

"  That  deals  the  fruit  of  LABOUR'S  honeft  toil, 
"  And  draws  the  tear  of  blood  from  PITY'S  eye  !** 

O  PITT  !  what  punifhment  (hall  we  contrive, 
To  fuit  this  faucy,  felf-important  crew  ? 

How  fhall  we  fmoke  this  academic  hive, 
That  flinging  makes  us  look  fo  very  Hue  ? 

Oh,  bid  our  Monarch  draw  his  purfe-ftrings  tight ; 

Contract  his  open  heart,  of  giant  ftature  j 
Ufe  ev'ry  fpecies  of  little  fpite, 

And  violate  for  once  his  noble  nature. 

Oh,  bid  our  Sov'reign  take  it  not  to  heart ; 

For  downright  brutes  are  BRITONS,  nine  in  ten ; 
At  curbs  and  whips  behold  us  afles  ftart, 

And  infolently  claim  the  RIGHTS  OF  MEN  f 

And  yet,  I  moderation  vvifli  to  Kings  \ 

Yes,  yes,  they  fhouLd  be  merciful,  though  flrong : 

As  SCEPTRES  have  been  found  in  France  with  wing5? 
One  would  not  lofe  an-EMPjRE  for  a  Song. 

ODES 


ODES    TO    MISTER    PAINE, 

AUTHOR     OF 

"RIGHTS    OF    MAN? 

On  the  intended  Celebration  of  tht 
DOWNFALL   OF   THE   FRENCH    EMPIRE, 

BY    A 

SET     OF     BRITISH     DEMOCRATBS, 

ON    THE    FOURTEENTH    OF   JULY. 


atiyit/'J  f> rev' but  Cyans  t  vtl  carter t  dignum, 
'   Si  vh  rfc  elifiiii. — — 


(    247    ) 

ODES    TO    MISTER     PAINE, 

AUTHOR    OF 

• 

«  RIGHTS    OF    MAN." 


ODE      I. 

f\  PAINE  !  thy  vaft  endeavour  I  admire ! 
^  How  brave  the  hope  to  let  a  realm  on  fire ! 

AMBITION,  fmiling,  prais'd  thy  giant  wi(h  : 
Compar'd  to  Mrr,  the  MAN,  to  gam  a  name, 
Who  to  DIANA'S  temple  put  the  flame, 

A  fimple  minnow  to  the  KING  OF  FISH. 

Say,  didft  thou  fear  that  Britain  was  too  bleft, 

Of  Peace  thou  mod  delicious*peft  ? 

How  fliameful  that  this  pin's-head  of  an  ISLE, 

While  half  the  GLOBE'S  in  grief,  {liould  wear  a  fmile  ! 

How  dares  the  WREN  amidft  liis  hedges  (ing, 

Wliile  Eagles  droop  the  beak,  and  flag  the  wing? 

Oh,  muft  the  fcythe  of  DESOLATION  deep, 
So  keen  for  carnage,  ftay  its  mighty  fweep, 

And  HAVOCK  on  his  hunter  drop  his  bfli ; 
Spurr'd,  arm'd,  and  ripe  to  dorm  with  groans  the  (ky, 
To  chafe  an  empire,  and  enjoy  the  cry, 

The  cry  of  millions — what  a  glorious  crafh ! 


Wlut 


24-8  1    ODES    TO    MISTER    PAINE. 

What  pity  thy  combuflibles  were  bad  ! 

How  DEATH  had  gririii'd  delight,  and  HELL  been  glad, 

To  fee  our  liberties  o'erturning ; 
And  WAR,  whofe  expectation  tiptoe  flood, 
Ready  for  hills  of  (lain,  and  feas  of  blood, 

Who  drops  his  death's-head  flag,  and  puts  on  mourniDg ! 

Why,  cur-like,  didft  thou  fneak  away,  nay  fly  ? 
Dread 'ft  thou  of  anger'd  JUSTICE  the  fharp  eye  ? 

Return,  ard  bring  M  BSD  AMES  POISSARDES  along: 
And  lo,  with  FR  i ENDS  HIP'S  fqueeze  and  fire  to  meet  'em, 
And  oaths  of  ev'ry  hue  to  greet  'em, 

The  fifterhood  of  Billingfgate  fhall  throng. 

The  jails  may  open  all  their  dreary  cells, 
Where  HORROR  brooding  on  damnation  dwells, 

And  vomit  forth  their  grifly  bands  j 
Surrounded  by  this  fqualid  hoft, 
PAINE  mall  their  leader  be,  and  boaft ; 

PAINE,  GORDON,  and REBELLI ON,  fliallftiake  hands. 

IMPORTANCE,  in  a  nut -fhellr hide  thy  head  ! 

/deem'd  myfelf  a  dare-devil  in  rhyme, 

To  ^hi/per  to  a  KING  of  modern  time, 
And  try  to  ftrike  a  royal  foible  dead  ; 

While  dauntlefs»//ww,  of  treafon  mak'ft  no  bones, 

But  ftrik'ft  at  Kings  themfelves  upon  their  thrones  ! 


ODE       II. 

HELL  hears  our  pray'r ! — all  is  not  loft — 
Behold  a  chofen  few,  a  ho/I, 
Stand  forth  the  C  H  A  M  p  i  o  NS  of  the  gloriou  s  caufe ! 
The  jails  are  opening  ! — hark  !  the  iron  doors  ! 
Chains  clank ! — the  brazen  throat  of  TUMULT  roars ; 
And.  lo !  the  deftin'd  VICTIMS  of  the  Laws ! 

Dif- 


\ODEI    TO    MISTER     PAINE.  249 

Difgorg'd,  they  pour  in  dark'ning  tribes  along, 
An3  mingle  with  our  DEMOCRATIC  THRONG  ! 

BEDLAM  unlocks  her  melancholy  cells  ! 

Forth  rum  the  MA  N  i  A  c  s  grim,  with  joy  fill  yells ; 

They  tear  their  blankets,  clap  their  frenzied  hands ; 
They  grind  their  teeth,  they  dance,  they  foam,  they  ftare ; 
They  rend  with  burfts  of  laughter  wild  the  air : 

And  join,  they  know  not  why,  our  thick'ning1>ands ! 

Thou  SUN,  withdraw  thy  hated  day; 

To  jEthiop  DARKNESS  yield  thy  reign; 
And  hide  in  clouds,  O  MOON,  thy  ny, 

Nor  peep  upon  our  fpeftre  fcene ! 
Though  faint  thy  folitary  light, 
We  feel  thy  feeble  beanifoo  bright. 

Ah  !  PEACE,  thy  triumph  now  is  o'er! 
Thy  cheek  fo  cheerful  fmiles  no  more ; 

Thine  eye  with  difappcintmcnt  glooms ! 
Our  Mufic  mail  be  NATURE'S  cry; 
Our  ears  (hall  feaft  on  PITY'S  fiftth— 

Lo,  haggard  DEATH  prepares  his  tombs  I 

Hot  with  the  fafcinating  grape,  we  reel ; 
The  full  proud  fpirit  of  Rebellion  feel ! 

SON  of  Sedition,  daring  PAINE, 
"While  fpeech  endues  thv  treafon  tongue, 
£ul  the  roof  ring  with  damned  fong, 

And  EREBUS  Ihall  echo  back  the  it  rain. 


VOL.  If.  Z  SON7G, 


250  ODES    TO    MISTER    PAINE, 

SONG, 

BY    MISTER    PAINE. 

/"1OME,  good  fellows  all — Confufion's  the  toaft, 
^  And  fuccefs  to  our  excellent  caufe  : 
As  we've  nothing  to  lofe,  lo,  nought  can  be  loft ; 
So,  perdition  to  Monarchs  and  Laws ! 

FRANCE  {hows  us  the  way — aft  example  how  great ! 

Then,  like  France,  let  us  ftir  up  a  riot ; 
May  our  names  be  preferv'd  by  fome  damnable  feat, 

For  what  but  a  wretch  would  lie  quiet  ? 

As  we  all  are  poor  rogues,  'tis  moft  certainly  right, 
At  the  doors  of  the  rich  ones  to  thunder ; 

Like  the  thieves  who  fet  fire  to  a  dwelling  by  night, 
And  come  in  for  a  fhare  of  the  plunder. 

Whoever  for  mifchief  invents  the  beft  plan, 
Beft  n/mrders,  fets  fire,  and  knocks  down, 

The  thanks  of  our  CLUB  mail  be  giv'n  to  that  MAN, 
And  hemlock  fhali  form  him  a  crown. 

Our  Empire  has  tow'r'd  with  a  luftre  too  long; 

Then  blot  out  this  wonderful  SUN  ; 
Let  us  arm  then  at  once,  and  in  confidence  ftrong 

Complete  what  dark  GORDON  begun. 

But  grant  a  defeat — we  are  hang'd,  and  that's  all ; 

A  puniftiment  light  as  a  feathef  \ 
Yet  we  triumph  in  death,  as  we  C  ATI  LINES  fail, 

And  go  to  the  Devil  together. 


THE 


THE 

REMONSTRANCE. 

TO    WHICH    IS     APDID, 

AN  ODE  TO  M,Y  ASS: 

ALSO 

THE   MAGPIK    AND    ROBIN, 

A     TALK; 
JX  JfiQLOGY  SOK  XMOSi 

AND 

AN    ADDRESS    TO    MY    PAMPHLET. 


Irrteg er  *At*  fcelerifyut  fwruf,  ice.   See.          HoR. 

The  Man  of  dove-like  Innocence  a  farnple, 
So  fwcct !   fo  mild  !  mypifjioiu,  for  example, 
Difdiins  of  GofTip  Fame  the  tittle-tattle  ! 
He  begs  no  News-Paper  to  fight  his  bj'tle — 
Unruov'd,  with  equal  eye  on  all  he  looks  ; 
The  Lord's  Anointed,  and  his  loufy  Cooks. 

I  deem'd  rude  Clamour,  in  my  days  of  youth) 
The  folcmn  voice  of  all-commanding  Truth  .* 

But  now,  no  more  creating  awe  and  wonder  : 
Old  rrnpty  hogfheads,  rumbling  in  a  cart, 
That  make  Jome  peop.'e  gape,  and  rtarc,  and  ftart, 

As  well  may  tcU  me,  <  <  We're  the  Noble  Thunder." 

P.  Pi  NX)  AX, 


THE 

REMONSTRANCE,  &c. 


•ODE. 

WIDE  gap«  the  tboughtlcfs  mouth  of  moon-ey'd 
WONDER, 
While  "gun,  drum,  trumpet,  blunderbufs,  and  thunder," 

With  CALUMNY'S  dark  hounds  the  BARD  purfue: 
'*  Bring  on  his  marrow-bones  th*  apoftate  down, 
"  The  turncoat  is  a  flatt'rer  of  the  Crown ; 
"  Bum  all  his  verfes,  burn  the  author  too :" 

Such  is  the  found  of  millions !  fuch  the  roar 

Of  billows  booming  011  the  rocky  (hore ! 

"  How    chang'd  his  note!    (they   cry)   now   fpinning 

"  rhymes 
"  In  compliment  to  Monarchs  of  the  times, 

"  Who  lately  felt  no  mercy  from  his  rancour ; 
"  The  ftar-bedizen'd  fycophants  of  ftate, 
"  Blue-ribbon'd  knaves  have  brib'd  his  pliant  hate; 

"  Behold  him  at  St.  James's  fnug  at  anchor. 

Thus  on  my  ears,  fo  patient  let  me  fay, 

They   pour  their  rough,    rude  prill  of   ^roundlefs 

clamour : 
Battering,  pell-mell,  upon  my  head  a\vny, 

Juit  like  on  anvils  the  fmith's  fledge  and  hammer ! 

Z  3  How- 


THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

Howe'er  the  world  in  (corn  may  fliake  its  head, 
Nor  knave  nor  fool  through  me  fhall  current  pafs ; 

Too  honeft  yet,  I  thank  my  ftars,  to  fpread 
The  MUSE'S  filver  o'er  a  lump  of  brafs. 

/ 

I  own  the  voice  of  CENSURE,  very  proper; 

Greatly  refembling  a  tobacco-ftopper ; 

Confining  all  the  feeds  of  fire  fo  flout, 

And  quick  in  growth,  when  left  to  run  about : 

But  poffibly  I'm  hardened — yes,  I  fear  I 

Her  frequent  ftrokes  have  form'd  a  callous  ear. 

'*. 

here  was  a  time  when  PETER  ghoft-like  ftar'd, 
When   CENSURE    thunder'd — ftar'd   with  awe  pro 
found  ; 

With  fighs,  to  deprecate  her  wrath,  prepar'd ; 
So  chill'd  with  horror  at  the  folemn  found ; 

But  harden'd,  foon  he  gave  his  ague  o'er ; 
Look'd  up,  and  fmil'd,  and  thought  of  her  no  more. 

Thus  when  an  earthquake  bids  JAMAICA  tremble ; 
On  Sunday  all  the  folks  to  church  affemble ; 

To  foothe  JEHOVAH,,  fo  devoutly  ftudying — 
Proftrate  they  vow  to  keep  his  holy  laws : 
Returning  home,  they  fmite  their  hungry  craws, 

And  fcarce  indulge  them  with  a  flice  of  pudding- 
Deeming,  in  earthquake  time,  a  dainty  board, 
A  fad  abomination  to  the  LORD  ! 

Ere  Sunday  comes  again,  their  hearts  recover; 
The  tempeft  of  their  fears  blown  over, 

Fled  ev'ry  terror  of  the  burning  lake, 
They  think  they  have  no  bufinefs  now  with  church ; 
So,  calmly  leave  th*  ALMIGHTY  in  the  lurch, 

And  iin  it— till  it  gives  a  fecond  fliake. 

The  ladies  too  have  join'd  the  general  cry ! 
What !  thofe  divinities  in  PETER'S  eye  ! 

Angels 


THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

Angels  in  petticoats  ! — it  ill  behoves  'cm : 

What!  bite  the  conftant  STEN TOR  of  their  praife, 
Who  robb'd  the  Mufes  of  their  fu-tctf/t  lays, 

To  tell  the  world  how  much  he  loves  'em  ! 

The  Bard,  who  vouches  for  their  harmlsfs  fouls, 
And  like  another  CICERO  perfuades, 

The  frenzied  eye  of  admiration  rolls — 

Ready  to  kneel  and  worfliip  'em — Oh,  jades  ! 

LADIES  and  GENTLEMEN, 
Know,  that  I  fcorn  a  proftituted  pen : 
No  rpval  rotten  wood  my  verfe  veneers— 
Oh,  yield  me,  for  a  moment  yield  your  ears. 

Stubborn,  and  mean,  and  weak,  nay  fools  indeed, 
Though  Kings  may  be,  we  mu/l  fupport  the  breed. 

Yet  join  I  iflue  with  you — yes,  'tis  granted,  . 
That  through  the  world  fuch  royaf  folly  rules, 
As  bids  us  think  thrones  advertife  for  fools  j 

Yet  is  a  King  a  utenfil  much  wanted— 

A  fcrew,  a  nail,  a  bolt,  to  keep  together 
The  (hip's  old  leaky  fides  in  ftormy  weatlter; 
Which  fcrew,  or  nail,  or  holt,  its  work  performs, 
Though  downright  ignorant  of  fbips  and  (forms. 

I  knuckle  not — I  owe  not  to  the  Great 

A  thimble-full  of  obligation ; 
Nor  iafcious  wife  Jiave  I,  their  lips  to  treat, 

To  lift  me  to  PE  EFERMKNT'S  funny  ftation ; 
Like  many  a  gentleman  whom  LOVE  promotes; 

Whofc  lofty  front  the  ray  of  gold  adorns ; 
Refembling  certain  mod  ingenious  goats, 

That  climb  up  precipices  by  their  horns. 

I'm  not  obltg'd  (believe  my  honeft  word) 
To  kifs— what  ihall  I  calf't?— of  any  Lord: 
Not  pepper-corn  acknowledgment  I  owe  'emj 
Nay,  like  the  GOD  of  truth,  I  fcarcely  know  'cm. 


256  THE    REMONSTRANC8. 

By  me  unprais'd  are  Dukes  and  Earls : 
At  fuch  moft  uncommonly  my  fatire  fnarls— 
My  pride  like  theirs  indeed,  the  high-nos'd  elves, 
Who  love  what's  equal  only  to  themfelves. 

As  for  Court  virtues,  wherefoe'er  they  lie, 

I  leave  them  all  to  Laureat  PYE, 

The  fafhionable  Bard,  whom  Courts  revere ; 

Who  trotteth,  with  a  grave  and  goodly  pace, 
Deep  laden  with  his  Sovereign,  twice  a  year, 

Around  ParnafTus's  old  famous  bafe : 
Not  only  proving  his  great  King  alive, 
But  that,  like  docks,  the  royal  virtues  thrive. 

But  I'm  not  qualified  to  be  a  hack ; 
Too  proud  to  carry  lumber  on  my  back : 
Too  dainty  is  my  Lady  Mufe,  I  hope, 
Into  a  coalfhed  to  convert  her  fhop ; 
Her  fhop  indeed — a  very  haridfome  room, 
Fill'd  with  rich  fpices  and  Parnaffian  bloom. 

Court  Poets  muft  create — on  trifles  rant — 
Make  fomething  out  of  nothing — Lord,  I  can't! 
Bards  muft  bid  virtues  crowd  on  Kings  in  fwarms, 

Howe'er  from  fuch  good  company  remote ; 
Juft  as  well-natur'd  heralds  make  up  arms 

For  Nabob-robbers  born  without  a  coat. 

I'm  a  poor  botching  taylor  for  a  Court, 

Low  bred  on  liver,  and  what  clowns  call  mugget  ;* 

Befides,  \vhat  greatly  too  my  gains  would  hurt, 
I  cannot  few  gold  lace  upon  a  drugget. 

Say  not  I'm  furn' J  towards  the  SCEPTER'D  GREAT  : 
Talk  not  of  Kings  —I  deem  one  half  a  cheat : 

Felt  is  their  weaknefs — hufks,  mere  hufks  of  men  ! 
Yes,  they  create  NOBILITY — I  know  it; 
The  verieft  ideot  of  them  all  can  do  it, 

And  on  the  falcon's  perch  can  place  the  wren. 

*  Part  of  the  entrails  of  ceitain  cattle. 

BuJ 


THE    nEMOKStRANCE.  257 

But  can  a  King  command  th'  ethereal  flame 
That  clothes  with  immortality  a  name  ? 

Oh,  could  the  RACE  that  fire  ethereal  catch  ! 
But  no  fuch  privilege  to  Kings  is  giv'n  : 
So  very  low  their  int'reft  lies  in  Heav'n, 

They  can't  command  enough  to  light  a  match. 

No,  Sirs,  and  therefore  pray  be  civil ; 
I've  not  yet  bargain'd  with  the  Devil. 

Yet  grant  me  fold — I've  precedents  a  ftore ; 
Befides,  we  poets-are  confounded  poor ; 

And,  ah !  how  hard  to  ftarve,  to  pleafe  Mot  ALITY  I 
For  HUNGER,  though  a  fav'rite  of  old  SAIHTS, 
Whofe  pinching  virtue  pious  hift'ry  paints, 

Is  reckon'd  now  a  FELLOW  of  bad  quality: 
Not  deem'd  a  gentleman — can't  fhew  his  face, 
E'en  where  SAINT  PETER'S  *  children  give  the  grace ! 
^A  rofy  finner,  LUXURY  yclr;t, 
'Long  in  his  place  hath  eat,  and  drunk,  and  flept. 

Yes,  (as  I've  faid)  we  Bards  are  moftly  poor, 
Can  fcarcely  drive  gaunt  FAMINE  from  the  door ! 
That  Helicon's  a  hellifli  ftream,  God  knows ! 
Ah,  me  !  moft  rarely  it  Paflo/ian  flows : 
Though  (harp  as  hawks,  and  hungry  too,  and  thick, 
Few  are  the  golden  grains  that  POETS  pick; 
And  yet  each  new  advent'rer  of  the  NINE 
Deems  all  Parnaflus  one  mere  golden  mine. 

All  this  by  way  of  wild  digreflion— - 
And  now  for  my  political  confeffion. 

Again,  ye  Crown-and-Anchor  tinners, 
I  reprobate  your  revolution  dinners. 


*  Archbilhopi,  BiJhopJ,  fcc. 

NATURC 


358  THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

NATURE  at  times  makes  wretched  wares; 
(Amongft  the  fmiiing  corn-like  tares) - 

Men  with  fuoh  miserable  fouls ! 
Nought  pleafes  from  the  moment  of  their  birth  ; 
With  horror  for  a  while  they  blot  the  earth, 

Then,  crab-like,  crawl  into  their  bury  ing-holes. 

How  like  a  dreary  dull  December  DAY, 

^Thatfhows  his  muddy  difcontented  head, 
Low'rs  on  the  world  awhile,  then  moves  away 

In  gloom  and  fullennefs  to  bed  ! 
Have  riofc  our  Revolution  hoft  a  few 
Of  fouls  of  this  fame  yEthiop  hue  ? 

Permit  me,  Sirs,  to  tell  you,  ye  are  mad  ; 
Your  cafe,  although  not  mortal,  yet  quite  bad; 

An  ugly  inflammation  of  the  brain. 
Although  a  dull  phyfician,  I  could  find 
Something  to  calm  the  hurry  of  the  mind, 

And  bring  you  back  to  common  fenfe  again— 
The  flocks  would  do  it,  gentlemen,  or  jails : 
A  heavy  nojtrum — yet  it  rarely  fails. 

Lo,  DRUNKENNESS,  a  bluft'ring,  bullying  blade, 
The  cock'd  hat  covering  half  one  eye  fo  brave, 

As  though  dread  valour  were  his  meat,  his  trade, 
NATURE  a  driv'ler,  and  the  world  his  flave : 

He  rants,  roars,  prays,  howls,  fwears,  on  boldly 

To  feize  fun,  moon,  and  planets,  by  the  nofe ; 

Whenlo,  NIGHT'S  long-ftaff'd  GUARDIAN  to  himfteals, 
Squints  with  one  eye  on  him,  and  then  the  other; 

To  pillow  well  his  head,  trips  up  his  heels, 

And  lays  him  on  old  earth,  our  common  mother. 

Thence  at  the  round-houfe,  in  about  an  hour, 
Renews  his  poor  debilitated  pow'r 
Of  comprehending,   feeling,  hearing,  feeing— 
Yet  is  this  WATCHMAN  too  a  heavy  BEING. 

Keel 


THE    REMOV 

Keel  up  lies  FRANCE  !  long  may  flic  fceep  that  pofturc ! 
Her  knav'fy,  folly,  on  the  rocks  have  toft  her ; 

Behold  the  thousands  that  furround  the  wreck  ! 
Her  cables  parted,  nidder  gone, 
Split  all  her  fails,  hermain-znaft  down, 

Choak'd  all  her  pumj>s,  crufli'd  in  her  deck ; 
Sport  for  the  winds,  the  billows  o'er  her  roll ! 
Now  am  I  glad  of  it  with  all  my  foul. 

FRANCE  lifts  the  bufy  fword  of  blood  no  more; 

Loft  to  its  giant  grafp  the  wither'd  hand : 
O  fay,  what  kingdom  can  her  fate  deplore, 

The  dark  difturber  of  each  happy  land  ? 

To  Britain  an  infidious  damn'd  liigo — 
Remember,  Englishmen,  old  Cato's  cry, 
And  keep  that  patriot  model  in  your  eye— 

His  conftant  cry,  "  DtlenJa  eft  CARTHAGO." 

FIANCE  is  our  Carthage,  that  fworn  foe  to  truth, 
Whofe  perfidy  defervcs  th'  eternal  chain  ! 

And  now  (he's  down,  our  Britiih  bucks  fbrfooth 
Would  lift  the  (tabbing  ftrumpet  up  again. 

Love  I  the  French  ? — By  heav'ns  'tis  no  fuch  matter  !  % 
Who  loves  a  Frenchman,  wars  with  (imple  Nature. 

What  Frenchman  loves  a  Briton  ? — None  : 
Yet  by,  the  hand  this  enemy  we  take ; 
\  r  '•„  blund'ring  Britons  bofom  up  the  fnake, 

And  feel  themfelves,  loo  late  indeed,  undone. 

The  converfe  chafte  of  day,  and  eA?  of  night, 
The  kifs-clad  moments  of  fupreme  delight, 

To  LOVE'S  pure  paffion  only  due; 
The  feraph-fntile  that  foft-ey'd  FR  i  ENPSH IP  wears, 
And  SORROW 's'iialm  of  fympathifing  tears, 

Thofe  iron  fellows  never  knew. 


For 


THE    R.JEMONSTRANQE. 

For  this  I  hate  them. — Art,  all  varnifh'd  art ! 

This  doth  EXPERIENCE  ev'ry  moment  prove : 
And  hollow  mufl  to  all  things  be  the  heart, 

That  foe  to  beauty,  which  deceives  in  l&ve. 

Hear  me,  Dame  NATURE,  on  thofe  men  of  cork— 
Blufti  at  a  FRENCHMAN'S  heart ,  thy  handy  work  ; 

A  dunghill  that  luxuriant  feeds 

The  gaudy  and  the  ranked  weeds : 
Deception,  grub-like,  taints  its  very  core, 
Like  flies  in  carrion — pr'ythee,  make  no  more. 

Not  but  a  neighboring  nation  to  the  French 
Have  morals  that  emit  a  ftronger  ftench, 

That  Chriftian  nofes  fcarcely  can  withftand: 
The  HEART  a  dungeon,  hollow,  dark,  and  foul, 
The  dwelling  of  the  toad,  fnake,  bat,  and  owl, 

Demons,  and  all  the  grimly  fpectre  band. 

Mad  fools ! — and  can  we  deem  the  French  profound^ 
And,  pleas'd,  their  infant  polities;  embrace, 

Who  drag  a  noble  pyramid  to  ground, 
Without  one  pebble  to  fupply  its  place  ? 

Yet,  are  they  follow'd,  prais'd,  admir'd,  ador'd. 
Be,  with  fuch  praife,  -thefe  ears  no  longer  bor'd  ! 
This  moment  could  I  prove  it  to  the  nation  all, 
That  verily  a  FRENCHMAN  is  not  rational. 

Yes,  FRENCHMEN,  this  is  my  unvarying  creed, 
44  Ye  are  not  rational  indeed ; 
*'  So  low  have  fond  conceit  and  folly  funk  ye : 
*'  Only  a  larger  kind|Of  monkey !" 

*'  What  art  thou  writing  now  ?  the  WORLD  exclaims, 

"  Thou  man  of  brafs>!" 

Good  Wo  R  ID,  no  names,  no  names — I  beg,  no  names- 
Writing  ? — an  Ode  to  my  old  fav'rite  Ass. 

Not  making  royal  varnifli— no  ! 

My  Ass's  virtues  bid  my  numbers  flow: 

PETE*. 


THE    KBMONSTR&NCE.  l6l 

PKTKR  his  name,  my  namefake,  a  good  bead; 

A  fervant  to  my  family  fome  years. 
To  me  is  gratitude  a  tanie-feaft, 

A  haunch  of  ven'fon  that  mV'tafte  reveres  ; 
And  therefore  I've  been  fabricating  metre 
AJ1  in  thepraife  of  honeft  PETER. 


ODE    TO    MY    ASS,    PETER. 

OTHOU,  my  folemn  friend,  of  man  defpis'd, 
But  not  by  wu  defpis'd — refpe&ed  long ! 
To  prove  how  much  thy  qualities  are  priz'd, 
Accept,  old  fellow -traveller,  a  fong. 

My  great  great  ANCESTO*,  of  Lyric  fame, 
Immortal  \  threw  a  glory  round  the  korft  ; 

Then,  as  I  lit  my  candle  at  his  flame, 
Thai  candle  (hall  illumine  tkee  of  courfe. 

For  why  not  thou,  in  works  and  virtues  rich, 
In  FAMR'S  fair  temple  alfo  boa  ft  a  niche? 
How  many  a  genius,  'midft  a  vulgar  pack, 
OBLIVION  fturrs  into  her  footy  fack, 
Calmly  as  Jew  old -clothes-men,  in  their  bags, 
Mix  fome  great  man's  lac'd  coal  with  dirty  rags; 
Or  fatin  petticoat  of  fome  fweet  maid, 
That  o'er  her  beauties  caft  an  envious  made ! 
And  what's  the  reafbo?— reafon  too  apparent! 
Ah  !  **  quia  vate  facro  carcnt" 
As  Horace  favs,  that  bard  divine, 
\Vhofe  wits  fo  fortunately  jump  with  mine. 

Ah,  PETER,  I  remember,  oft,  when  tir*d 
And  mod  unpleafantly  at  times  bemir'd, 
Bold  haft  thou  faid,  **  I'll  budge  not  one  in^h  further; 
44  And  now.  younc  MASTER,  vou  may  kick  or  murther,'* 
VouH.  A  a  The. 


THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

Then  have  I  cudgell'd  thee — a  fruitles  matter !     . 
For  'twas  in  vain  to  kick,  or  flog,  or  chatter. 
Though,  BALAAM-like,  I  cnrs'd  thee  with  a  fmack ; 
Sturdy  thou  dropp'dft  thine  ears  upon  thy  back, 
And  trotting  retrograde,  with  wriggling  tail, 
In  vain  did  I  thy  running  rump  ailkil : 

For,  lo,  between  thy  legs  thou  putt'dft  thine  head, 
Arid  gaveft  me  a  puddle  for  a  bed. 
Now  this  was  fair — the  aclion  bore  no  guile: 
Thou  duck'dft  me  not,  like  JUDAS,  witlra  fmile, 
O  were  the  manners  of  fome  Mouarchs  fuck, 
Who  fmile  ev'n  in  the  clofe  infidious  hour 
That  kicks  th'  unguarded  minion  from  his  pow'ri 
But  thisisafking  p'rhaps  of  Kings  too  much. 

0  PETER,  little  didft  thou  think,"!  ween, 
When  I  afchoolboy  on  thy  back  was  feen, 
Riding  thee  oft,  in  attitude  uncouth; 

For  bridle,  an  old  garter  in  thy  mouth ; 
Jogging  and  whittling  wild  o'er  hill  and  dale, 
On  floes,  or  nuts,  or  ftrawb'ries  to  regale — 

1  fay,  O  PETER,  little  didft  thpu  think, 
That  7,  thy  namefake,  in^immottal  ink 
Should  dip  my  pen,  and  rife  a  luond^rous  Eard^ 
And  gain  fuch  praife,  SUBLIMITY'S  reward; 

But  not  the  LAUREL— honour  much  too  high; 
Giv'n  by  the  KING  pf  ISLES  to  Mifter  PYE, 
Who  fings  his  SOV'REIGN'S  virtues  twice  a  year, 
And  therefore  cannot  chronicle  SMALL  BEER. 

Yet  fimple  as  Montaigne,  I'll  tell  thee  true ; 
There  are,  who  on  my  verfes  look  ajkew^ 

And  call  my  lyric  lucubrations/fr/^".- 
But  I'm  a  modeft)  not  uncanny inge  elf, 
Or  I  could  fay  fuch  things  about  mvfelf— 

But  God  forbid  that  I  ihouid  puff ! 


Yet 


THE    KEMONSTRAtfCE.  263 

Yet  natural  are  ftlfijk  predilections  ; 

Like  fnakes  they  writh*  about  the  heart's  affections, 

And  fometimes  too  infufca  poifonous  fpirit; 
Producing,  as  by  nat'ralifts  I'm  told, 
Torpid  infenfibility,  fo  cold 

To  ev'ry  brother's  rifing  merit. 

WITS  to  each  other  juftlike  loadftones  act, 
That  do  not  always  like  firm  friends  at  trad  / 
Tho'of  the  fame  rare  nature,  (ftrange  to  tell !) 
The  little  harden'd  u  gues  as  oft  repel. 

But,  lo,  of  thee  I'll  fpeak,  my  long-ear'd  friend ! 

Great  were  the  wonders  of  thy  heels  of  yore; 
Victorious,  for  lac'd  hats  didft  thou  contend ; 

And  ribbons  grac'd  thy  ears— a  gaudy  (lore. 

Buff  breeches  too  have  crown'd  a  proud,  proud  day, 
Not  thotty  but  which  thy  rider  wore  away  ; 
Triumphant  ftrutting  through  the  world  be  ftrode. 
Great  loul !  deferving  an  Olympic  Ode. 

Thy  bravery  often  did  I  much  approve  ; 

Rais'd  by  that  Queen  of  Paffions,  LOVE. 

Whene'er  in  LOVE'S  delicious  frenzy  croft 

By  long-ear'd  brothers,  lo !  wert  thou  a  koft  ! 

LOVE  did  thy  lion- heart  with  courage  ftecl ! 

Quicker  than  that  of  VEST R is  mov'd  thy  heel : 

Here,  there,  up,  down,  in,  out,  how  thou  didft  fmite! 

And  then  no  Alderman  could  match  thy  bite ! 

And  is  thy  race  no  more  rever'd  ? 
Indeed  'tis  greatly  to  be  fear' J  ! 

Yet  (halt  THOU  flourifli  in  im mortal  fong, 

To  me  if  immortality  belong ; 

For  ftranger  things  than  this  have  come  to  pafs— 
POSTERITY  thine hift'ry  (hall devour, 
And  read  with  pleafure  //ow,  when  vernal  fliovr'r 

In  gay  profufion  rais'd  the  dewy  gr.d-, 

A  a  z  I  led 


264  THE    REMONSTRANCE* 

1  led  thee  forth  thine  appetite  to  pleafe, 
And  'mid  the  verdure  favv  thee  up  to  knees  f 

HDIV,  oft  I  pluck'd  the  tender  blade  ; 

And,  happy,  //crcu  thou  cam'ft  at  my  command, 
And  wantoning  around,  as  though  afraid^ 

With  poking  neck  didft  pull  it  from  my  hand, 
Then  fcamper,  kicking,  froiickfome,  away, 
With  fuch  a  fafcinating  bray  ! 

Where  oft  I  paid  thee  vifits,  and  where  thou 
Didft  cock  with  happinels  thy  kingly  ears, 

And  grin  fo  Vitchingly,  I  can't  tell  how, 
And  dart  at  me  fuch  friendly  leers  ; 

With  fuch  a  fmiling  head,  and  laughing  tail  ; 

And  when  I  mov'd,  how,  griev'd  thou  feetn'dft  to  fay  ; 
M  Dear  MASTER,  let  your  humble  Ass  prevail; 

u  Pray,  MASTER,  do  not  go  away"  — 
And  how  (for  what  than  friendship  can  be  fweeter  ?) 
I  gave  thee  graft  again,  O  pkafant  PETER. 


when  WINTER  bade  the  herbage  die, 
And  Nature  mourn'd  beneath  the  ftormy  fky  ; 
When  waving  trees,  furcharg'd  with  chilling  rain, 
Dropp'd  feeming  tears  upon  the  hrrafs'd  plain, 
I  gave  thee  a  good  ftable,  warm  as  wool, 
With  oats  to  grind,,  and  hay  to  pull  : 
Thus,  whilft  abroad  DECEMBER  rul'd  the  day, 
How  plenty  fliew'd  within,  the  blooming  MA?  ! 

And  lo,  to  future  times  it  fhall  be  known, 
Haw,  twice  a  day,  to  comb  and  rub  thee  down, 

And  be  thy  bed  maker  at  night, 
Thy  groom  attended,  both  with  hay  and  oat, 
By  which  thy  back  could  boaft  ahandfome  coat, 

And  laugh  at  many  a  fine  Court  Lord  and  Knight, 
Whofe  ftrutting  coa^s  belong  p'rhaps  to  the  tailor, 
And  probably  their  bodies  to-  the  jailor  ! 


What 


TflE    SKMONSTRANCE.  2&5 

What  though  no  dimples  thou  haft  got ; 
BJack  fparkling  eyes  (the  fafiiion)  are  thy  lot, 

And  oft  a  'witching  fmile  and  cheerful  laugh ; 
And  then  thy  clcanlitffs  ! — 'tis  ftrange  to  utt«  I 
Like  fin,  thy  heels  avoid  a  pool,  or  gutter ; 

And  then  the  ftream  fo  daintily  doth  quaff  ! 
Unlike  a  country  alderman,  who  Wows 
And  in  the  mug  baptizeth  mouth  and  nofc ! 

What  though  I've  heard  fome  voice*  fwceter ; 
Yet  exquifite  thy  hearing,  gentle  PETER  ! 
Whether  a  judge  of  mufic,  I  don't  know— 
If  fo, 

Thou  haft  th'  ad  vantage  got  of  many  a  foorc 
That  enter  at  the  Opera  door. 

Some  people  think  thy  tones  are  ratktr  coarfe; 

Ev'n  love-fick  tones  addrefs'd  to  Lady  Alles— 
0 flaves  indeed  of  wond'rous  force ; 

And  yet  thy  voice  full  many  a  voice  furpaues. 

LORD  CARDIGAN,  if  rightly  I  divine, 
Would  very  gladly  give  his  voice  for  thine  : 

And  LADY  MOUNT,*  her  MAJISTY'S  fine  foil, 
For  whom  perfumers,  barbers,  vainly  toil, 
Poor  lady  !  who  has  quarrell'd  with  the  Graces, 
Would  very  willingly  change  faces. 

But  honour 'd  once  wert  thou  !  but  ah  !  no  more  ! 
Thus  too  defpiSd  the  Hards— -cftecm'd  of  yore ! 
How  rated  once,  the  tuneful  TRIBES  of  Greece  ! 
Deem'd  much  like  di'monds— -thou&nds  worth -a  piece ! 

How  great  was  PINDAR'S  glory ! — On  a  day, 
Entering  APOLLO'S  churcn,  to  pray, 
The  LADY  of  the  facred  fane,  or  Mlftrcfs) 
Or,  in  more  claffic  term,  tU«  PRIESTESS, 

*  Her  M v  is  always  happy  to  have  Lady  Mount  E-    ••  Vy  Ker 

fide,    as  being  one  of  the  uglkft   women  in  Englani~-in  (hort,  Hn 
Jo  petticoat* 

A  a  3  Addrefs'd 


266  THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

Addrefs'd  him  with  ineffable  delight — 

"  GREAT  SIR   (quoth  ihe)  in  pigs,  and  fheep,  and 
"•  calves, 

*'  Mailer  injifts  upon't  that  you  go  halves  : 
**  To  <ta/"his  Godfliip  alfo  gives  you  right." 

Thus  did  the  TWAIN  moil  hearty  dinners  make ; 
PINDAR  and  PHCEBUS  eatmg  fteak and  fteak,:; 
When  too  (PAUSANIAS  fays)  to  pleafethe  GOD— 
Between  each  mouthful,  PINDAR  fung  an  ODE  \ 

Thus  half  a  Deity  was  this  great  POET  ! 

Now  this  was  grand  in  PHCEBUS — vaftly  civil-— 
How  chang'd  are  things !  the  prefent  moments  ihow  it;; 

For  Bard  is  now  fynonymous  with  Devil  / 

Juft  to  three  hundred  years  agOj  Jfpeak — 

IrLow  Jimple  fcholarjiip  was  wont,  to  rule  ! 
A  man  like  DOCTOR  PARR,  that  mouth' d\>\&  Greek, 

Was  ajmoil  worihipp'd  by  the  SAGE  and  FOOL;. 
JDeem'd  by  the  world  indeea  a  firft-rate  ftar. 
How  diff ' rent  now  the  fate  of  DOCTOR  PARR  ! 

Unknown  he  walks  !^ — his  name  no  infants  Hfp— - 

Not  -only  reckon'd  not  a  firjft-rateftar 

Is  this  our  Greek  man,  DOCTOR 
But,  Gods !  not  equal  to  a  will-o'-wifp  ! 
Plague  on't !  how  niggardly  the  tramp  of  Fame, 

That  wakes  not  *  BellenJenus  on  the  Ihelf ! 
The  world  fo  ftilr,  too;  on  the  DOCTOR'S  namef 

The  man  isTeally  forc'd  to  praife  kimfelf  ! 

tt  Archbifhops,  Bifhops^'  (fo  fays  DOCTOR  PARR) 
*'  By  Alpha,  Beta,  merely,  have  been  made  : 

**-  Why  from  the  mitre  then  am  /fo  far; 

"  So  long  a  dray-horfe  in  this  thundering  trade  ? 

*  The  Preface  to  BeHendenus  was  a  coup  d'effaiof  the  Doctor's  ft*  zv 
BHhoprick — it  was  the  child  of  his  dotagi.  The  pap  of  Party  fupported 
it  fomc  little  time;  when,  after  fevml  ftruggles  to  remain  amongft  us, 
it  paid  the  laft  debt  of  nature. 

4       .  "  O  PITT, 


THE    REMONSTRANCE. 

"  O  PITT,  fhameon  thce!— art  thou//7/to  feck, 
"  The/out  of  wifdom  in  the  found  of  Greek  ?" 

PETER,  fuppofe  we  make  a  bit  of  ftyle, 
And  reft  ourfelves  a  little  while  ? 


IN    CONTINUATION. 

THUS  endeth  DOCTOR  PARR  ;  and  now  again, 
To  thee,  as  good  a  fubjeft,  flows  the  (train. 
Permit  me,  PETER,  in  my  lyric  canter, 
Jult  to-  fpeak  Latin— *'  tempera  mutantur  t 

Kings  did  not  fcorn  to  prefs  your  backs  of  yore ; 

But  now,  with  humbled  neck  and  patient  face, 
Tied  to  a  thievifti  miller's  dufty  door, 

1  mark  thy  fall'n  and  di  (regarded  race. 

To  chimney-  fweepers  now  a  common  hack  ; 
Now  with  a  brace  of  fand-bags  on  your  back  f 
No  gorgeous  faddles  your's — no  iv'ry  crib*  ; 
.No  Slken  girts  furround  your  ribs ; 

No  ROYAL  hands  your  cheeks  with  pleafure  pat;; 
Cheeks  by  a  rognifti  halter  preft — 
Your  ears  and  rump,  of  inference  the  jeft ; 

Dragg'd,  kick'd,  and  pummell'd,  by  a  beggar's  brat. 

Thus,  as  I've  faid,  your  race  is  much  degraded!' 
And  much  too  is  the  POET'S  glory  faded  ! 

A  time  there  was,  when  Kings  of  this  fair  LAN  DV 
So  meek,  would  creep  to  POETS,  cop]in  hand, 
Begging,  as  'twere  for  alms,  a  grain  of  fame, 
To  fweeten  a  poor  putrifying  name- 
But  paft  are  thofe  rich  hours  !  ah  !  hours  of  ycrf  ! 
Thofe  golden  fands  of  TIME  fhall  glide  no  more. 


"  Yet 


THE    REMONSTRANCE. 


Yet  are  we  not  in  thy  dlfcarded  ftate, 
Whate'er  may  be  the  future  will  of  FATE  ; 
'Since,  as  we  find  by  PYE  (what  ftill  muft  pride  us) 
Kings  twice  a  year  can  condefcend  to  ride  us.~ 


AN  AFTER-REFLECTION. 

NO W,  WORLD,  thou  feeft  the  fluff  of  which  I'm  made ;, 
Firm  to  the  honour  of  the  timeful  Trade ; 
Leaving,  with  high  contempt,  the  Courtier  clafsr 
To  fing  the  merrts  of  the  humble  Ass. 

Yet  ihouH  a  miracle  the  PA  LACE  mend, 

And  high-nos'd  SAL'SB'RY  to  the  VIRTUES  fend^ 

Commanding  them  to  come  and  chat  with  KINGS-;. 
Well  pleas'd  tepcntant  Sinners  to  fupport, 
So.help  me,  IMPUDENCE,  I'll  go  to  Court ! 

Befldes,  I  dearly  love  to  fetfirange  things.. 


PRUEMIUM: 


P  R  O  E  M  I  U  M 

TO    THE 

MAGPIE  AND  ROBIN  RED-BREAST. 

TTOW  varied  arc  our  taftes !  Dame  NATURE'S  plan, 
•"  All  for  wife  reafons,  fince  the  world  began: 

Yes,  yn,  the  good  old  LADY  afted  right : 
Had  things  been  Qthcrwift^  like  wolves  and  bears, 
We  all  had  fall'n  together  by  the  ears — 

One  object  had  produc'd  an  endkfs  fight. 

Nettles  had  ftrew'd  LIFK'S  path  i  aft  cad  of  nfcj  g 

And  multitudes  of  mortal  faces, 
Printed  with  hiftories  of  bloody  nofes, 

Had  taken  leave  of  abfencc  of  the  GB  ACES. 

Now  interrupting  not  each  other's  line, 

You  ride^oKr  hobby -horfe,  and  I  ride  mine— 

You  prefs  the  blue-ey'd  CHLOE  to  your  arms, 

And  /the  black-ey'd  SAPPHO'S  browner  charms: 

Thus  fituated  in  our  different  blifles, 

We  fquint  not  envious  on  each  other's  kifles. 

Yet  are  there  feme  exceptions  to  thb  rule  : 
We  meet  with  now  and  then  a  ftubborn  fool, 
Dragooning  us  into  his  predilections; 
As  though  there  was  no  Jif'rmce  in  affections, 
And  that  it  was  the  booby's  firm  belief, 
Pork  cannot  pleafe,  becaufe  he  doats  on  beef! 
Again — how  weak  the  ways  of  forne^  and  fid  ! 
One  would  fuppofe  the  Man-creation  mad. 

I.-)!  this  poor  fellow,  folly-drunk,  he  rambles, 
And  flings  himfelf  into  MISFORTUNE'S  brambles, 

In  fulipurfuit  of  HAPPINKSS'S  trenfure  ; 
\\  hen,  with  a  little  glance  of  circumfpr<5r.ion, 
A  mniiard- grain  of  ler^fc — a  r/W</'s  reflection— 

Tl.c  Tool  had  couiVd  the  velvet  b'vn  of  PLtAsu*B. 


>HOEMIt7M,   &C. 

Idly  he  braves  the  furge,  and  roaring  gale  \ 
When  REASON,  if  confulted  with  a  fmile, 

Had  tow'd  through  fummer  feas  his  filken  fai/9 
And  fav'd  a  dangerous  and  Herculean  toiU 

Yes,  as  I've  fomewhere  faid  above,  I  find, 
That  many  a  man  has  many  a  mind. 

How  I  hate  DRUNKENNESS,  a  nafty  pig  ! 

With  fmiff-ftain'd  neckcloth,  without  hat  or  wigr 

P  eeling,  and  belching  wifdom  in  one's  face  ! 
How  I  hate  BULLY  UPROAR  from  my  foul, 
Whom  nought  but  whips  and  prifons  can  controuJ, 

Thofe  necelfary  implements  of  GRACE  ! 

Yet  altars  rife  to  DRUNKENNESS  and  RIOT — 
How  few  to  mild  SOBRIETY  and  QUIET  ! 

Thou  art  my  Goddefs,  SOLITUDE— to  thee, 
Parent  of  dove-ey'd  PEACE,  I  bend  the  knee  ! 

O  with  what  joy  I  roam  thy  calm  retreat, 
Whence  foars  the  lark  amid  the  radiant  hour, 
Where  many  a  varied  chafte  and  fragrant  flow'r 

Turns  coyly  from  Rogue  ZEPHYR'S  whifper  fweetf 
Bleft  IMP  !  who  wantons  o'er  thy  wide  domain, 
And  kifles  all  the  BEAUTIES  of  the  plain : 

Where,  happy,  'mid  the  all-enlivening  ray, 
The  infect  nations  fpend  the  bufy  day, 

Wing  the  pure  fields  of  air,  and  crawl  the  ground; 
Where,  idle  none,  the  Jew-like  myriads  range, 
Jtift  like  the  Hebrews  at  high  'Change, 

Diffufing  hum  of  Babel-notes  around  ! 

Where  HEALTH  fo  wild  and  gay,  with  bc*fom  bare. 
And  rofy  cheek,  keen  eye,  and  flowing  hair, 
Trips  with  a  fmile  the  breezy  fcenes  along, 
And  pours  the  fpirit  of  content  in  fong  ! 

Thus  taftes  are  various,  as  I've  faid  before — 
Thefe  damn  moft  cordially  what  thofe  adore. 


THE 

MAGPIE 

AND 

ROBIN    RED-BREAST: 
A    TALE. 

A    MAGPIE,  inthefpirit  of  romance, 
*•*"  Much  likethe  fam'd  Reformers  now  of  FRANCE, 

Flew  from  the  dwelling  of  an  old  Poi  SSARDE  ; 
Where,  fometimes  in  his  ca^e,  and  fometimes  out, 
He  ju  (lifted  the- Revolution  rout, 

That  is,  call'd  names,  and  got  a  fop  for  his  reward. 

Red-hot  with  Monarch-roaftin<*  coal*, 

Juft  like  his  old  fifh-thunct'ring  Dame, 
He  left  the  Queen  of  crabs,  and  plaice,  and  foles, 

To  kindle  in  Old  England's  realm  a  flame. 

Arriv'd  at  evening's  philofophic  hour, 
He  refted  on  a  rural  antique  tow'r, 

Some  BARON'S  caftle  in  the  days  of  old; 
When  furious  wars,  mifnnmer'd  civil, 
Sent  mighty  chiefs  to  fee  the  Devil, 

Leaving 'behind,  their  bodies  for  rich  mould, 
That  pliable  from  form  to  form  patroles, 

Making  freih  houfes  for  new  fouls. 

Perch  on  the  wall,  h«  cocks  his  tail  and  eye, 

And  hops  like  modern  beaux  in  country  dances ; 

Looks  devTifh  knowing,  with  his  head, 
Squinting  with  connoiffeurfhip  glances. 

All  on  a  fudden,  MAGGOT  ftarts  and  ft  ares, 
And  wonders,  and  for  fomewbat^roirgr  prepares ; 

But 


THE    MAGPIE 

Bat,  lo !  his  wonder  did  not  hold  him  long — 
Soft  from  a  bum  below,  divinely  clear,. 
A  modeft  warble  melted  on  his  ear, 

A  plaintive,  Toothing,  folitary  fong — 

A  ftealing,  timid,  imprefuming  found, 
Afraid  dim  NATURE'S  deep  repofe  to  wound  ; 

That  hufh'd  (a  death-like  paufe)  the  rude  SUBLIME. 
This  was  a  novelty  to  MAG  indeed, 
Who,  pulling  up  his  fpindle-flianks  with  fpeed, 

Dropp'dfrom  his  turret,  half-devour'd  by  TIME, 
j$  la  Franfoife,  upon  the  fpray, 
Where  a  lone  Red-breaft  pour'd  to  eve  his  lay. 

Staring  the  modeft  minftrel  in  the  face ; 
Familiar,  and  with  arch  grimace, 
He  conn'd  the  dufky  warbler,  o'er  and  o'er, 
As  though  he  knew  him  years  before ; 
And  thus  began,  with  feeming  great  civility, 
All  in  the  Paris  eafe  of  volubility — 

*c  What — BOBBY!  darn'me,  is  it  _>•<>», 
**  That  thus  your  pretty  phiz  to  mufic  fcrew, 
*'  So  far  from  hamlet,  village,  town,  and  city, 
**  To  glad  old  battlements  with  dull  pfalm  ditty  ? 

•"  'Sdeath  1  what  a  pleafant,  lively,  merry  fcene ! 
•*'  Plenty  of  bats,  and  owls,  and  ghofts,  I  ween  ; 
*'  Rare  midnight  fcreeches,  BOB,  between  you  all ! 
44  Why,  what's  the  name  on't,  BOBBY  ?  DifmalHall? 

**  Come,  to  be  ferious — curfe  this  queer  old  fpot, 
"  And  let  thy  owlifh  habitation  rot ! 

"  Join  me,  and  foon  in  riot  will  we  revel : 
"  I'll  teach  thee  how  to  curfe,  and  call  folks  names, 
"  And  be  expert  in  treafont  murder,  flames, 

"  And  moft  divinely  play  the  devil. 

"  Yes,  thou  lhalt  leave  this  fpeftred  holef 
'•  And  prove  thou  haft  a  bit  of  foul ; 

«  Soon 


ANT)    HIE     ROI.IN    RED-BREAST.  2*~, 

"  Soon  (halt  thou  fee  old  fhipid  LONDON  dance ; 
a  There  will  we  fliine  immortal  knaves; 
"   Not  fteal  unknown,  like  cuckoos,  to  our  graves, 

"  But  imitate  the  geniufes  of  FRANCE. 

*'  Who'd  be  that  monkifh,  cloirter'd  thing,  a  mufcfe? 

*  Importance  only  can  arife  from  buftle! 

*  Tornado,  thunder,  lightning,  tumult,  ftrifc — 
4  Thefe  f///?rw,  and  add  a  Jififty  to  life, 

4  That  thou  fhowldtl  choofe  this  fj>ot,  is  monftrous  odd; 
**  Poh,  poh  !  thou  canft  not  like  this  life,  by  G—  !" 

•'  Sir!"  like  one  thunder-itricken,  daring  wide — 
**  Can  you  be  ferious,  Sir?"  the  ROBIN  cry'd. 
"  Serious!"  rejoin'd  the  MAGPIE,  **  a^e,  my  boy— 
u  So  come,  let's  play  the  devil,  and  enjoy ." 

"  Flames  !"  quoth  the  ROBTN — "  and  in  riot  revel, 
"  Call  names,  and  curfe,  divinely  play  the  devil ! 
"  I  cannot,  for  my  life,  the  fun  difcern." 
«  No !— bluHi  then,  BOB  !  and  follow  me,  and  learn." 

"  Excufe  me,  Sir,"  the  modeft  HERMIT  cry'd — 

"  Hell's  not  the  hobby-horfe  I  wifh  to  ride." 

«  Hell!"  laugh'd  the  MAGPIE— u  hell  no  longer  dread  ; 

'•  Why,  BOB,  in  FRANCE  the  Devil's  lately  dead: 

"  Damnation  vulgar  to  a  Frenchman's  hearing— 

"  The  world  is  only  kept  alive  for  f\vearing. 

"  Againft  futurity  they  all  proteft ; 

M  And  God  and  Heav'jj  art  grown  a  (landing  jeft. 

"  Brimftone  and  fin  are  downright  out  of  fafhion ; 

*  I  R  A  N c E  is  quite  alter'd — -now  a  thinking  nation  : 

more  of  penitential  tenrs  and  groans ! 
"  PHILOSOPHY  has  crack'd  RELIGION'S  bones. 

*  A*  for  your  Saviour  of  a  wicked  world, 

u  Long  from  his  confcquence  has  he  been  hurl'd: 
'  They  do  acknowledge  fuck  a  man,  d'ye  fee ; 
.  "  But  then  tliey  callhiin  fimple  Moffsitu*  CHRIST. 
VOL,  H  Bb 


MAGPIE,    &C. 

<;  BOB,  for  thy  ignorance,  pray  blufh  for  fliame — 
"  Behold,  thy  DOCTOR  PRIESTLEY  fays  ttte fame. 

*'  Well !  now  thou  fully  art  convinced — let's  go." 
*'  What  curfed  doctrine !  quoth  the  ROBIN,  "  No— 
u  I  won't  go — no !  thy  fpeeches  make  me  fhudder." 
**  Poo?-  ROBIN  !"  quoth  the  MAGPIE,  "  what  a  pudder! 
"  Be  damn'd,  then  BOBBY" — flying  off,  he  rav'd — 
**  And  (quoth  the  ROBIN)  Sir,  may  you  befav'd !" 
This  faid,  the  tuneful  SPRITE  renew 'd  his  lay 
A  fweet  and  farewell  hymn  to  parting  DAY. 


In  THOMAS  PAINE  the  MAGPIE  doth  appear: 
That  I'm  POOR  ROBIN,  is  not  quite  fo  clear. 


POSTSCRIPT. 

TO     THE      CANDID      READER. 

T  REALLY  think  that  this  Tale  of  the  MAGPIE  and 
•*•  ROBIN  ought  immediately  to  have  followed  the  RE 
MONSTRANCE  :  but  as  *///brder,  inftead  of  order,  is  the 
leading  feature  of  my  fublime  LYRIC  BRETHREN  of 
old,  I  fhall  take  the  liberty  of  flickering  myfelf  under 
the  wing  of  their  facred  names.  The  fable  was  written  in 
confequence  of  a  ftrenuous  application  of  a  red-hot  RE 
VOLUTIONIST  to  a  POET  in  the  country,  preffing  him  to 
becomea  Member  of  the  ORDER  of  CONFUSION. 


AX 

APOLOGY    FOR  KINGS. 

\S  want  of  candour  really  is  not  right, 
I  own  my  Satire  too  inclin'd  to  bite  : 
On  KINGS  behold  it  breakfaft^  dine,  and/i^: 
Nvw  (hall  flic  praijlt)  and  try  to  make  it  up. 


Why  will  the  fimple  world  expect  wife  things 
From  lofty  folk,  particularly  Kings  ? 

Look  on  their  poverty  ot  education  ! 
Ador'd  and  flatter'd,  taught  that  they  are  Goos  ; 
And  by  their  awful  frowns  and  nods, 

JOVE-LIKE,  to  (hake  the  pillars  of  creation  ! 

They  fcorn  that  little  ufcful  IMP  call'd  MIND, 
Who  fits  them  for  the  circle  of  Mankind  ! 
PRIDK  their  companion,  and  the  WORLD  their  hate; 
Immur'd,  they  doze  in  ignorance  and  (late. 

Sometimes,  indeed,  GREAT  KINGS  will  conJefcnd 
A  little  with  their  ftt&jeffs  to  unbend  ! 

An  inftance  take  —  A  King  of  this  great  land, 

In  days  of  yore,  •we  umlerftand, 
Did  vifit  SALISBURY'S  old  church  fo  fair: 

An  EARL  of  PEMBROKE  was  the  MONARCH'S  guide  ; 

Incog,  they  travell'd,  muffling  fide  by  fide  ; 
And  into  the  Cathedral  dole  the  PAIR. 

The  VERGER  met  them  in  his  blue  filkgown, 
And  humbly  bow'd  his  neck  with  rev'rence  down, 

Low  as  an  afs  to  lick  a  lock  of  hay  : 
Looking  jhe  frighten'd  VERGER  through  and  through, 
All  with  his  eye-glafs—  "  Well,  Sir,  who  atej-ow  ? 

"  What,    what,    $ir?—  hey,    Sir?"   deign'd  the  King 
to  fay. 

B  b  a  «  J  am 


2/6  AN    APOLOGY    FOR    KIN^BS, 

"  I  am  the  V£RGER  here,  mofl  mighty  *  KING  :    ; 
"  In  this  Cathedral  I  do  ev'ry  thing; 

"  Sweep  it,  an't  pleafe  ye,  Sir,  and  keep  it  clean." 
"  Hey?  Verger!  Verger  'l  you  the  Verger  ?  —  hey?" 
"  Yes,  pleafe  your  glorious  MAJESTY,  J  &," 

The  VERGER  anhver'd,  with  the  mildeft  mien. 

Then  turn'd  the  KING  about  towards  the  PEER, 
And  wink'd,  and  laugh'd  ;  then  whifpcr'din  hte  ear, 
"  Hey,  hey  —  what,  what—  fine  fellow,  'pon  my  word  : 
"  I'll  knight  him,    knight  him,  knight  him  —  hey,  my 

"  Lord?" 

Then  with  his  glsfs,  as  hard  as  eye  could  ftrain, 
He  kenn'd  the  trembling  VERGER  o'er  again. 

*'  He's  a  poor  Verger,  SIRE,"  his  Lordfhip  cry'd  : 
"  Sixpence  would  handfomely  requite  him," 

•'  Poor  Verger,  Verger,  hey  ?"  the  King  reply  'd  : 
"  No,    no,   then,  we  won't  knight  him  —  no.    won't 
«  knight  him." 

Now  to  the  lofty  roof  the  King  did  raife 

His  glafs,  and  fkipp'd  it  o'er  with  founds  of  praife  ; 

For  thus  his  marv'ling  MAJESTY  did  fpeak  : 
"  Fine  roof  this,  Matter  Verger,  quite  complete  : 
*'  High  —  high  and  lofty  too,  and  clean  and  neat  : 

"  What,  Verger,  what  ?  mop,  mop  it  once  a  week  ?  *' 

**  An't  pleafe  your  MAJESTY,"  with  marv'ling  chops, 
The  VERGER  anfwer'd,  "  we  have  got  no  mops 

"  In  Sai'ib'ry  that  will  reach  fo  high." 
"  Not  mop)  no,  no,  not  mop  it,"  quoth  the  King. 
*'  No,  Sir,  our  Salary  mops  do  no  fuch  thing  ; 

44  They  might  as  well  pretend  to  fcrub 


*  The  Reader  will  be  pleafed  to  obfcrve,  that  the  Verger,  of  all  the 
jfcns  of  the  Church,  wa&  the  Wy  one  entrufkd  \yith  the  royal  inttntiw. 


IMORAL 


AN    APOLOGY    FOR    KINGt.  277 

MORAL. 

This  little  anecdote  doth  plainly  fho'.v, 

That  IGNORANCE  a  King  too  often  lurches ; 

For,    hid  from  AJLT,    Lord!     how  Jloulti  MONARCH* 

know 
The  nat'ral  hiftory  of  mops  and  churches  ? 


STORY  THE  SECOND. 

FROM  Sal'lbVy  Church  to  Wilton  Houfefo  grand, 
Return  *d  the  mighty  RUI.B.R  of  the  LAND— 

44  My  Lord,  you've  got  fine  ftatues,"  faid  the  King. 
*  A  Few  !  beneath  your  royal  notice,  Sir," 
Reply'd  Lord  PEMBROKE—  "  Stir,  my  Lord,  ftir,  ftir; 

"  Let's  fee  them  all,  all,  all,  all,  rv'ry  thing. 

«  Who's  this  ?  who's  this  ?  who's  this  fine  fellow  here?'* 

**  SESOSTRIS,"  bowing  low,  repty'd  the  Peer. 

**  SIR  SOSTRIS,  hey?  SFR  SOSTRIS?  'pon  my  word  ! 

"  KNIGHT  or  a  BARONET,  my  Lord  ? 

44  One  of  my  making  f  what,  my  Lord,  my  making  J" 

This,  with  a  vengeance,  was  miftaking  f 


M  .SV-sosTRis,  SiRE/'y&yo/Qr,  the  Peer 
"  A  famous  KING  of  EGYPT,  Sir,  of  old." 

44  Poh,  poh  !  \\finftruftcd  MONARCH  fnappifli  cry'd, 
"  I  need  not  that  —  I  need  not  that  be  told." 

•  Pray,  pray,  my  Lord,  who's  that  big  fellow  there?" 
**  'Tis  HERCULES,"  replies  the  (hrinking  PEER. 
•*  Strong  fellow,  hey,  my  Lord  ?  ftrong  fellow,  hey  ? 
«  Clean'd  ftables  !  crack'd  a  lion  like  a  flea  ; 
"  Kill'd  friakes,  great  fnakes,  that  in  a  cradle  found  him— 
**  The  QITEEN,  QUEEN'S  coming  !  wrap  an  apron  round 
44  him." 

B  b  3  OUR 


378  *y    ArOLOGY    FOR    KINGS.. 


OUR  Moral  is  not  merely  water-gruel ; 
It  ihews  that  curiofity's  a  jewel ! 

It  (hows  with  Kings  that  IGNORANCE  may  dwelt  * 
It  fhows  that  fubjefts  muft  not  give  opinions 
To  PEOPLE  reigning  over  wide  dominions,. 

As  information  to  great  Folk,  -is  hell : 

It  fhows  that  DECENCY  may  live  with  Kings, 
On  whom  the  bold  ytrtu-men  turn  their  backs  • 

And  (hows  (for  num'rous  are  the  naked  things) 
That  fauty  Statues  fhould  be 


ADDHES 


(    279    ) 
ADDRESS  TO  MY  BOOK. 

AN    ELEGY. 


of  my  love,  go  forth,  and  try  thy  fate : 
^  Few  are  thy  friends,  and  manifold  'thy  foes ! 
Whether  or  long  or  fhort  will  be  thy  date, 
FUTURITY'S  dark  volume  only  knows. 

Much  criticifm,  alas  !  will  be  thy  lot ! 

Severe  thine  ordeal,  I  am  fore  afraid  ! 
Some  judges  will  condemn,  and  others  mot : 

Some  call  thy  fonnfittyaitttol — others,  Jkaik. 

Yes,  CHILD,  by  multitudes  wilt  thou  be  tried ! 

Wife  men,  and  fools,  thy  merits  will  examine : 
Tlnff  through  muck  fn-udcnct,  may  thy  virtues  kiilc  ; 

Tkefey  through  viU  rencntr,  or  tkt  drtaJ  of  famine. 

Pra/Wwill  it  be  indeed  (to  make  thee  flirink) 
What  metal  Nature  in  thy  mafs  did  knead  ; 
A  *  melting  procefs  will  be  us'd,  I  thiuk ; 
vnat  is  to  fay,  large  quantities  of  Uatt. 

Byfome  indeed  will  NITRE'S  fummg  fpirit, 
Be  o'er  thy  form  fo  fweet,  fo  tender,  thro\vn ; 

Perchance  a  Mafttr  hand  may  try  thy  merit ; 
Perchance  an  Imp  by  FOLLY  only  known. 

Now,  now  I  fancy  thee  a  timid  hare, 

Started  for  beagles,  hounds,  and  curs,  to  chace  \ 
A  mongrel  dog  may  fnap  thee  up  unfair; 
HUUGI 


For  SPITE  and  HUNGER  boaft  hut  little  grace. 
Called  Equation. 


Long 


28O  ADDRESS    TO    MY    BOOK. 

Long  are  thy  legs  (F  know)  and  ftout  for  running  j 
And  many  a  trick  haft  thou  within  thy  brain ; 

But  guns  and  greyhounds  are  too  much  for  cunning, 
Join'd  to  the  rav'nous  pack  of  THOMAS  PAINED 

And  now  a  LAMB  ! — What  devils  now- a -days 
The  butch'ring  SHOP  of  CRITICISM  employs! 

Each  beardlefs  villain  now  cuts  up,  and  flays  ; 
A  gang  of  wanton,  brutal,  'prentice  boys ! 

Ah  me !  how  hard  to  reach  the  dome  of  FAME  !     . 

Knock'd  down  before  (lie  gets  half  way,  poor  Mufe  r 
For  many  a  LOUT  that  cannot  gain  a  namet 

(Rebus  and  riddle- maker)  now  reviews  / 

Poor  jealous  Eunuchs  in  the  land  of  TASTET 
Too  weak  to  reap  a  harvefl  of  fair  praife ; 

Malicious,  lo !  they  lay  the  region  watte, 
Fire  all  they  can,  and  triumph  at  the  blaze  I 

Too  oft,  with  talents  bleft,  the  cruel  FEW 

Fix  on  poor  MERIT'S  throat,  to  flop  her  breath  : 

How  like  the  beauteous  *  FRUIT,  that  turns  of  Dew 
The  life  ambrofial,  into  drops  of  Death ! 

Sweet  BABE,  to  WEYMOUTIT  fhouldft  thou  find  thy  way  ! 

The  KING,  with  curiofity  fo  wild, 
May  on  a  fudden  fend  for  thee,  and  fay, 

"  See,     CHARL.Y,    PETER'S   child — fihe   child,    fine 
44  child  r 

*  Ring,    ring  for    SCHWELLENBERG  ;    ring,    Gharly, 

"  ring; 
•*•  Show  it  to  SCHWELLENBERG |    fhow,  fliow  it,  fliow 

"  it: 
**  She'll  fay,  Got  dem  cte  fancy  ftoopid  ting, 

"  I  hate  more  ivorfe  as  hell  "what  come  from  Poet?' 

*  The  mortifying  powers  of  dew  or  rain  falling  from  the  Manchineel 
re«  are  muverfally  knowru 

1  '  Yet 


ADDRESS    TO    MY    BOOK.  * 

Ytt  \v\\\fomc  Counters  all  at  once  be  glad ! 

LLEDS,  HAWKSB'RY,  SAL'SB'RY,  BRUDENELL,  will 

rejoice; 
Forget  how  oft'  thy  Brothers  made  them  mad, 

And  echo  through  the  realm  the  royal  voice. 

And  then  for  ME  his  MAJESTY  may  fend  ; 

(Making  fome  people  grumble  in  their  gizzards) 
With  DRAKE'S  new  place,  perchance,  thy  SIR K  befriend ! 

FIRST  FLY-CATCHER  to  good  QUEEN  CHARLOTTE'S 
*  Lizards ! 

*  The  ftory  of  the  Lizards  is  as  follows  :— At  a  Board  of  Green  Cloth 
lately,  which  aflembled,  as  ufual,  with  due  dtcorum,  to  deliberate  on 
the  Jpfciet  of  food  proper  to  be  given  to  the  Litm  of  Buckingham-Houfe, 
the  Iblemnity  of  the  meeting  was  interrupted  by  the  fudden  Gothic  ir 
ruption,  and  fclf-introduclion,  of  a  fervant  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  one  of 
the  Honevrallt  Board;  which  fen  ant,  a  true  Devon/hi™  Du*iflint  open 
ing  an  ell-wide  pair  of  jaws,  exclaimed  thus  t  "  Zur  Vrancis,  I'm  a 
"  tent  to  ax  if  yow've  a  cort  f  enny  *  more  Vices  § — Have  ye  con 
«  enny,  Zur  Vrancis  ?"  The  Baronet  hemmed,  winked,  nodded, 
knitted  his  brows,  ftared,  fhrugged  up  his  fhouldcrs,  blew  hit  nofe,  bit 
his  lips  at  poor  Nuinps :  but  all  the  face-making  hints  writ  thrown 
away.  «'  Why  Zur  Vrancis,  I  lay  (continued  Numps)  Madam 
"  Zwellinburg  wanth  to  know  if  yow've  a  nabb'd  enny  more  J7«j /" 
The  Board  flood  amazed  ! — Sir  Francis  bluftwd  for  thejty?  time.  At 
length,  recovering  from  his  confufion,  and  bidding  the  fellow,  in  an 
angry  tone,  go  about  his  bufinefs,  he  very  candidly  informed  the  Board, 
that  her  Majefty  had  lately  received  a  prcfcnt  of  Lizards;  that  fhe  had 
ordeied  Mtftrefs  Schwellcnhcrg  to  catch  JfrVi  for  them ;  but  that,  to  oblige 
Miftrcfs  Schwellenberg,  who  kindly  invited  him  to  dine  with  her  three 
or  four  times  a  week,  he  promifed  to  adilt  her  in  her  F/y-kuxt;  in  ihort, 
to  be  her  Deputy  Fly-catcher t  and  nx  Fi'fi  Fly-cat ckfr,  as  the  Ekgy 
errooeoully  proclaimeth. 


MORE 


MORE       MONEY! 

OR, 

ODES     OF    INSTRUCTION 

TO 

MISTER     PITT: 

WITH 

A  VARIETY  OF  OTHER  CHOICE  MATTERS. 


-  •  '  Quid  no*  "nrtatia  ft&tri  cogil, 
Auri  facra  famei  f  Vl  R  c  I L. 

O  Gold  !   thou  prrciourfafcinating  evil, 
Say,  with  what  foul  thou  haft  not  pfay'd  the  devil  ? 


F/eflcre  Jt  nejue*  Sufem,  Acheronta  movtl*.         V I  ROIL. 

Go  to  the  Houfe — beg,  threifcn,  nay,  compel  for't  : 
We  muft  have  Money,  though  we  ftukc  all  Hell  for't. 


READER, 

THE  rumour  of  an  intended  and  fpeedy  application  to 
Parliament  for  more  Money  for  the  KING,  gave 
birth  to  the  following  Odes.  Though  by  no  means  an 
advocate  for  Mr.  PAINE'S  violent  fyftem  of  Revolution, 
I  am  too  much  the  POET  OF  THE  PEOPLE,  not  to  fing 
for  a.  Reformation.  To  the  ODES  is  fubjoined  a  fort  of 
make- weight  Poetry.  As  the  pieces  are  alluded  to  in  the 
ODES,  I  deemed  it  not  amifs  to  publim  them — To  be 
fure,  they  add  to  the  price  as  well  as  the  bulk  of  the  Pam 
phlet  ;  but,  as  I  ftill  profefs  myfelf  free  from  political  cor 
ruption,  notwithstanding  a  wicked  report  to  the  contrary, 
(for  GREAT  POETS  as  well  as  GREAT  KINGS  may  be  tra 
duced)  I  flatter  myfelf  that  thou  wilt  be  proud  of  the 
opportunity  of  paying  a  fmall  tribute  to  PUBLIC  VIRTUE. 

P.  P. 


ODES 


MISTER      PITT, 


ODE      I. 


TV/TORE  Money  wanted ! — 'tis  a  brazen  lie ; 
1Y1   »TJS  OPPOSITION'S difappomted  cry; 

A  poifon'd  (haft  to  wound  the  beft  of  Kings. 
More  money  !— 'tis  a  poor  invented  ftory 
To  cloud  with  dire  difgrace  the  King  of  Glory; 

Damn'd  lliears  to  clip  his  FAME'S  exalted  wings. 

More  Money  !— 'tis  a  little  dirty  tale 

To  fink  of  popularity  the  gale, 

That  wafts  the  name  of  GEORGE  tourmoft  earth; 

A  lhake  that  mould  be  ftrangled  in  its  birth. 

More  Money  ! — 'Tis  a  party  trick  fo  mean, 
To  make  us  fick  of  our  £ooit  King  and  Queen  ! 
We  have  no  more  to  give — a  truce  to  grants, 
That  make  the  State  a  field  devour'd  by  *  wants ; 
The  ruft  that  eat*  the  cannon — the  rank  weed 
That  dares  the  veflel's  courfe  fublime  impede ; 


Vat.  II. 


*  Another  word  for  a  mole. 

Cc 


The 


286  MORE    MONEY. 

The  worm  that  gnaws  its  native  keel,  th*  i 
And  opes  the  world  of  waters  for  its  fate  ; 
A  fpreading  cancer  that  demands  the  knife, 
That,  wolf-like,  preys  upon  the  Nation's  life, 


e  Money  !  —  what  a  found  !  the  folemn  bell 
That  tolls  the  Conftitution's  knell. 

Clap  a  hot  iron  on  the  patriot  tongues, 

Tor  loading  fpotlefs  Majefiy  with  wrongs  ; 

Kay,  tear,  thofe  tongues,  th'  offenders,  from  their  holes, 

Foul  pumps,  that  pour,  the.froth  from  poifon'd  fouls. 

The  Monarch  fcorns  to  afk  a  penny  more  ; 

Tax'd  to  the  eyes,  his  groans  the  State  deplore  : 

Away,  then,  DEFAMATION'S  baleful  breath, 

That  blows  on  VIRTUE'S  bud  the  blight  of  death. 

Yet,  Jltauld  it  happen  that  the  Beft  of  Kings 
Should  whifper  to  his  Minifter  ftrange  things, 

And  bid  thee  money  afk,  the  tempting  curie  ; 
Then  firmly  THOU,  the  Nation's  fteward,  fay 
(With  rev'rence  due  to  Royalty,  I  pray), 

"  Dread  Sir,  have  mercy  on  your  People's  purfe  : 

*4  O  King,  your  calculations  have  'milled  ye,; 
*  Millions  on  millions  you  have  had  already. 
41  Oh!  let  DISCRETION*  from  -the  Virtue,  band 
*'  Be  call'd  to  Court  to  take  you  by  the  hand. 

**  You  really  do  not  know  how  rich  you  are  : 

*'  Your  wealth  fo  wond'rous  makes  your  fubjecls  flare, 

"  Squeez'd  from  great  cities,  towns,  and  hovels  : 
**  HAWKSB'RY  and  COUTTS  can  fliow  fuch   heaps  of 

"  treafure, 
lt  Such  Ipads  of  guineas  for  the  royal  pleafure, 

M  H«av'jd  into  iron  chefts  with  fhovels  j 

*•  This  is  fruitlefs  advice,  I  fear  —  The  PASSIONS  5re  too  powerful 
lor  the  gentle,  VIRTUES.  See  my  b«autiful  Addrcfs  to  thofe  LADIES 
in  thU  Work. 

«  Then 


M01E    MONET.  287 

14  Then  how  can  Majefty  be  poor  ? 

nr coffers,  Sir,  are  running  o'er; 
"  Thanks  to  ECONOMY,  of  golden  views, 
«*  Whoinends  old  breeches,  and  twice  folcs  old  flioes  V9 


ODE      II. 

QJAY  to  the  King,  (but  with  profound  refpeft, 
^  For  who  would  manners  unto  Kings  neglect?) 
44  Dread  Sir,  to  Hofpitals  you  little  grant, 
44  Your  magic  name  fupplyingev'ry  want : 

'*  And  then  your  mutton,  veal,  and  beef,  you  kill, 
44  The  ftomachs  of  yourfkvour'd  Few  to  fill : 

14  And,   lo  f  you  kill  your  own  delightful  lambs, 
•*  And  beat  old  BAKEWELL*  in  the  breed  of  lambs; 

44  And  never  with  to  keep  a  thing  for  finery : 
"  Thus  are  parterres  of  Richmond  and  of  Kew 
u  Dug  up  for  bull  and  cow,  and  ram. and  ewe, 

"  And  Windfor  Park,  fo- glorious,  made  a  {winery. 

u  And,  lo  !  your  Dairy  thriving,  let  me  fay, 
*  As  not  one  drop  of  milk  is  giv'n  away ; 
"  So  fays  your  little  dairy-maid  fo  fweet, 

Whofe beauties  many  a  fmile  fo  gracious  meet; 
**  And  fmiling  like  the  blooming  May, 
*-*  Who  fliows  the  milk-fcore  ev'ry  day. 
44  How  then  can  Majefty  be  poor  ? 
44  Your  chefts,  Sir,  muft  be  running  o'er. 

44  Your  Oratorios,  that  expences  bred, 

44  And  DUKE  of  CUMBERLAND,!  fo  dear^  are  dead, 

*  We  have  more  reverence  than  to  fay,  a  B  fiber  Grazier  ofthe 
North. 

f  By  the  death  6f  the  Duke,  a  large  annual  income  revertedvjo  hi* 
Majefty. 

C  c  a  «  The 


»  MORE    MONEY. 

"  That  gave  ftu  faM)  your  Majefty  much  pain  j 
44  The  Nation  kindly  paid  your  Dolor's  bills, 
44  I  mean  the  WILLISES,  for  toil  and  pills, 

«*  That  brought  you  to  your  wifdom,  Sire,  again  ; 
44  Then  how  can  Majefty  be  poor  ? 
"  Your  coffers  muft  be  running  o'er. 

44  Cabbage  and  carrot  without  end 
44  The  Windfor  Gard'ners  *  daily  fend  ; 
44  Proud  that  their  vegetables  load  the  board 
44  Of  Britain's  High  and  mighty  LORD  ! 

44  Of  this,  their  glad  pofterhy  (hall  boaft  j 

44  For  fuch  an  honour  never  fhould  be  loft: 

44  Thus  {hall  they  cry  in  triumph  to  their  neighbours, 

44  Crown'd  were  our  great  great  great  forefathers  labours  ; 

44  Whofe  praife  through  FAME'S  long  tnunpet  ever  ringSj 

44  For  giving  cabbages  to  Kings  ! 

44  Prefents  of  ev'ry  fort  of  thing  are  made, 
"  Without  the  flighted  danger  of  offending, 

"  Either  from  gentlemen,  'or  men  in  trade  5 
"  Your  Majefties  are  both  fo  condefcending  : 

"  Folks  for  acceptance  never  beg  and  pray  j 

"  For  prefents  never  yet  were  turn'd  away. 


**  People  meet  much  encouragement 

"  For  fending  rarities  and  pretty  things  : 

"  Although  fuch  rarities  ye  do  not  need  — 

"  Such  is  the  fweet  humility  of  Kings  ! 

44  Then  how  can  Majefty  be  poor  ? 

44  Your  coffers  muft  be  funning  o'er. 

44  Card-entertainment  'tis  ye  chiefly  give, 
44  By  which  the  Chandlers  fcarce  can  live  : 
"  For  foon  as  e'er  ye  leave  the  little  rout, 
44  The  candles  are  immediately  blown  out  ! 

f. 
#  Not  now.—  Se?  the  progrefc  of  ADMIRATION. 

44  So 


MORE    MONEY.  289 

CT  So  quickly  feiz'd  on  by  fomc  candle-ftiark, 
44  LADIES  and  Gentlemen  are  in  the  dark  j* 
44  Where  what  lias  happen'd,  heav'n  alone  can  tell, 
u  As  DARKNESS  oft  turns  pimp  t'  undo  a  BKLLL." 


ODE      III. 

CAY  to  the  King  (but,  as  I've  faid  before, 
'  With  due  refpeft),  "  "by  G — ,  vou  cau't  be  poor, 
1  Sometimes  a  little  Concert  is  made  up, 
14  Where  nought  is  giv'n  to  eat  or  fup — 

Where  mufic  makes  an  economic  pother ; 
44  Where  with  a  folitary  tweedle  twcedie, 
44  A  pretty  melancholy  fiddle 

44  Squeaks  at  the  abience  of  his  little  brother, 
*'  Whofe  prefence  would  be  much  enjoy'd, 
44  But  cofts  too  much  to  be  employ 'd  ! 
44  Where  FISCHER'S  inftrument  (a  frugal  choice) 
44  Serves  both  for  hautboys  and  for  voice — 
14  As  BILLINGTON  and  MARA,  to  the  King, 
44  And  that  perverfe  S  TO  RACK  will  not  fing.f 

44  Lo  !  by  fome  WOMAN'S  order  (fie  upon  her !) 
44  The  pretty,  harmlefs,  modeft  Maids  of  Honour 

*  At -the  breaking- up  of  a  Royal  Card-party,  this  is  conftanty 
done  :— the  poor  Maids  of  Honour,  and  th«  Gentlemen,  may  gropcj 
their  way  bow  they  can. 

f  When    Monfieur  NICHOLAT,  1m   Majefty's  Jirji  favourite, /r/? 
fiddle,  and/ry?   news-monger,  went  with   his  MA)  f  STY'S  commands 
to  Madam  S  r  »  «•< '••'**,  to  affilt  at  a  fo't  of  a  corccrr  at  Buckinrham- 
houfe,  the  Songftrcfs,  f  mil  ing  on  him  with  the  m  >lt  incffab! 
alkcd  him,  ••  What,  NICHOLAI,  I  am  to  fing  at  thf  | 

meaning   nothing — «  My  compliment  M  liter   and 

Miftrcfr,  and  till  them  I  am  better  enpageJ."  In  fhorr,  thf  iafolenceof 
fiogcrs  and  performers  is  intolerable.  In  other  countries,  the  bart  ksnottr 
of  fioging  and  playing  to  MAJESTY  is  thought  ample  recompense;  but 
KiWf  indeed;  the  Mercenaries  expect  money  rcmwKretion  !  '.  '. 

C  c  3  "  Are 


MORE  MO*TEY. 

«'  Are  forcM  to  furnifli  for  their  beds,  the  flieet  j 
*'  The  pillow-cafes  too,  fays  FAME, 
**  By  order  of  fome  high-commanding  Dame, 

"  To  whofe  fweet  foul  economy  is  fweet. 

*  Dear  Maids  of  Honour  !  what  a  fin  of  fins, 
*'  That  Britain  can't  accommodate  your  fkins ! 

M  Poor  GENEROSITY  is  fadly  lam'd ; 

*'  And  yet  the  noble  beafl  was  ne'er  rode  hard— • 
"  Pale,  cold  ECONOMY  feems  quite  afham'd, 

"  Who  never  plays  an  idle  card : 
"  Nay,  AVARICE,  her  mother,  with  furprife 
**  Turns  up  the  whites,  fo  fad,  of  both  her  eyes. 

"  To  Wit  ye  nothing  give — to  Learning  nought : 
"  Lo,  in  his  garret,  MATHEMATICS  pines, 

**  Where,  hungry  after  bread  and  cheefe  and  thought, 
"  He  forms  with  brother  fpiders  ufelefs  lines ! 

"  Th'  expence  of  *  New- Year's  Ode  is  felt  no  more  ! 
*  Thus  is  that  needlefs,  tunelefs  hubbub  o'er : 

"All  praife  mult  centre  in  the  Birth -day  Song : 
**  The  Virtues  muft  be  lump'd  together — yes  !    / 
**  And  then  (if  fubjefts  may  prefume  to  guefs) 

"  TheLAuaEAT  need  not  make  it  very  long. 

\ 

**  A  load  of  praife  is  naufeous  fluff — 
41  SIRE,  don't  you  think,  at  times,  one  line  enough? 
**  What's  chriften'd  Merit  often  wants  a  crutch ; 
14  Thus  then  a  Jingle  line  may  be  too  much. 

>M  Tn  vain  the  Firft  of  Poets  tunes  his  pipe ; 
"  His  wiiiflle  ne'er  fqueez'ci  iixpence  from  your  giipe— 
4*  Vain  all  Epiftles,  vain  his  heav'nly  Odes : 

*  This  Court  Farce,  in  confequence  of  a  fcantinefs  of  public  virfuef 
and  a  univcrfal  ridicule,  was,  for  a  feifon  or  two,  difmiffed.  Grfat 
events,  however,  imexpe&edly  happening,  the  Ljtic  warfcop  has  been 
caUed  in  »gain  to  found  their  praifes. 

?  No, 


MOtl    MON1Y.  291 

"  No,  no!  poor  PETER  may  his  (train  prolong; 
44  The  dev'l  a  farthing  will  reward  his  fong, 
*4  The  fong  that  fhould  have  celebrated  Gods  ! 

"  In  vain  for  Royal  patronage  he  Ggh'd :  j 

"  In  vain  (fome  fey)  th«  modtft  Bard  apply'd 

"  To  gain  his  book  your  patronifing  name. 
"  And  if  this  Bard^  whom  all  the  NINE  infpire, 
u  Inftead  of  zen'rou*  oil  to  feed  his  fire, 

"  Finds  cold,  cold  water  flung  upon  his  flame : 
"  If  he,  ah !  vainly  fighs  for  dedication, 
"  Woe  to  the  witfags  of  the  Nation  ! 

**  What  though  uncouth  his  fhape,  and  dark  his  face ; 

"  Whofe  breeding  Metier  might  for  charcoal  long; 
"  Still  may  the  BARD  abound  in  verfe  and  grace, 

44  And  love  for  Majefty,  divinely  ftrong. 

44  Then  heed  not,  SIRE,  a  clumfy  form  fo  fat, 

44  And \fombrf  phiz,  Dame  NATITRK'S  work  unkind: 

44  Great  moufmg  qualities,  with  manyacat^ 
44  Of  perfect  uglinefs,  a  lodging  find. 

44  Obferve  a  fat,  black,  greafy  lump  of  coal ; 
44  Lo,  to  that  moft  ungraceful  piece  of  earth, 
*4  A  warm  and  lively  luftre  owes  its  birth  ; 

"  A  flame  in  this  wor/</,  pleafa.U  to  the  f  >  .1  ! 

44  To  (hapelefs  clouds,  that,  waggon- like,  along 
44  Movecumb'rous,  (cowling  on  the  twilight  hear'n, 

"  At  times,  behold,  the  purcll  fnows  belong ! 
44  To  fuch,  of  rain  the  luuJ  «irops  are  giv'n: 

<4  Nay,  'mid  the  maf>  fo  murky  .ind  forlorn, 

44  Behold  the  lightning's  vivid  bt«im  is  boni!" 

Say,  "  Mighty  Monarch,  modeft  M  F.  R  i  T  pines, 

"  Hid  like  tlu-  ni  amid  the  mines, 

4'   Your  gracious  imile,  which  all  tiic  world  reveres, 
Your  wea.th  trad  u^jen'd  her  pale  doling  eye, 

'*  Which  HOPE  once  brighten'd  with  a  ipark  of  joy, 
"  And  cruel  DJSAPFOINZMENT  quench'd  with  tears." 


ODF 


MORE    MONET. 


ODE 


'T'HEN  unto  Majefty  (halt  thou  repeat 
•**   The  lines  that  are  to  Majefty  a  treat, 
Proverbs  that  economic  fouls  revere; 
To  wit — "  A  pin  a  day's  a  groat  a  year'*— - •• 
"  A  little  faving  is  no  fin" — 
l*  Near  is  my  fhirt,  but  nearer  is  my  (kin"— 
**  A  penny  fav'd,  a  penny  got" — 
"  'Tis  money  makes  the  old  mare  trot" — 
Then  fay,  "  With  fuch  wife  counfellors,  I'm  fure 
*'  No  Monarch  ever  can  be  poor." 

Say  too,  "  Great  Sir,  your  Queen  is  very  rich  j 
"  Witnefs  the  d'monds  lodged  in  ev'ry  flitch 

"  Of  Madam's  petticoat,*  of  broad  effulgence; 
"  Where  flame  fuch  jewels  on  its  ample  field, 
"  As  only  to  her  charms  and  virtues  yield, 

"  So  very  noble,  God's  and  Man's  indulgence ! 

Now  may 'ft  thou  raife  thy  tone  a  little  higher — 
"  Not'«$y«/re,  for  that's  impertinent,  but  "  SIRE," 

Firm  fhalt  thou  fay,  "  The  Realm  is  not  a  wizard, 
"  Quick,  with  a  word,  to  make  the  guineas  ftart, 
"  To  pleafe  a  Monarch's  gold-admiring  heart — 

"  In  fliort,  BRITANNIA  grumbles  in  her  gizzard. 

""  Sire,  let  me  fay,  the  realm  will  fmell  a  rat, 
"  And  cry,  '  Oh !  oh !  I  know  what  ye  are  at— - 
'  Is  this  your  cunning,  Mailer  BILLY  PITT? 
*  What,'  Mailer  BILLY  !  tiy  to  touch  his  Grace? 
'  To  keep  your  moft,  moft  honourable  place  ? 

*  Is  this  your  flaming  patriotic  fit  ? 

*  This  famous  petticoat  affordeth  a  pleafait  hiftory — one  part  of 
-which  is,  that  it  was  watched  all  night  by  a  certain  Great  Man,  on  a 
particular  occafwn,  to  prevent  its  being  ftolea. 

4  Thick 


MORI    MONEY. 

*  Thick  as  may  be  the  head  of  poor  John  Ball,  . 

*  The  beaft  hath  got/ome  brains  within  his  fkuli; 

*  A  pair  of  dangerous  Aorns,  too,  let  me  add  : 

'  Dare  but  to  make  the  generous  creature  mad." 

"Thus  may'ft  thou  decently  thy  voke  exalr— 
And  add,  "  Soft  fires,  O  Monarch,  make  fweet  malt  | 
•'  The  kiln,  much  forc'd,  may  blaze  about  our  cars, 
"  And  then  may  FATE  be  bufy  with  his  facers— 
14  For  then,  with  all  his  fame,  your  daring  'So^'  ill 
44  May,  rtt-likc,  fqueak,  unpitied  in  the  fire." 

Proclaim  that  Reputation  is  a  jewel, 
And  life,  without  it,  merely  water-eruel ; 
Say,  that  a  King  who  feeks  a  denthleis  name, 
Turns  not  to  news-papers  to  find  a  fame ; 
Where  paragraphs  (a  Minifteml  job) 
Report  the  hair-crown  howlings  of  a  Mob. 

Inform  the  Monarch,  when  he  goes  to  heav'n, 
Verfe  to  his  parting  fpirit  may  DC  giv'n  ; 

E^'n  PETER'S  ver(e,  for  which  atboufand  figh— 
Verfe  which  die  POET  ev'n  to  Brutes  *  can  give, 
To  bid  their  lucky  names  immortal  live, 

Yet  to  a  King  the  kcred  gift  deny  ! 

.  "  Sire,  we've  crippl'd  the  poor  people's  backs ; 
44  Poor  jaded,  worn-out,  miferable  hacks ; 

41  How  'tis  they  bear  it  all,  is  my  furprife ! 
4t  I  cannot  catch  another  tax  indeed, 
*•  \Vith  all^<«/r  fox-hounds'  nofes,  and  my  fpeed, 

*(  Your  hu gable  greyhound,  though  all  teeth  and  eye*. 

\ 

44  The  State,  Sir,  you  will  candidly  allow, 
*  Has  been  t'ye  a  moft  excellent  milch  cow ; 

*  This  is  literally  true.  I,  the  Lyric  Peter,  aflVrt,  that  I  have 
written  a  molt  beautiful  Elegy  to  an  old  Friend,  a  Dying  Afs.  with 
more  feeling  than  I  could  compliment  the  dcach*  of  half  the  Kings  in 
CUtiftcadom. 

44  For 


MORE    MONEY. 

ci  For  jvw,  too,  many  a  bucket  has  been  fill'd— 
"  But  truft  rue,  Sir,  'the  cow  muft  not  be  kill'J, 

14  So  numerous  are  your  wants,  and  they  fo  keen, 
M  That  verily  a  hundred  thoufand  pounds 

"  Seem  juft  as  in  a  bullock's  mouth  a  bean  ! 
"  A  pound  of  butter  'midft  a  pack  of  hounds ! 

4<  Have  mercy  on  us,  Sir — you  can't  be  poor — 

"  Your  coffers  really  muft  be  running  o'er.'* 

Say,  "  SIRE,  your  wifdom  is  prodigious  great f 
"  Then  do  not  put  your  fervant  in  a  fweat— 

"  He  hates  fnapdragon — 'tis  a  game  of  danger— 
"  The  found, "more  money,  the  whole  realm  appalls ; 
**  Still,  ftill  it  vibrates- on  SAINT  STEPHEN'S  walls; 

"  Our  beaft,  the  PUB  Lie,  foon  muft  gnaw  the  manger."" 

Say,  "  Good  my  Liege,  indeed  there's  no  more  hay ; 

"  Kind-hearted  King,  indeed  there's  no  more  corn ;,, 
"  Our  hack,  OLD  ENGLAND,  fadly  fells  away; 

"  Lean  as  leaaRosiNANTE)  and  forlorn." 

Say,  "  Sire,  your  Parliament  I  dare  not  meet ; 

*4  For  verily  I've  fome  remains  of  grace : 
**  If  forc'd  with  money-meflages  *  to  greet, 

"  Your  Majefty  muft  lend  me  H RY'S  fece; 

"  I  know, 

*  The  cry  of  ".More  money,  more  Money,"  brings  to  recolledioa 
a  little  dialogue,  ampr>gft  the  many,  that  happened  between  the  Kinf* 
of  the  Mofqtiitoes  and  myfelf,  in  the  Govern  men  t-houfe  at  Jamaica, 
during  the  adminiftration  of,  th$  late  Sir  William  Trelawny. — His 
Majefty  was  a  very  ftout  black  man,  exceedingly  ignorant,  neverthelefs 
pofleflfed  of  the  fublimeil  ideas  of  Royalty  ;  very  riotous,  and  grievoufly- 
inclined  to  get  drunk.  He  came  to  me  one  day,  with  a  voice  more 
like  that  of  a  bullock  than  a  king,  roaring,  «  Mo  drink  for  King> 
«•  mo  drinlc  for  King  \" 

P.  P. 

King1,  you- are -drunk  already. 


MOfcB    MONFY.  2-)'y 

<c  I  know  what  Parliament  will  fay,  fo  mad— 
1  More  money,  MASTER  BILLY!  very  fine! 

'  The  impudence  of  highwaymen,  my  lad, 
•  By  G—  !   is  per/eft  modefty  to  thine.* 

"  Sire,  Sire,  the  moment  that  I  mention  MONET, 

44  I'm  fure  the  anfwer  will  be  «  NINNY  NONNY." 


ODE      V. 


,  PITT,  put  forth  a  fmall  prophetic  found  ; 
Say,  "  KINGS  fliould  keep  their  ftate,  but  noU>e 

«  rich"— 
Yes,  fay,  "  they  never  fhould  with  wealth  abound, 

"  As  money  might  the  royal  mind  bewitch." 
Say,  "  Gambling  Monarch*  pojfbly  may  fpring, 

*  And  Stocks  be  at  the  mercy  of  a  King  — 
And  if  for  Boroughs  figh  their  great  affections, 

*  Rare  bufiuefs  for  the  DEVIL  at  elections; 

"   A  Monarch  offering  his  own  heads  and  notes  ! 

*  A  King  and  Cobbler  quarrelling  for  votes!" 

Then  lift  thine  head,  and  alfo  lift  thine  eyes, 
And  drawing  of  thy  mouth  the  corners  down, 

Exclaim,  (as  ftricken  with  a  deep  furprife) 
"  Not  that  I  think  a  man  who  wears  a  crown 

KINO. 

No  !  no  1  King  no  drunk  —  King  no  drunk  —  Mo  drink  for  King— 
Bfodcr  George  love  drink  (meaning  the  King  of  England.) 

P.  P. 

Broucr  George  does  not  love  drink  :  he  is  a  fober  man. 

KINO. 

But  King  of  MoC^uito  love  drink  —  me  will  have  mo  drink  —  me 
love  driak  like  devil—roe  drink  whole  ocean. 

«  Would 


396  MORE    MONEY. 

"  Would  a&  fo  meanly,  Sir,  or  ever  did — 

"  No!  God  forbid,  dread  Sovereign— God  forbid  !" 

Such  are  my  counfels,  PITT. — Thy  King,  perchance, 

May,  fmiling,  hear  thee  oracles  advance ; 

And  pitying  thee  for  hinting  reformation 

To  fuch  a  King  of  fuck  a  Nation, 

May  ftim  thee  with  two  proverbs  all  fo  pat — 

"  What,  what,  PITT—'  Play  a  jig  to  an  old  Cat  ?' 

*'  What,  preach — what,  preach  to  me  on  Money-wit  I 

*  *  Old  Foxes  want  no  tutors,'  BILLY  PITT." 


The  following  Ekgy  was  written  on  the  Royal  Scheme  oj 

fattening  Cattle  folely  en  Horfe- chef  nuts,  which   (had  h 

Jucceeded)  muft  have  been  attended  with  prodigious  facings. 

The  Bullocks  tried  what  they  could  do,  but  were  forced  ft 

give  up  the  point \  and  nearly  the  ghoji  ! 


THE    ROYAL    BULLOCKS. 

A  CONSOLATORY  AND  PASTORAL  ELEGY. 


horn'd  inhabitants  of  Windfor  Park, 
Where  reign'd  fweet  HOSPITALITY  of  yore, 
Why  are  ye  not  as  merry  as  the  lark  ? 
Why  is  it  that  fo  difmally  ye  roar  ? 

*  Reformation  is  a  moft  difficult  and  dangerous  fubjeft Hazarding 

a  critique  on  the  work  of  a  very  eminent  Artift,  foijie  years  ago,  what 
was  the  confeqoence  ? — See  the  Ode. 

Ah 


THE    HOYAL    Bt  LLOCRS. 

Ah  me  I  I  guefs  the  caufe  f— our  glorious  King 

Would  fatten  cattle  in  the  cheapeft  way- 
It  is,  it  is,  horfe-chefnuts !— that's  the  thine 
Which  gives  each  lace  the  cloud  of  dire  difmay. 

Say,  do  the  prickles  ftab  each  gentle  beard  ? 

Ve  wi(h  t'oblige  the  King ;  but,  ah !  with  pain 
Ye  turn  them  round  and  round,  to  bite  afeard^ 

And,  faintly  mumbling,  drop  them  out  again. 

Fain  would  I  comfort  you  with  better  meat- 
God  knows  I  pl:y  every  plaintive  tone- 
Gladly  your  gums  with  turnips  would  I  greet, 
And  give  the  fragrant  hay  to  foothe  each  groan. 

Say,  are  the  nuts  too  folid  to  be  chewM  ?— 
Of  want  of  nut-crackers  do  ye  complain  * 

Ye  make  up  awkward  mouths  upon  your  food ; 
But  plaint  6f  ev'ry  fort  is  pour'd  in  vain. 

Condemn'd  on  fuch  hard  fere -to  flip  and  dine, 
And  often  by  its  fhibborn  nature  foil'd, 

Perhaps  ye  wi(h  it  roafted,  gentle  Kine, 
Or  probably  ye  wifh  it  ftewM  or  boiiM. 

But  coals  coft  money— labour  muft  be  fav'd — 
Now,  this  would  prove  a  great  expence  indeed  : 

Ah  !  Kine,  by  fuch  economy  ciofe-ftiav'd, 

Your  bellies  grumble,  and  your  mouths  muft  bleed. 

Your  leannefs  mortifies  the  King  of  Nations : 
Difpleas'd,  he  wonders  that  ve  wont  grow  fat : 

Your  high  back -bones  employ  his  fproilations, 
Much  your  lank  bellies  exercife  his  chat. 

The  MAN  whofe  lofty  head  aJorns  a  crown, 
That  ftoutly  ftudies  bullocks,  pigs,  and  books, 

Wants  much  to  fee  you  knotk'd  by  butchers  down, 
And  hung  in  iair  array  upon  their  hooks. 

I.  Dd 


298  A    MOrRA't    REFLE-CTIOW. 

Yet,  murm'ring  creatures,  life  is  vaftly  fweet- 
For  life,  were  I  a  bullock,  I  (hould  figh : 

Much  rather  make  a  facrifice  to  meat ; 
Live  on  horfe-chefnutS)  than  on  turnips  die. 


A    MORAL    REFLECTION 

ON    THE    PRECEDING    ELEGY. 

HOW  can  the  eye,  in  NATURE'S  foftnefs  dreft, 
So  harden 'd,  fee  the  different  tribes  around ; 

Behold  the  grazing  cattle  all  fo  bleft, 

And  lambkins  mingling  fport,  with  fweeteft  found ; 

Then  glift'ning,  -jn.-a  train  of  triumph  cry, 

"  Yorfr  throats,  young  gentlefolks,  will  fbon  be  cut— 

**  You,  fweet  Miis  Lamb,  moft  fpeedily  fhall  die— 
*'  Soon  on  the  fpit,  you,  Matter  Calf,  be  put !" 

How  can  the  tongue,  amid  the  mingled  noife 
Of  goofe,  duck,  turkey,  pigeon,  cock,  and  hen, 

Exclaim,  "  Aye,  aye,  good  fowls,  your  cackling  joys 
•*•  Soon  ceafe,  to  fill  with  mirth  the  mouths  of  men  ?" 

I  cannot  meet  the  lambkin's  afidng  eye, 

Pat  her  foft  neck,  and  fill  her  mouth  with  food, 

Then  fay,  "  Ere  evening  cometh,  thou  ihalt  die, 
**  And  drench  the  knives  of  butchers  with  thy  blood." 

I  cannot  fling  with  hVral  hand  the  grain, 
And  tell  the  feather'd  race  fo  bleft  around, 

**  For  me,  ere  night,  ye  feel  of  death  the  pain ; 
"  With  broken  necks  ye  flutter  on  the  ground. 

«  How 


A    MOXAL    REFLECTION.  299 

"  How  vile ! — Go,  creatures  of  th'  Almighty's  hand  ; 

44  Enjoy  the  fruits  that  bounteous  NATURE  yields  j 
**  Gra/.e  at  your  cafe  along  the  funny  land : 

44  Skim  the  free  air,  and  learch  the  fruitful  fields : 

•*  Go,  and  be  happy  in  your  mutual  loves ; 

44  No  violence  mall  (hake  your  fliclter'd  home  \ 
"  'Tis  life  and  liberty  (hall  glad  my  groves ; 

44  The  cry  of  murder  fliaH  not  damn  my  dome  j" 

Thus  (hould  I  fay,  were  mine  a  houfe  ami  land— 
And,  lo !  to  me  a  parent  (hould  ye  ity, 

And  run,  and  lick,  and  peck  with  love  my  hand, 
And  crowd  around  me  with  a  fearlcfc  e\  *• 

And  you,  O  wild  inhabitants  of  iir, 
To  blefs,  and  to  be  bleft,  at  PETER'S  call. 

Invited  by  his  kindncfs,  mould  repair; 

Chirp  on  his  roof,  and  hop  arnidft  his  hall. 

No  fchoolboyrs  hand  (hould  dare  your  nefts  invade, 
And  bear  to  clofe  captivity  your  young  : 

Pleas'd  would  I  fte  them  flutter  from  the  (haile, 
And  to  my  window  call  the  fons  of  fong. 

And, "you,  O  natives  of  the  flood,  (hould  play 
Unhurt  amid  your  chryftal  realms,  and  deep : 

No  hook  (hould  tear  you  from  your  loves  away  j 
No  net  furrounding  form  its  fatal  fweep. 

Pleas'd  (hould  I  gaze  upon  your  gliding  throng, 

To  fport  invited  by  the  fummer  beam ; 
Now  moving  in  moft  folemn  march  along, 

Now  darting,  leaping  from  the  dimpled  ftream. 

How  far  more  grateful  to  the  foul  the  joy, 
Thus  daily,  like  a  fet  of  friends,  to  treat  ye, 

Than,  like  the  bloated  epicure,  to  cry, 

44  Zounds!  what  rare  dinners! — God!  how  I  could 
"  eat  ye!" 

D  d  a  ELEGY 


ELEGY 


MY    DYING    ASS,    PETER. 


of  my'youthful  days,  for  ever  paft, 
•*•     Whea  whim  and  harmlefs  folly  rui?d  the  hour  ; 
Ah  !  art  thou  ftretch'd  amid  the  ftraw  at  laft  !  — 
Thefe  eyes  with  tears  thy  dying  looks  devour  ! 

Bleft,  would  I  foften  thy  hard  bed  of  death, 
And  with  new  floods  the  fount  of  life  fupply  : 

Yes,  PETER,  bleft  would  1  prolong  thy  breath, 
Renew  each  nerve,  and  cheer  thy  bearalefs  eye, 

But  wherefore  wHh  ?  Thy  lot  is  that  of  all  : 

Thy  friend  who  mourns,  muft  yield  toNATu.RE's  law  — 

Like  thee  muft  fink,  and,  o'er  each  darkling  ball, 
Will  DEATH'S  cold  hand  th*  eternal  curtain  draw, 

Piteous  thou  lifted  up  thy  feeble  head, 

And  mark'ft  me  dimly,  with  a  dumb  adieu  ; 

And  thus  amid  thy  hopelefs  looks  I  read, 

"  Faint  is  thy  fervant,  and  his  moments  few. 

**  With  thee  no  more  the  hills  and  vales  I  tread  I 
"  Thofe  times,  fo  happy,  are  for  ever  o'er  ! 

**  Ah  \  why  mould  FATE  fo  cruel  cut  our  thread, 
**  And  part  a  friendship  that  muft  meet  no  more  ? 

**  O,  when  thefe  languid  lids  are  fhutby  FATE  ; 

"  O,  let  in  peace  thefe  aged  limbs  be  laid 
"  JMid  that  lov'd  field  which  faw  us  oft  of  late, 

"  Beneath  our  fav'rite  willow's  ample  fliade  ! 

"  And 


KLEGY    TO    MY    DYING    AJS,    PETER.  3OI 

44  And  if  my  Mafter  chance  to  wander  nigh, 
"  Befide  the  fpot  where  PETER'S  bones  repofe ; 

44  Let  your  poor  fervant  claim  one  little  figh ; 
44  Grant  this— and,  bleft,  thefc  eyes  for  ever  clofe." 

Yes,  thou  poor  SPIRIT,  yes — tfy  wifh  is  «/•*— 
Yes,  be  thv  grave  beneath  tlie  willow's  gloom — ' 

There  (hall  the  fod,  the  j?reeneft  Cod,  be  thine ; 

And  there  the  brightest  flow'r  of  Spring  (hall  bloom. 

Oft  to  the  field  as  HE  ALT  H  my  footftep  draws, 
Thy  turf  (hall  furrly  catch  thy  Matter's  eye ; 

There  on  thy  deep  of  death  (hall  FRIENDSHIP  paufe. 
Dwell  on  paft  days,  and  leave  thee  with  a  figh. 

Sweet  is  remembrance  of  our  youthful  hours, 
When  INNOCENCE  upon  our  actions  fmil'd  ! 

Wliat  though  AMBITION  fcorn'd  our  humble  pow'n, 
Thou  a  wild  cub,  and  1  a  cub  as  wild  r 

Fleas'd  will  I  tell  how  oft  we  us'd  to  roam ; 

How  oft  we  wander'd  at  the  peep  of  morn  ; 
Till  NIGHT  had  wrapp'd  the  world  in  fpe&red  gloom, 

And  SILENCE  liften'd  to  the  beetle's  horn. 

Thy  *  victories  will  I  recount  with  joy  ; 

The  various  trophies  by  thy  fleetnefs  won ; 
And  boaft  that  I,  thy  playfellow,  a  boy, 

Beheld  the  feats  by  name  fake  PETER  done. 

Yes,  yes,  (for  grief  muft  yield  at  times  to  glee) 
Amidft  my  friends  I  oft  will  give  our  tale ; 

When,  lo !  'thofe  friends  will  rulh  thy  fod  to  fee, 
And  call  thy  peaceful  region  PETER'S  VALE  ! 

*  P*jer*»  r. icing  powers  were  truly  great  ;  and  for  fize  and  ftrength 

he  might  juftly  have  I  een  catted  the  llcrcvlc*  of  Jack-aiTcs.     It  w-.uld 

probably  be  ttx>  ludicnxis  hen  to  affirm,  that  for  a/f^r**4'"    h;  ™<eh"» 

wirh  i-qwal  jullice,  bavc  kca   ftylcd   not  only   the   Mur<hef\t  but  the 

' 


P  d  3  AN 


AN   ACADEMIC   ODE. 

[  This  Ode  was  'written  fome  years  face,  and  was  mi/Iaitt? 
t  but  is  fortunately  recovered.     It  kinteth  at  the  univerfal 
rage  for  Reputation,  and  attacketh  Painters  who  pitifully 
•wince  at  the  gently-reforming  touch  of  Criticifm. 

A  LAS  !  who  has  not  fondnefs  for  a  name  ? 
**•  Lo,  NATURE  wove  it  in  our  infant  frame  ! 

From  tzx-delighttrs,  down  to  ezr-confounJtrs, 
Each  vainly  fancies  he  pofiefles  killing  tones ; 
Ev'n  from  theMARAS  and  theBiLLiNGTONs, 

Down  to  the  wide-mouth rafcals  crying  flounders; 
Nay,  watchmen  deem  their  merits  no 'ways  fmall, 
Proud  of  a  loud,  clear,  melancholy  bawf ; 
Nay,  proud  too  of  that  inftrument  the  rattle, 
That  draws  the  hobbling  brotherhood  to  battle,. 

Yes,  yes  !  much  vanity's  in  human  nature — 
Like  mad  dogs,  that  abhor  the.  water, 

The  Painters  hate  to  hear  their  faults  difplay'd  j, 
And  though  I  (ing  them  in  the  fweeteft  rhymes, 
Such  are  the  reformation -curfing  times, 

The  foolHh  fellows  wifh  the  Poet  dead  ! 
Now  this  is  huge  depravity,  I  fear ; 
My  Tale,  too,  proveth  it  as  noon- day  clear* 


T&E  TALE  OF  VAN  TRUMP, 

MYNKEER  VAN  TRUMP,  who  painteth  very  well, 
riam'd  at  my  gentle  criticifms,  like  hell —    - 

"  Poor  vretch  (cry'd  TRUMP)  I'm  much  dat  rogues'* 

"  fuperiors — 

*;  Ven  he,  poor  loufy  dog,  be  ded  an  rot, 
**  VAN  TRUMP  by  pepeis  vill  not  be  forgot, 
"  But  lif  in*  all  de  mouths  of  my  po/leriors" — 

Meaning 


THE  TALE  OF  VAN  TtUMP.          303 

Meaning,  indeed,  by  this  feverity, 
His  name  would  live  to  all  pofterity. 

Upon  a  day,  fome  goodly  folks  and  fine 
Arriv'd,  to  barter  praife  for  beef  and  wine; 
ACADEMICIANS  were  the  wiehts,  I  trow, 
The  very  men  to  dine  with  VAN  and  VROW. 

To  Madam  TRUMP  did  fall  the  carving  work ; 
So  (ticking  in  fowl's  foft  breaft  her  fork — 
"  I  u  ifh  this  fork"  (quoth  angry  Madam  TRUMP, 
Wriggling  from  fide  to  fide  her  angry  rump) 

"Were  now  as  deep  in  PBTBR  PINDAR'S  heart." —   ' 
44  Veil  zed— dat's  clever — Jantelmans,  dat's  vit," 
Quoth  VAN—**  fpake  it  vonce  more,  my  dear,  a  bit— 
.    **  Now  don't  you  tink,   Sirs,    dat  my  Vrow's  dam 
"  fmart?  ' 

14  Now,  Jantelmans,  I  ax  you  if  vou  pleafe," 

Roar'd  VAN,  upftarting — catching  nre  like  tinder— 

44  To  drenk  von  dam  goot  bumper  'pon  our  knees — 
"  Come,  Sirs,  "  Damnation  to  dat  PETER  PINDAR." 

Plumb  down  the  great  Academicians  fell, 

And  liearty  drank  th'  immortal  Bard  to  hell ! 

Such  is,  I  blufti  to  fay,  the  dev'lifh  mind 
Too  oft  contaminating  poor  Mankind  ! 

Here  too  a  little  Moral  may  be  feen : 

Reformers  are  good  folks  the  million  hate  ; 

And  who,  if  hang'd,  or  (hot,  or  burnt,  I  ween, 
Repentant,  find  their  folly  out,  too  late. 


THE 


(    304    ) 
THE 

PROGRESS   OF   ADMIRATION; 

OR,     TBE 

WINDSOR   GARDENERS. 

"«7HEN  firft  their  MAJESTIES  to  Windfor  went, 
Lo !  almoft  ev'ery  curious  mouth  was  rent — 

With  what? — with  gaping  on  the  ROYAL  PAIR  ; 
Indeed  from  Eaft  and  Weft  and  North  and  South, 
Arriv'd  large  cargoes  both  of  eye  and  mouth, 

To  feait  on  MAJESTY  their  gape  and  flare. 

Not  PUNCH,  the  mighty  PUNCH,  the  prince  of  joke, 
E'er  brought  together  fuch  a  herd  of  folk. 

Amongft  the  thoufands  full  of  admiration, 
Appear'd  fair  Windfor'sGARDENiNG  NATION, 

Blazing  with  Loyalty's  bright  torches : 
They  humbly  came  their  MAJESTIES  to.  greet, 
Begging  their  MAJESTIES  to  come  and  treat, 

On  ev'ry  fort  of  fruit,  their  grand  Allforches. 
The  COUPLE  fmil'd  aifciu,  and  aflt'd  grand  queftions, 
Refolv'd  to  gratify  their  grand  digestions*. 

Forth  went  his  MAJESTY/  fo  condefcending— 
Forth    went    our   gracious    QUEEN,    the    fruits    com- 
mending — 

Munching  away  at  a  majeftic  rate : 
The  Gardeners  faw  themfelves  befpread  with  glory  ; 
Told  unto  all  the  ale-houfes  the  ftory  ; 

Which  houfes  did  again  the  tale  relate. 
Yes,  they  were  all  fo  pleas'd  that  their  poor  things 
Should  find  fuch  favour  in  the  mouths  of  Kings — 

So 


tfTE    PROGRESS    OP    ADMIii  ATIOM. 


So  happy  at  the  fudden  turn  of 

As  though  they  all  had  found  a  fine  eftate. 

V,  iJi  awe  deep  ftriken  were  the  Gardeners  mute  — 
So  (harp  they  ey  <l  IMC  in  as  they  ate  their  fruit  — 

Marv'ling  to  rind  that  fuch  as  wear  a  crown 
Had  aclions  very  much  like  theirs  in  eating  ; 
And  that  they  mov'd,  when  pines  and  necl'rines  greeting). 

Their  jaws  like  other  people,  up  and  ekno*  ; 
And  that,  like  manv/oAts,  they  ate  a  deal— 
Making  (that  is  to  ity)  a  ploughman's  mcaL 

And  now  the  GARDENERS,  all  fo  glorious,  wanted 
To  fend  to  MAJESTY  rare  things  —  'twas  granted. 

Both  horfe  and  foot  fo  labour'd  to  embark  it  ! 
So  much  indetd  unto  their  GRACES  came, 
In  confequence  of  this  mod  loyal  Hamc, 

The  palace  look'd  like  Covent-  Garden  Market. 

And,  lo!  their  MAJESTIES  went  forth  each  day, 
Their  compliments  to  dainty  fruits  to  pay  : 

The  Gardeners  met  them  with  beft  looks  and  bows  ; 
And  then  the  royal  reputation^rais'd  — 
The  vegetable  wifdom  highly  prais'd 

Of  GEORGK  the  glorious,  and  his  glorious  SPOUSE* 

They  told  of  Windfor  town  the  gaping  throng, 
What  tajlc  did  unto  Majefty  belong  ; 

As  how  they  pick'd  the  beft  —  ftrange  to  relate  tooK 
As  how  their  eyes  were  of  fuch  lofty  ftature  ; 
Fill  d  with  fo  much  fublimity  their  nature, 

They  look'd  "not  on  an  onion  or  pot  a  toe  — 
Which  fliow'd  a  noble  patron  iiing  fpirit, 
And  prov'd  that  ev'n  iii/nr/f  they  favour'd  merit. 

Reader,  prepare  to  drop  thy  jaw  with  wonder  ! 
mepare  dice  now  to  hear  a  found  like  thunder  ! 
The  Gardeners,  lo  !  with  Majefty  grew  tir'J  f 
No  more  their  gracious  vifitors  defir'J! 
In  ihort,  when  MON  A  R  CHS  did  themfelv/es  difplay, 
The  Gardeners,  lxmAjicU%  ran  a  way; 

Finding 


5p  T2TE    PROGRESS    OF    ADMTR  ATK>?T, 

Finding- a  _/cr/  of  vacuum  'mongft  their  fruit, 
That  did  not  much  their  fche me  of  thriving  fuit. 

3Tor  MAJESTY  gives  nought  to  fubjec'ts,  mind-— 
Honour  and  money  would  be  much  too  kind  : 
The  royal  fmile,  and  guinea's  glorious  rays, 
Likej$EMELE,*  would  kill  them  with  the  blaze. 

They  now  began  exalted  birth  to  fmoke, 
And  fancy  MONARCHS  much  like  common  folk : 
Therefore  no  more,  when  MAJESTIES  were  coming^, 
Whittling  and  laughing,  fmiling,  finging,  humming. 
They  gao'd,  and,  bleffing  their  too  happy  eyes, 
JLeap'd  at  their  prefence,  ju&  like  fifli  at  flies. 

Thus  did  thofe  fellows  run  from  QUEEN  and  KING-;, 

Which  fhows  the  changeful  folly  of  mankind— 
By  growing  tir'd  and  fick  of  a  good  thing, 
To  actual,  happinefs,  alas !  ftone- blind  ! 

For  what  in  this  our  earthly  world  can  fpring, 
That's  equal  to  a  wife  and  glorious  KING  ? 
What  in  this  world  of  wonders  can  be  feeri, 
That's  equal  to  a  fweet  and  generous  QUEEN  ? 
To  fancy  otherwife,  alas !  what  fin  it  is ! 

From  fuch  profane  opinion  how  I  {brink  ! — 
There  muft  befometkzng  great,  for  they  too  think 
Them/elves -great  Gods,  or  coujins  of  Divinities ! 

No  more  thofe  dogs  the  Gard'hers  ponder'd  how 
To^ay  fine  words,  and  make  a  loyal  bow  : 

No  more  they  felt  a  choaking  in  the  throat : 
No  more  look'd  up  and  down,  and  wink'd  aikew, 
Poor  fouls  !  and,  filly,  wift  not  what  to  do, 

When  with  vaft  awe  the  ROYAL  VISAGE  fmote. 

No,  no !  the  fcene  was  moft  completely  alter'd — 
No  longer  like  fome  (lupid  jack-afs  halter'd    v 

*  The  flory  of  Semele,  not  being  known  to  every  one,  is  this :  the.' 
young  lady,  ambitious  of  enjoying  Jupiter  in  all  his  glory,  perilled 
pmidft  the  fublirac  efFulgen9C  of  the  god. 

Befide 


THI    PROGRESS    OP    ADMIRATIOK.  '307 

^Befide  a  miller's  door,  or  gate,  or  port, 

In  deep  and  filent  meditation  loft, 

To  Majefty  were  drawn  their  heads  fo  thick— 

No— they  were  off — all  admiration-fick  ; 

The  (miles  of  MAJESTY  deem'd  farce— -all  bur*. 

The  conversation  ! — Lord  ! — not  worth  a  plum  f 


SUCH  is  fad  repetition,  O  ye  Gods  f 
And  this  may  really  happen  to  my  odes ! 
Men  of  huge  titles  and  exalted  places 

Should  at  a  diftance  commonly  be  feen— 
Eyes  (hould  not  be  familiar  with  their  faces; 

Then  WONDER  goes  a  courting  to  each  mien. 

Lo  !  NOVELTY'S  a  barber's  ftrap  or  hone, 
That  keennefs  to  the  razor-j>aflions  gives  : 

Us  E  weareth  out  this  barber's  (trap  or  ftone ; 
Thus  'tis  by  NOVELTY,  ENJOYMENT  lives. 

In  Love,  a  fweet  example  let  us  feek  : 

I  have  it — CYNTHIA'S  foft  luxuriant  neck— 

Fix'd  on  the  charm,  how  pleas'd  the  eye  can  dwell! 
How  fighs  the  hand  within  the  gauze  to  creep, 
Moufe-like,  and  on  the  fnowy  hills  to  fleep, 

Rais'd  by  the  moft  delicious,  gentle  fwell ; 
Like  gulls,  thofe  birds  that  rife,  and  now  fubfide, 
Bled  on  the  bofom  of  the  wavy  tide. 

But  let  the  breaft  be  common — all's  undone; 
Wifhes,  and  fighs,  and  longings,  all  are  gone  ! 
Away  the  hurrying  palpitations  fly  ! 
DESIRE  lies  dead  upon  thegazelefs  eye ! 
Sunk  into  infipidity  is  rapture ! 
Thus  finiflieth  of  Love  the  fimple  chapter ! 

This  is  a  pretty  lefTon,  though  not  new  ; 
A  leflbn  fit  for  Gentile  or  for  Jew  ; 

For 


30$  ADDRESS    TO    THE    VIRTUES. 

For  LOVE,  the  cooing,  fweet,  perfuafive  pigeon, 
Gains  all  the  globe  indeed  to  his  religion : 
Throughout  the  world  his  humble  vot'ries  pray, 
And  worfhip  him  exactly  the  famfc  Way. 
Other  religions  kill—are  lorn  by  ftrife ; 
LOVE  liffes)  and,  what's  fweeter  ftill,  gives  life  ! 


ADDRESS  TO  THE  VIRTUES. 

AN      ODE. 

~"t 

AH,  VIRTUES,  ye  are  pretty-looking  creatures; 
*"  But  then  fo  meek  and  feeble  in  your  natures  I— 
Thou  charming  CHASTITY  now,  par  exemple, 
Who  guard'ft  the  lufcious  Tip,  and  fnowy  bread, 
And  all  that  maketh  wilhing  fhepherds  bleft, 
Forbidding  thieves  on  facred  ground  to  trample. 

Appear  but  LOVE,  the  favage,  all  is  loft; 

Faint,  trembling,  bhifhing,  thou  giv'ft  up  the  ghoft  j 

Lo,  there's  an  end  of  all  thy  mincing  care  ! 
The  field  fo  guarded,  in  the  TYRANT'S  pow'r; 
Each  fence  torn  down,  defpoil'd  each  mofly  bow'r, 

All,  all  is  rudely  plunder'd,  and  laid  bare. 

VIRTUES,  ye£/#»fikrVon  the  world,  I  fear— 
Defign'd,  I  ween,  for  fome  more  gentle  fphere; 
Where  the  wild  PASSIONS  ftorm  ye  not,  nor  teaze  ye  j 
Where  ev'ry  animai's  a  mild  MARCHESI. 

I  know  your  parentage  and  education- 
Born  in  the  fkies — a  lofty  habitation  ; 
But  for  a  perfctt  fyftem  were  intended. 
Where  people  never  needed  to  be 

a  How 


TBE    PROGRESS    OP    KNOWLEDGE. 

flow  could  ye  think  the  PASSIONS  to  uithfhirJ, 
Thofc  roaring  BLADES,  fo  out  of  all  command, 
\Vhofe  flichteft  touch  would  pull  ye  ail  to  pieces  ? 
Thty  are  GOLIAHS— you  but  little  Misses  ! 
Then  pray  go  home  again,  each  pretty  DE  AR— 
Ye  but  A/grace  yourfclves  by  coming  here. 


THE 

PROGRESS  OP  KNOWLEDGE. 

A  MIGHTY  POTENTATE,  of  feme  difcerning, 
Inquilitive  indeed  !  and  fond  of  learning, 
From  Windfor  oft  danc'd  down  to  Eton  College, 
To  make  himfelf  a  piucufhion  of  knowledge ; 
That  is,  by  gleaning  pretty  little  (cram 
Of  CJESAB,  ALEXANDER,  and  fuch chaps. 

There  fagely  would  he  oft  '  trnngiie  the  MASTER 
On  HOMER,  VIRGII,  PINDAR,  my  relation, 

Faft  ?.s  a  jack-fly,  very  often  fafter— 
Now  jack-flies  have  a  fweet  acceleration. 

Oft  alk'd  he  queitions  about  ancient  Kings— 

Nat'ral !  becaufe  fo  like  himfelf— Great  tilings  ! 

Heaflc'd  if  CJKSAR  tver  *d  infill, 

That  if  his  Minifter  would  keep  his  place, 
That  Minifter  fliould  always  have  the  grace 

To  mind  ctenVienvjies  of  CIVIL  Li 

.••tlrer  great  C.ts  A*  ever  fent  his  Tons, 
To  ftudy  all  theClaffics  and  great  . 

And  bring  of  art  and  fcicacc  nou^e  a  ftore, 
To  GOTTINGF.N  (his  money  wifely  hoarding) 
As  GoTTiNGK*.  ;>  ior  bosi 

Young  gentlemen  whofe  pareatb  are  but  jK>or. 

VOL.  II.  E  ev 


3~IO  THE    PROGRESS    OF    KNOWLEDGE. 

He  afk'd  if  CAESAR'S  foul  was  fond  of  knowing 
What  all  the  neighbourhood  was  daily  doing ; 

What  went  into  the  pot,  or  on  the  fpit— 
How  much  in  houfe- keeping  they  yearly  fpent, 
And  if,  like  honeft  folks,  they  paid  their  rent, 

Or  gave  of  vi&uals  to  the  poor,  a  bit, 

If  C.ES  AR  ever  to  a  Brewhoufe  went, 

With  Lords  and  Ladies  of  his  Court  To  .gran3, 
And  hours  on  hops  and  hoops  and  hqgftreads  fpent, 

So  wife,  with  lome  great  WKIXBKEAD  of  the  land:; 
And  tarried  till  he  did  the  Brewer  tire, 
And  make  the  Brewer's  horfe;and.dog.«;//«/7v; 
And  curious  draymen  into  hogflieads  creeping, 
Sly  rogues,  and  through  the.  bung -holes  peeping. 

Whether  great  C.ISAR  was. To  fly  an  elf, 

As  from  the  very  Servants  to  enquire, 
And  know  much  better  than  the  'SQUIRE  himfelf 

The .bufirjefs  of  .each  neigh'bring  'SQUIRE-: 

As  why  the.coachman  J:EKU  went.away.; 

Which  pf  .the  drivers  JOAN  the  cook  defiPd; 
Which; of  the  footmen  with  SUSANNA  lay, 

And  got  the  .charming  chamber-maid  with  child. 

He  afk'd  of  CESAR'S  fervants  all 

Were,  cat-like,  all  good  moufers,  earn'd  their  wages ; 
•Sought  news  from  ftreet  and  tavern,  bulk  and  flail, 

Like  NIC o LAI,  the  Prince  of  Pages  ; 
And  whether  .C^s  A R,  with  ferocious  looks, 
Found  a  poor  traveling  LOUSE,  and  fliav'd  his  Cooks, 

If  CESAR'S  Miniiter  gave  half-a-crown 

To  (hoe-blacks,  and  the  fweepers  of  the  town, 

To  howl,  and  fwear,  and  clap  him  at  the  Play  \ 
A-ad,  when  unto  the  Senate-houfe  he  rode, 
To  fpread  their  ell-wide  lantern  jaws  abroad, 
roar  mod  bull-like  when  he  came  away. 

2  He 


THE    PROGRESS    OF    KNOWLEDGE.  311 

ITtrruVdi:  CESAR'S  wife 

Had  ever  Maids  of  Honour  in  her  life, 

Like  any  modern  economic  Queen; 
And  if,  ot  fweet  and  faving  wifdom  full, 
The  faving  Fmprefs  ever  made  a  rule, 

So  keen,  indeed  fo  very,  very  keen  ; 

That  all  the  herd  of  honourable  maids, 
\Vl.o  wifh'd  to  deep  in  comfortable  beds, 
Should  purchafe  their  own  fheetsand  |*ilio\v-cafes, 
To  treat  their  gentle  backs  aad  blooming  la 

Whether  great  C^KSAR,  fond  of  heaping  riches, 

ihocs  with  holes,  and  pieces  to  his  breeches; 
If  CA.SAR  gave  bis  fervants  handfome  wages, 
Convened  vu:h  hobby  -grooms,  and  jok'd  with  pages. 

If  C^.SAR  and  his  Emprefi  us'd  to  pop 
Their  heads,  fo  grand,  into  a  trade!  man's  (hop, 

Aud  haggle  for  a  pennyworth  of  tape  ; 
And  eke  for  flannel,  inkle,  thread,  or  check  — 
Or  yard  of  red  cloth  for  the  Emp'ror's  neck  — 

That  is  to  fay,  to  make  his  coat  a  cape. 

If  C^SAR  recommended  fins  to  Lords, 

Such  as  the  CASTLE-TAVERK,  for  beft  cheer; 

In  ftrong,  indeed,  and  moft  perfuafivc"  words, 
Praifmg  the  landlord's  wine,  and  bread,  and  beer. 

Alfo  the  landlord's  ftables  and  foft  beds, 
To  lodge  their  own  and  horfes  gentle  heads  ; 
Ord'ring  Lords  there  with  all  their  cajh  to  part- 
But  never,  never  go  to  the  WHITE  HART. 

He  aflc'd  if  mighty  C^ESAI  lov'd  humility, 

That  is,  mfubjffis  only,  viz.  Nobility; 

And  eke  the  Commons,  deem'd  a  vulgar  maf  , 
Form'd  by  the  wifdom  of  Almighty  God, 
To  carry  on  their  backs  a  heav'nly  load, 

Juft  like  a'camel,  elephant,  or  afs. 


If 


$12  THE    PROGRESS    OF    KNOWLEDGE. 

If  C^SAK  cut  up  palaces  for  pens, 

And  unto  butch'ring  ftrongly  did  incline ; 

Sold  geefe  and  turkeys,  ducks,  and  cocks,  and  hens, 
And  fatten'd  cows,  and  calves,  and  fheep,  and  fwine;; 

In  rams  furpafs'd  him  (of  ram-glory  full) 

Or,  glorious,  ever  beat  him  in  a  bull. 

He  afk'd  if  CAESAR  did  not  find 

Some  cunning  fejlow  for  a  hind, 

Prepar'd  withyfafJtf*  accounts  to  meet  him,. 

And  in  his  pigs  and  fheep  and  bullocks  cheat  him  j 

And  whether  C^SAR  did  not  flily  watch  him ; 

And  what  were  CAESAR'S  traps  to  catch  hiai. 

Jf,  like  PEG  NICHOLSON,  on  rnifchief  bufy, 

A  Mantua-maker  drew  a  rufly  knife, 
To  cleave  the  Emperor  in  twain,  the  hufley^ 

Fright'ning  the  Emperor  out  of  his  life. 

He  afk'd  if  Italy  v/as  half  fo  bleft, 
As  England,  in  that  Prince  of  Painters  WEST; 
And  if  there  ever  liv'd  in  Rome's  great  town 
A  man  who^o/^,  like  REYNOLDS,,  a  renown; 
A  man,  indeed,  whofe  vilely-daubing  brulh 
Puts  PAINTING,  the  fweet  damfel,  to  the  blufb  * 
Then  afk'd  if  CAESAR  ever  had  the  heart 
To  give  a  milling  to  the  Painting  Art. 

He  afk'd  if  C>ESAR,  'midft  his  dread  campaigns, 
Felt  bold,  whene'er  well  dous'd  by  rufhing  rains ; 
Boldly  not  caring  ev'n  a  fingle  fig, 
Although  they  fpoil'd  a  bran-new  Tyburn-wig  ; 
When  'midft  the  doughty  regiments  of  death, 
On  fome  wild  Wimbledon,  or  huge  Blackheath. 

He  alk'd  if  CAESAR,  ever  ftar'd  abroad, 
(Inftead  of  flaring,,  as  he  ought,  at  hcme) 

For  Architects  with  tram  the  land  to  load, 
And  raife  of  gaudy  gingerbread  a  DOME  :* 

*  The  Royal  Academy. 

Sudi 


THE    PROGRESS    OF    KNOWLEDGE.  313 

Such  as  is  rais'd  by  that  rare  Swede  SIR  WILL, 
The  grinning  mouth  of  RIDICULE  to  fill. 

Whether  the  curious  CAESAR  fcnt  to  Greece, 
For  ftatues  coding  heav'n  knows  what  a-piece; 
Then  putting  under  ground  a  world's  rare  boaft,* 
To  entertain  a  toad  or  ghoft. 

Such  were  the  queftions,  with  a  thoufand  more, 
He  aflt'd,  to  fwell  of  knowledges  the  (lore; 
That  fell  like  darlings  on  the  ear,  in  flocks — 
Sure  keys  for  opening  MOTHER  WISDOM'S  locks : 

Rare  keys  that  ope  the  twilight  vaults  of  TIME  ; 

A  thief  who,  with  a  (acriTegious  pride, 

Delighteth  fomethine  ev'ry  day  to  hide, 
Sacks  hill  of  profe  and  fweetly-lounding  rhyme. 

Such  queftions,  with  a  manner  quite  unique^ 
The  monkey  boys  to  mimic  foon  began  ; 

And,  lo !  of  mimicry  the  feucy  trick, 
Like  wildfire  through  the  College  ran. 

Lord  !  hinder  them  ! — there  could  be  no  fuch  thing— 

Thus  ev'ry  little  rafcal  was  a  King  ! 

*  A  caft,  and  the  only  one,  of  that  famous  Farotfe  Hercules, 
having  been  procured  at  a  considerable  ei pence,  as  well  as  trouble,  for 
the  benefit  of  the  Students  of  the  Royal  Academy,  and  the  admiration 
of  the  world  in  general,  is  now  thrult  away  into  a  dirk  hole ;  the 
building  being  rather  calculated  for  the  fupp^rt  of  butterflies  than 
Jt4avy  antique*.  The  following  Ihort  dialogue  was  written  on  the 
occjlion  : — 

A  DIALOGUE  Ittwtoi  Two  STATUES,  in  an  W  Rs*m  sf  tJu 
ROYAL  ACADEMY. 

Fir/I  Statue. 

«  What  keeps  old  Hercules  fc/oor, 
•'  A  fellow  of  fuch  rare  renown  ? 

Second  Statue. 

<*  Plague  take  thec  !  hold  thy  tongue— for  know, 
'<  Should  he  come  n/>,  we  adl  go  down," 

E  e  3  This, 


3 14  THE    PROGRESS    OF    KNOWtETKSF. 

This,  FAME,  who  feldom  leflens  founds,  did  bear$ 

Witb  all  its  horrors,  to  the  Royal  ear  : 

The  confequence,  the  SCHOOL  had  caufe  to  rue— » 

To  fchools  the  Monarch  bade  a  long  adieu  ; 

Of  Eton  journeys  gave  th'  idea  o'er, 

An.d?  angry,  never  mentioned  C^SAR  more! 


ODES 


OPES 

or 

IMPORTANCE,    &c. 

TO   THE   SHOEMAKERS.  .  TO    THE    EINC. 

TO    MR.    BURKE.  7  TO   THE   ACADEMIC    CHAIR, 

TO    IRONY.  J  TO    A    MARGATE   HOT. 

TU    LORD    LOSSDALE.  7  OLD    SIMON,    A    TALE. 

THE    JUDGES; 

OR,    THE 

WOLVES,  THE  BEAR,  AND  INFERIOR  BEASTS* 
A  FABLE. 


'  Sie  fefiti,  fmruct  mifcetis  oJortt. 

Sweet-briar,  hawthorn,  lilies,  nettles,  rofesj 
What  a  nice  bcjjet  for  all  forts  of  nofcs  I 


Ludmui  I'MMOCHIS  ixrb'ut  mec  UJtrt  yteitjvam 
M  ns  no/Ira  M  A  R  T I  AC.. 

MY  VERSE'S /t^^n^f,  mlldntfi,  none  deny  : 
Lord  !  playful  PETER  would  not  wound a/y. 


(     3'7     ) 


ODES     OF     IMPORTANCE. 


RESIGN  A  TIOX; 
AN  ODE  TO  THE  JOURNEYMEN  SHOEMAKERS, 

HI*  /affly  refuftd  /«  wkt  UKfpt  thtir  fTjgei  -wtrt  raiftd. 

OONS  of  SAINT  CRISPIN,  'tis  in  vain  f 
^  Indeed  'tis  fruitlefs  to  complain  : 

I  know  yc  wilh  good  beef  or  veal  to  carve: 
But  firft  the  hungry  great  muft  all  be  fed  ; 
Mean  time,  ye  all  muft  clietv  hard  muftv  bread, 

Or,  what  is.  commonly  unplca&ut,  $arve. 


Your  M*flcrst  like  your/thes^  oppreffion  feel  — 
It  is  not  they  would  wiih  to  ftint  your  meal  : 

Then  fuck  your  paws,  like  l>ears,  and  be  refign'd  : 
Perhaps  your  fins  are  many,  and  if  fo, 
HCAV'N  gives  us  very  frequently,  we  know, 

The  GREAT  as  fcourges  for  mankind. 
Your  Maftcrt  foon  may  follow  you,  fo  lank  — 
Undone  by  fimple  confidence  in  Rank. 

The  royal  RICHMOND  builds  his  ftate  on  coals  ; 
SAL'SB'RV,  and  HAWKSB'RY,  lofty  fouls, 

With  their  fair  DAMES  muft  have  the  ball  and  rout;  . 
Kings  muft  our  millions  have,  to  make  a  glare  ; 
Whole  fycophants  muft  alfo  have  a  fliare  ; 

But  pout  not  —  'tis  a  Libel,  Sirs,  to  pout  — 

Olos'd  be  your  mouths,  or  dread  the  jail  or  thong  :. 

mft  not  for  your  money  have  a  fong. 
Ceafe,  ceafe  your  riots,  pray,  my*  friends  :- 
It  aiifwercth  (believe  me)  no  good  ends  — 

An» 


OTTES?  OF    IMPORTANCE. 

And  'yet  the  time  will  come,  I  hope  to  God, 
When  black -fac'd,  damn'd  OPPRESSION  to  his  dei* 
Shall  howling  fly  before  the  curfe  of  MEN, 

Afidfeel  of  anger'd  JUSTICE  the  fliarp  rod. 

Co  home,  I  beg  of  ye,  my  friends,  and  eat 
Your  four,  your  mouldy  bread,  and  offal  meat; 

Till  FREEDOM  comes — I  fee  her  on  her  way— 
Then  fliall  a  fmile  break  forth  uport  each  mien, 
'Eke  front  of  banifh'd  HAPPINESS  be  feen, 

And,  fons  of  CRISPIN,  ye  once  more  be  gay. 

Now  go,  and  learn  fubmiffion  from  your  Bible : 
Complaint  is  now-a-days  a  flagrant  libel. 
Yes,  go  and  try  to  chew  your  mouldy  bread — 
JUSTICE  is  (ick,  I  own,  but  is  not  dead. 
Let  GRANDEUR  roll  her  chariot  on  our  necks, 
Submiffion,  fvveet  humility  befpeaks : 

Let  GRANDEUR'S  plumes  be  lifted  by  our  fighs— 
Let  dice,  and  chariots,  and  the  ftately  thrones, 
Be  form'd  of  poor  men's  hard- work 'd  bones — 

We  muft  contribute;  or,  lo  !  GRANDEUR  dies. 
We  are  the  Parifh,  that  fupports  her  fhow ; 
A  truth  that  GRANDEUR  wilh.es  not  to  know. 

Full  many  a  time  reluctantly,  I  own, 
I  view  our  mighty  RULERS  with  a  groan, 

Who  eat  the  labours  of  us  vulgar  Crew  ; 
Balk  on  our  ftioulders  in  their  lazy  ftate ; 
And  if  we  dare/co£  up  for  eafe,  th*  ingrate 

Look  down,  and  a(k  us,  "  D-m'me,  who  are  you  ?'* 

Now  fuch  forgetful nefs  is  moft  unpleafant ! 
The  man  who  doth  receive  a  hare  or  pheafant, 
Might  fomeiuhat,  certainly,  from  manners  fpare, 
And  fay,  "  I  thank  ye  for  the  bird  or  hare." 

But  then,  I'm  told  a gen.  that  GFANBEUR'S  fore 
At  owning  obligation*  to  the  Poor— 

Sucb 


ODES    OF    IMFORTASfCK.  3  1^ 

Such  favours  cut  no  figure  in  ilifcourfe: 
"She  thinks  fhe  might  as  well  thank  dogs  ami  cats 
For  finding  partridges,  and  catching  rats  ; 

And  fay,  "  I'm  much  oblig'd  t'ye,"  to  a  horfc. 

•Lo,  to  the  GREAT  we  breathe  the  figh  in  vain  ; 

A  zephyr  mm  m'ring  through  the  hollow  walls  : 
Our  tear,  that  tries  to  melt  our  fouL%  the  rain 

That  printlefs  on  the  rock  of  ages  falls  ! 

The  lofty  GREAT  mud  have  the  fofteft  bed 
To  lay  t\icfoft  luxurious  head  : 

And  from  our  bofoms  we  poor  Gfrfa  fo  tome, 
Mud  pluck  fubmiflively  the  tender  feather  ; 
Ourfelves  expos'd  to  NATURE'S  rudeft  weather, 

Deny'd  the  liberty  to  cry  our,  "  Shame  !" 
Thus,  'while  their  heads  the  pillow's  down  imprint, 
Vurs  muft  be  only  bolfter'd  by  a  flint. 

Ye  muft  not  heed  your  children's  hunger'd  cry, 

Nor  once  upon  their  little  forrow's  figh— 

In  tears  their  blubbrr'd  faces  let  them  fteep, 

And  howl  their  hunger  and  their  grief  to  deep, 

*Tk  impudence  in  babes  to  cry  for  bread  — 

Lo,  GRANDEUR'S  fav'rite  //«§•/  muft  firft  be  fed  !— 


-See  yon  proud  Duchefc—  yet  of  late  fo 

With  not  above  ten  thwfand  ponnds  a  year  ! 
Behold,  a  hundred  coaches  at  her  door, 

re  PHARO  triumphs  in  his  mad  career. 
\Ve  muft  fupport  her,  or  by  hook  or  crook— 
For,  lo  !  her  huibaud  was  —  a  ROYAL  Duke. 

We  muft  fupport  too  her  fine  gold-hc'J  crc\v, 

Behind  htr  gilt  coach  dancing  Molly  fel!o\v% 
With  cam-sand  ruffle*  goodly  to  the  view, 

Aiming  their  complexion-.*  pink  umbrellas. 
•:«1  he  fo  ;  for  Lordly  GRAHDBVR  nilc"— 
Lul  QI.FA.LITY  are  C^ou  ,  aiut  MOB  are  muless 


1  know 


320  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

I  know  ye  wifh  to  fee  on  gold,  fo  good, 
•King  GEORGE'S  head,  that  many  a  want  fupplies; 
So  very  pleafant  to  his  people's  eyes, 

As  pleafant  as  the  head  of  flefh  and  blood. 
MONEY'S  a  rattling  (inner,  to  be  fure  : 
Like  the  fweet  Cyprian  girl  (we  vvo'n't  fay  wk—e) 
Us  happy  to  be  frequently  employed, 
And  not  content  by  one  to  be  enjoy'd ; 
Yet,  like  the  GREAT-ONES,  with  faftidious  eye 
Seems  of  inferior  mortals  rather  Ihy. 

Then  go,  my  friends,  and  chew  your  mouldy  bread* 

'Tis  on  our  moulders  Courts  muft  lift  the  head. 

Remember,  we  are  only  Oxen  yet-^- 

Therefore  beneath  the  yoke  condemn'd  to  fweat: 

But  gradually  we  all  mail  change  to  Men  ; 

And  then  1 !  !  what  then  ? — Ye  heav'ns !  why  tfitn 

The  lawlefs  fway  of  TYR  ANN  Y  is  o'er — 

PRIDE  falls,  and  BRITAIN'S  fons.are  beafts  no  more  ! 


OI>E      TO      BURKE. 

'  A  H,  BURKE  !  full  forry  is  the  Mufe  indeed 
**  That  thou  art  from  the  Patriot  Phalanx  fled  ! 

For  what  ?  To  crouch,  and  flatter  Queens  and  Kings  ? 
Meanly  to  mingle  with  a  Courtier  gang, 
That  INFAMY  herfelf  would fcorn  to  hang —    - 

Such  a  poor  fqualid  hoft  of  creeping  things  ! 

Has  madnefs  fir'd  thy  brain  ?   Alas  !  return  : 
Thy  fault  in  fackcloth  and  in  aihes  mourn: 

Join  not  a  Court,   and  FREEDOM'S  fouleft  foes— * 
REPENTANCE,  lo  !   lhall  try  to  warn  thee  white : 
Then  howl  not,  EDMUND,  'mid  the  Imps  of  Night; 

Swell  not  the  number  of  a  flock  of  crows. 

Wha 


ODES    OP    IMPORTANCE.  3*1 

What  murky  cloud,  the  vapour  black  of  Courts, 
(For  many  a  cloud  the  breath  of  Kings  fupports) 

Attempts  thy  reputation's  fpreading  beam  ? 
What  black-like  DEMON,  with  the  damncd'ft  fpite, 
Springs  on  thy  fame,  on  GLORY'S  (acred  height, 

Tofoufc  it  in  Di  so  WAGE'S  dirty  (beam  ? — 
Alas  !  if  MAJESTY  did  gracious  lay, 
44  BURKE,  BURKE,  I'm  glad,  I'm  glad  you  ran  away; 

"  J'm  glad  you  left  your  party— very  glad — 
44  They  wiuYd  to  treat  me  like  a  boy  at  (chool ; 

'*  Rope,  rope  me  likeahorfe,  aiiafs,  a  mulfr^ 
*•'  That's  very  bad,  you  know,  that's  very  bad. 

4  I  hate  the  PORTLAND  Junto,  hate  it,  BURKE — 

Poor  rogue*,  poor  rogues,  that  cannot  draw  a  cork— 
M  Nothing  but  empty  di flies,  empty  dimes-— 
"  We've  got  the  loaves  and  Hfhes,  loaves  and  fiflies." 

if  thus  a  mighty  Monarch  fpokc 
Ab  uiual — not  by  way  of  joke ; 

Did  not  the  fpeech  fo  with'ring  make  thee  fliri;. 
Didft  thou  not  inward  Jay,  "  I've  daimi'd  mylclt — 
"  Why,  what  a  miferableelf !" 

And  then  upon  each  old  acquaintance  think; 
And  with  a  fi#h  recall  thofc  attic  days, 

l  WISDOM  pour'd  the  mingled  blaze  J 

"BURKE,  BURKE,  mort  eafily  do  I  difcover 

>u  loatheit  the  weak  fmile  thar  \von  thee  over — 

From  TR RY  borrow'd,  ne'er  to  be  return'd: 

MOW  thou  art  not  happy  at  thy  heart— 
It  fighs  for  WISDOM'S  voice,  and  pants  to  part 
From  fellows  by  the  honeft  VIRTUES  fpurn'd. 

Thy  tongue  has  promib'd  frienclftiip  with  a  figU— 
For,  Jo!  tli' interpreter  of  thoughts  thine  ey« 

heavy,  beamlefs  on  the  motley  band, 
To  whom  thou  ftretcheft  forth  thy  leaden  hand! 
•fes,  flowly  does  that  hand  of  frlcn^fhlf  move  ; 
The  flartled  Courtiers  feel  no  erafp  ot  love : 

VOL.  II.  \i*  At 


$22  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

A  cold  and  palfied  fhake  o£  gratulation, 
As  though  it  trembled  at  contamination  ! 

O  BURKE  !  behold  fair  LIBERTY  advancing — 
TRUTH,  WIT,  and  HUMOUR,  fporting  in  her  train : 

Behold  them  happy,  linging,  laughing,  dancing, 

Proud  of  a  Golden  Age  again  ! 
When  all  thy  friends  (thy  friends  of  late,  I  mean) 
Shall,  flufh'd  with  conqueft,  meet  their  idol  Queen, 

The  Goddefs  at  whofe  mrine  a  world  mould  kneel ; 
When  ihey  with  fongs  of  triumph  hail  the  DAME, 
Will  not  thy  cheek  be  dafli'd  with  deepeft  fhame, 

And  CONSCIENCE  fomewhat  ftartled  feel? 

Ah  !  will  thine  eye  a  gladfome  beam  difplay; 
Borrow  from  fmooth  HYPOCRISY'S  a  ray, 

To  hail  thelong-defir'd  return  ? 
Speak,  wilt  thou  fcrew  into  a  fmile  thy  mouth, 
And  welcome  LIBERTY,  with  WIT  and  TRUTS ; 

And  for  a  moment  leave  thy  gang,  to  mourn  ? 
Yes,  thou  wilt  greet  her  with  a  half-forc'd  fmile, 
Quitting  thy  'virtuous  Company  a  while, 

To  fay,  "  Dear  Madam,  welcome — how  dy'e  do?'* 
And  then  the  DAME  will  anfwer  with  a  dip, 
Scorn  in  her  eye,  contempt  upon  her  lip, 

"  Not  much  the  better,  Miller  BUR  KB,  for  you." 
Poor  BURKE,  I  read  thy  foul,  and  feel  thy  pain — 
Go,  join  the  fycophants  that  I  difdain. 


ODE     TO      IRONY. 

/"\  THOU,  with  mouth  demure  and  folemn  eye, 
^^     Who  laugheftnot,  thou  Quaker- looking  wight, 

But  raakeft  others  roaring  laugh  outright, 
Thus  chafing  widow  SORROW,  and  her  figh-^ 
O  Thou  who  formeft  pills  to  purge  the  fpleen, 
INo  more  in  Britain  muft  thou  dare  be  feen  ? 


There 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE.  32) 

Theft  was  a  time,  but  not  like  our's  fo  nice, 
Whcnthou  couldft  banifti  FOLLY,  nay,  and  VICE — 
;'d  with  thy  daughter  HUMOUR,  danifel  quaint, 
And  WJT,  that  could  have  tickled  e'en  a  Saint. 

But  times  are  alter'd  !  Certain  Greybeards  fay, 

**  Ve  vagabonds,  you've  had  indeed  your  day ; 

"  But  never  dare  to  (hew  your  face  agen, 

44  To  take  vile  liberties  with  lofty  men. 

"  Grin,  if  you  pleafe — with  joke  the  world  regale— 

*  Yet  mind,  a  Critic  hears  you,  cail'daJaiL" 

But,  lo !  fair  Lf BERT v  divinely  ftrong ! 
A  patriot  PAalanx  leads  the  DA  MB  along. 

THOU,  WIT,  and  HUMOUR,  (hall  adorn  her  train— 
And  let  me  proudly  join  the  noble  Few ; 
Whilft,  to  thecaule  of  Glory  true, 

The  MUSB  (hall  fhout  her  boldeft  drain. 

E'en  I,  'midft  fuch  a  patriot  band, 
Will  gain  importance  through  the  land ; 

Rile,  from  a  poor  Extinguifher,  a  Steeple— 
And,  O  AMBITION,  hear  thy  fuppliant's  pray 'r, 
A  fprie  of  thy  unfading  laurel  fpare, 

And  crown  me,  crown  me  POET  of  the  PEOPL*. 


ODE    TO    LORD    LONSDALE. 

fie,  my  Lord!  attack  a  faint-like  POET  ! 
O,  let  not  ASKALON,  nor  IctGATH  know  it! 
What !  by  law-bulldogs  bid  the  lambkin  groan ! 
O  LONSDALE!  genuine  Poetry  is  rare, 
Half  of  our  verfe,  adulterated  ware ; 
I  fpeak  of  other's  vcrfes,  not  my  : 

Ffa  Ah! 


324  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

Ah  !  flop  not,  flop  rfot  PETER'S  tuneful  throat! 

Hereafter,  he  may  warble  in  thy  praife, 
Who  fo  furpafleth  thoufands  in  his  note, 

A  Philomel  amid  ft  a  flock  of  Jays. 

The  banifhment  of  OVID  into  Thrace 
Did  CAESAR'S  glory  grievoufly  difgrace ; 
Dropp'd  on  his  coat  of  arms  a  (lain  of  ink, 
And  made  the  honeft  pen  of  HIST'RY  (brink. 

Thou  who  (hott'ft  SERJEANT  BOLTON  through  the 
At  leaft  didft  make  the  Serjeant  (hoot  himfelf: 

O  think  how  thou  mayft  fuffer  in  repute,    • 
By  fhliing  on  a  harmlefs  rhyming  elf ! 

REVENGE  herfelf  would  blufh  at  fuch. a  deed; 

For  Poets  always  were  a  dove-like  breed : 

Fire  at  a  grqat  LAW  SERJEANT — then  let  fly, 
Bounce,  on  a  fimple  Rhymer  fuch  as  I, 

Great  condefcenfion  verily  requires : 
What  fportfman  at  the  pheafant  aims,  and  then 
Hunts  in  his  humble  bufh  the  twitt'ring  wren  ? 

On  grqufe  and  grafshoppers  what  mortal  fires  ? 

^At  London  frequently  we  meet 
A  lofty  CAMEL  in  the  ftreet, 

Moving  with  ftate-lmwieldinefs  along  j 
We  alfo  fee  a  Monkey  on  his  hump, 
Now,  with  an  arch  grimace,  from  head  to  rump 

Skipping,  and  drawing  wonder  from  the  throng— 
Againft  Lord  Chefterfield's  grave  maxim  (inning, 
The  merry  grig,  that  is  to  fay,  by  grinning. 

Now  this  fame  CAMEL,  a  well-judging  beaft, 
jFeels  not  of  goading  ridicule  the  leail ; 

Calmly  the  ruminating  creature  goes, 
Poking  his  head,  and  (baking  it  in  guife, 
Much  like  great  DOCTOR  JOHNSON,  call'd  the  wife^ 
*  for  pulling  ev'ry  Scotchman  by  the  uofe, 

Wh«n 


ODE*  OF    IMPORTANCE.  32$ 

When  pond'rous  moving  through  the  Northern  track, 
With  dapper  JEMMY  Bos  WELL  on  his  back,. 

Now  would  not  ev'ry  mortal  ("mile, 
To  fee  this  Camel  all  fo  full  of  bile 

Bouncing  unhappily  about, 

Dancing,  and  flaring,  grunting,  kicking,  moaning, 
And  like  a  creature  in  the  cholic  groaning, 
Making  for  playful  JACKO  all  this  rout  r 

When   HAWKSB'RY,    SALTSH'RY,  LEEDS,    and  mow 

befide, 
Fearing;  the  tinfel  on  the  back  of  PRIDE 

Might  tarnifli  by  an  acid  drop  of  rhyme, 
And  confequently  lofe  the  magic  rays 
That  call  forth  ADMIRATION'S  gape  and  gaze, 

And  make  her  think  (he  views  the  true  SUBLIME— 

I  fay,  to  MAJESTY  when  thofe  great  LORDS 
Poiir'd  forth  a  foaming  torrent  of  hard  words; 

As,  "Hang  that  PETER  PINDAR,  if  you  pltafe; 
u  sire,  make  the  gracelefs  varlet  underftand 
4;  What  'tis  tofmileat  Ku/trs  of  the  land  — 
"  A  beggar  that  difgraces  his  own  fleas. 

44  SIKB,  SIRB,  th1  ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S  tiger  gripe 
44  Would  quickly  (lop  the  RnggamutEn's  pipe; 
44  Then  for  his  laugh,  at  GRANDEUR  let  him  fwing.." 
«  No,"  quoth  the  KING— 

"  If  Tm  not  hurt,  iny  Lords,  you  may  be  quiet  : 

*4  'Tis  for  v  wjlhcs,  ywrftlve*,  you  \vifti  tiic  riot—  -• 

**  Y(  u  ffar,  you  fear,  that  PETER'S  Miife 

'*  Vv  ill  luing  your  Grandeurs  in  her  noofe. 

**  No,  no,  my  Lords,  *M'DoN  A  LD  mud  not  fqueeze  him: 
'*  ^rou  fee  I  give  up  Ncw-year  Odes,  to  pleaie  him  ; 
**  And  frith,  between  me  and  the  port  ruid  you, 
"  I  fear  die  knave  will  get  the  Birth-Jay  too. 


f  3  *  No, 


J2  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE.  • 

"  No,  no — let  PETER  fing,  and  laugh,  and  live: 
"  1  like  to  read  his  works — Kings  are  fair  game : 

"  What  though  he  bites — 'tis  glorious  to  forgive. 
""  Go,  go,  my  Lords,  go,  go,  and  do  the  fame* 

"  Should  PETER'S  verfebe  in  the  right, 

"  Our  conduct  muft  be  in  the  wrong  r 
<{  Poor,  poor's  the  triumph  of  a  little  fpite— 

"  We  muft  not  hang  a  fubjecl  for  a  fong. 

<s  My  Lords,  my  Lords,  a  whifper  I  defire : 

14  Dame  LIBERTY  grows  ftronger— fome  feet  higher; 

"  She  will  not  be  bamboozled,  as  of  late : 
14  Arijlocrate  &  la  lanterne 
"  Are  very  often  cheek  by  jowl,  we  learn, 

"  Within  a  certain  neighb'ring  bu  ft  I  ing  State : 
<:  I  think  your  Lord/hips  and  your  Graces 
"  Would  not  much  like  to  dangle  with  wry  faces. 

14  But  mum,  my  Lords— mum,  mumrmy  Lords— mum, 

"  mum: 
**  You  muft  be  cautious  for  the  time  to  come : 

*'  The  People's  brains  are  loling  their  old  fogs ; 
"  Juries  before  the  Judges  won't  look  (link; 
*'  No,  no — they  fancy  they've  a  right  to  think  : 

"  They  fay,  indeed,  they  won't  be  driven  like  hogs, 

*'  No  Starchambers,  no  Starchambers  for  them — 
1  SLAVERY'S  thedev'l,  and  LIBERTY  a  gem. 

"  You  fee,  my  Lords,  their  heads  are  not  fb  thick : 
1  Take  care,  or  foon  you'll  have  a  bone  to  pick  ; 

"  And  p'rhaps  you  would  not  like  this  fame  hard  bone  v 

<c  So  let  the  laughing,  rhyming  rogue  alone." 

Sweet  ROBIN  of  the  Mufe's  facredgrove^. 
Whofe  foul  is  butter-milk,  and  fong  is  love ; 

So  bleft  when  Beauty  forms  the  faming  theme  j 
Who  wouldft  not  Heav'n  accept,  (the  fex  fo  dear) 
Had  charming  WOMAN  no  apartments  there, 

Thy  morning  vilion,  aad  thy  nightly  dream/"*1 

Mild 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE.  J2 

Mild  MINSTRBL,  could  their  Lord  (hips  call  thee  rogue, 
Yarlet,  and  knave,  and  vagabond,  and  dog  ? 
What !  try  to  bring  thee,  for  ihy  liarmlefs  wit, 
Where  GREYBEARDS  in  their  robes  terrific  fit, 

Wirh  fanftified  long  fortune-telling  faces, 
Whilft  ERSKINE,  eldeft-born  of  RIDICULE, 
From  foleinn  IRONY'S  bewitching  fchool, 

Tears  to  ua-Judgelike  grins,  the  hanging  GRACES  1 

Meek  POET,  who,  no  proftitute  for  price, 
Wilt  never  fanftion  fools,  nor  varnifli  Vice ; 

Nor  rob  the  MUSK'S  altar  of  its  flame, 
To  brighten  with  immortal  beams  a  King 
(If  FREEDOM  finds  nb  flicker  from  his  wing,) 

And  meanly  fing  a  Tyrant  into  fame  ! 

Thus,  LONSDALE,  thou  behold'ft  a  fair  example 
Of  greatnefs  in  a  King — a  noble  fample ! 

Thou  cry'ft,  "  What  muft  I  do?  on  thee  I  call."— 
Catch  up  your  pen,  my  Lord,  at  once,  and  fay, 
"  Dear  PETER,  all  my  rage  is  blown  away  j 

"  So,  come  and  eat  thy  beef  at  LOWTHER-HALL." 


ODE  TO  THE  ACADEMIC  CHAIR, 

ON    T»B 

Eltfiion  of  Mr.  Weft  to  the  Preftdency. 

TTOW  art  thou  fallen,  thou  once  high-honour'd  CHAIR  ! 
•*•*  Moft  hedgehog-like,  thou  briftleft  up  my  hair. 

But  poflibly  I'm  only  in  a  dream. : 
If  fo,  immediately  O  let  me  wake; 
Good  MORPHEUS,  drag  me  from  this  fad  miftake : 

Open  my  eyes,  or,  lo !  I  fliali  blafpheme. 

By 


328  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE.- 

By  heav'ns  I  it  is  no  vifion — 'tis  too  plain 
That  thou,  poor  imp,  art  fated  to  luftain 

Of  BENJAMIN  th' abominable  b-m. 
What!  after  REYNOLDS,  to  take  up  with  WEST  I 
Th'  antipodes  thou  feekeft,  I  proteft ; 

From  Jove's  grand  thunder,  to  an  infant's  drum; 
The  lightning  courfer  to  the  creeping  mole ; 
The  world's  wide  orbit,  to  a  fpider's  hole  j 
From  fome  fair  column,  or  Corinthian  dome, 
Sunk  to  a  dreary  dungeon,  or  the  tomb ! 

And  yet,  on  recollection,  that  old  throne, 

In  Weftminfter's  fair  Choir  for  two-pence  (hewn, 

Which  bore  the  EDWARDS,  HARRYS  of  our 
Has  been  oblig'd  (a  truth  moft  melancho//y  !) 
To  Ihrink  beneath  a  leaden  load  of  folly, 

And  every  meannefs  that  can  man  defile. 

Thy  virtue  is  gone  out  of  thee,  I  ween  ! 

Thy  brother  Chairs  of  late  with  humbled  mien, 

Tha  jealous  envy'd  thee  thy  tow'ring  fame,, 

All  with  one  voice  exclaim, 
And  all  the  poignant  pow'r  of  ridicule, 
"  He  is  not  equal  to  an  old  joint  ftooL 

"  He  who  of  late  fo  lofty  held  his  creft, 

"  Array 'd  fo  gorgeous  in  a  crimfon  veft, 

"  He  now  is  worfe  than  us  poor  humble  hacksr 

"  With  not  a  fmgle  rag  about  our  backs. 

"  Get  thyfelf  burnt,  thou  fad  degraded  creature ; 
**  Go,  boil  fome  poor  old  wafherwoman's  water : 

"  Or  get  thyfelf  to  ikewers  and  crockfticks  turn'd  ^ 
*'  To  fome  dead  beggar's  coffin  give  each  nail, 
**  And  yield  thy  velvet  to  fome  {trumpet's  tail :  v 

"  For,  know,  thou  fhouldft  uo  longer  be  adoru'd.* 

Thus  fpeak  thy  brother  Chairs !   And  yet  'tis  cruel, 
As  thou  wouldft  rather  be  cut  up  for  fuel, 

Or 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

Or  reft  the  backs  of  beggars  in  the  ftreet : 
Bvit,  lo  !   WEST  fills  thee,  by  his  King's  commands; 
Lov'd  by  his  fubject  --  by  foreign  lands — 

And  full  of  wifdom  as  an  egg  of  meat ! 

"  I  like  WEST'S  works — he  beats  the  RAPHAEL  fchool: 
"  I  never  lik'd  that  REYNOLDS — 'twas  a  fool — 

:ted  too  thick — a  dauber — 't  won't,  'twon't  pafs— 
"  WKST,  WEST,  WEST'S  pi&urrs  are  as  Imoothasglafat 
44  Befidrs,  I  hated  RKYNOLDS,  from  my  heart : 
**  He  thought  tliat  I  knew  nought  about  the  art. 

"  WEST  tells  me  that  my  tafte  is  very  pure— 
"  That  I'm  a  connoifleur,  a  connoiffcur: 

"  I  like,  I  Hke,  I  like  the  works  of  WEST."— 
Thus  doth  w  King,  in  founds  fo  gracious  cry  : 

\Vhic!1.  proves  that  Kings  with  link  can  be  bleft, 
And  give  the  wings  of  eagles  to  a  fly ! 


OLD      SIMON.. 
A    TALE. 

IpOLKS  cannot  be  forever  fnlv'ling — no! 

•*•     With  fountain  nofes  that  for  ever  flow— 
The  world  would  quickly  be  undone; 

Widows,  and  lovelorn  girls,  poor  fouls,  would  die; 

And  for  his  rich  old  father,  lob  and  figh, 
And  hang  himfelf,  perchaunce^  a  Iioptful  fon ; 

And,  for  their  cats  that  hnpp'd  to  flip  their  breath, 
Old  maids,  fo  fweet,  might  mourn  therafelvcs  to  death  j 
SORROW  may  therefore  have  her  decent  day, 
And  fmiling  PLEASURE  come  again  in  play. 


No! 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

No !  folks  can't  brood  for  ever  upon  GRIEF  : 
PLEASURE  muft  fteal  into  her  place  at  laft ; 

Thus  then  the  heart  from  horror  finds  relief, 
Snatch'd  from  the  cloud  by  which  it  is  o'ercaft. 

Thus  was  an  anger'd  Lord  my  conftant  theme, 
My  conftant  thought  by  day,  my  conftant  dream : 

Tears  at  his  image  6ft  burft  out,  with  fighs  : 
At  length  CHARLES  Fox  appear'd  * — behold  the  change  ! 
No  longer  after  SORROW  did  I  range, 

But  on  the  fmile  of  PLEASURE  caft  mine  eyes. 
PLEASURE'S  a  lafs  that  will  at  length  prevail : 
Witnefs  the  little  pleafant  following  tale. 

NARCISSA,  full  of  grace,  and  youth,  and  charms, 
Had  flept  fome  years  in  good  old  SIMON'S  arms; 

Her  kind  and  lawful  fpoufe,  that  is  to  fay, 
Who,  following  of  numbers  the  example, 
Wifhing  of  fweet  young  flefh  to  have  a  fample, 

Married  this  charming  girl  upon  a  day. 

For  from  grey-headed  men,  and  thin,  and  old, 
Young  flefh  is  finely  form'd  to  keep  the  cold. 
Thus  of  the  pretty  Shunamite  we  read, 
Who  warm'd  the  good  King  DAVID,  and  his  bed, 
Brought  back  his  flagging  fpirits  all  fo  cool, 
And  kept  the  King  of  Tfrael  warm  as  wool — 
Indeed  fhe  warmer  could  the  Monarch  keep, 
Than  any  thing  belonging  to  a  fheep. 

Moil  virtuous  was  NARCISSA  !  lo, 
All  purity  from  top  to  toe ; 


*  With,  the  Libel-Bill-,  on  which  the  Lord  Chancellor  wifted  to 
confult  the  Judges.  Few  are  the  men  candid  enough  to  part  vobtntctrify 
with  power,  however  tyrannical — ir  mutt  be  torn  from  them.  The 
Judges  have  been  rendered  independent  of  the  Croy/n,  by  the  People  : 
now  let  them  (hew  their  gratitude. 

As 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

As  HEBE  fweet,  and  as  DIANA  chafte. 
None  but  old  SIMON  was  allow'd  a  kifs, 
Though  hungry  as  a  ho»md  to  fnap  the  blifs  ; 

Nor  fqueeze  her  hand,  nor  take  her  round  the  wairt  ; 
Had  any  dar'd  to  give  her  a  green  gown, 
The  FAIR  had  petrified  him  with  a  frown  ; 
For  CHASTITY,  Lord  blefs  us  !  is  fo  nice  — 
Pure  as  the  (how,  and  colder  than  the  ice. 

Thus,  then,  as  I  have  faid  before, 

Sweetly  flie  flcpt,  and  probably  might  fnore, 

In  good  old  SIMON'S  unmolefting  arms  : 
Some  years,  with  this  Antique  of  Cnriftian  clay, 
Did  pafs  in  this  fame  taftelefk,  tranquil  way  — 

Ah  !  Gods,  how  lucky  for  luch  tender  charms  ! 

Yes,  very  fortunate  it  feem'd  to  be  ; 

For,  had  N  A  RCISS  A  wedded  (omejouitg  chaps, 
Their  impudences,  all  forfooth  fo  free, 

Had  robb'd  her  eyes  by  night  of  half  their  naps. 

And  yet,  on  fecond  thoughts  (fometimes  the  beft) 
Ladies  might  choofe  to  lofe  a  little  reft  ; 
Keep  their  eves  open  for  a  Lover's  fake, 
And  thus  a  (acrifice  to  CUPID  make. 

It  plcas'd  at  length  the  Lord  who  dwells  on  high, 
To  bid  the  good  old  fimple  SIMON  die; 

Sleep  with  his  fathers,  as  the  Scripture  has  it  : 
NARCISSA  wept,  that  they  were  doom'd  to  part, 
Blubber'd,  and  almoft  broke  her  little  heart  — 

So  great  her  grief  that  nothing  could  furpafs  it  : 
Not  NIOBE  mourn'd  more  for  fourteen  br 
Nor  Miftrefs  TOFTS,*  to  leave  her  twtnty  cats. 


to  his  grave  was  poor  old  SIMON  hurrifJ  s 
No  !  'twas  a  fortnight  full,  ere  he  was  buried. 

*  The  fnmous  Singer.     Sb«  died  »  few  years  fifnce  at  Venice,  and 
left  to  every  cat  n  legacy. 

Til 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

'Tis  faid  old  SIMON  verily  did  ftiok  : 
A  pretty  fermon  on  th'  occafion  giv'n 
Prov'd  his  good  works,  and  that  he  was  in  heav'i*  t 

Scraps  too  of  Latin  did  the  parfon  link 

Unto  the  funeral  fermon,-  all  fo  fweet, 
The  congregation  and  the  dead  to  greet : 
For  every  Wife  that  is  genteety  bred, 
Orders  a  fprig  of  Latin  for  the  dead. 
And  of  a  fprig  of  Latin  what's  the  coft  ? — 
A  poor  half-guinea  at  the  moft. 

Latin  founds  well — it  is  a  kind  of  balm, 
That  honour-eth  a  corpfe  juft  like  a  pfalm ; 
And  'tis  believ'd  by  folks  of  pious  qualm, 
Heav'n  wo'n't  receive  a  foul  without  a  pfalm. 

But  now  for  poor  NARCISS  A,  wailing  dove  ! 

Nothing — no,  nothing  eqiiall'd  her  dear  love : 
Such  tears  and  groans  burl}  forth,  from  eyes  and  mouth ; 

Where'er  me  went,  flie  was  fo  full  of  woes, 

Juft  like  a  difma)  day  that  rains  and  blows 
From  every  quarter— eaft,  weft,  north,  and  fouth; 

And  like  fome  fountains  were  her  radiant  ^yes, 

Lifting  a  conftant  water  to  the  ikies. 

Refolv'd  to  keep  his  image  near  her  breaft, 
She  got  him  beautifully  carv'd  in  wood  ; 

Made  it  her  bedfellow,  to  foothe  her  reft, 

And  thought  him  much  like  him  of  flefli  and  blood,. 

Becaufe  it  lay  fo  wonderfully  quiet, 

And  like  old  SIMON  never  bred  a  riot. 

'Twas  for  fome  weeks,  fweet  foul,  her  pious  plan 

Nightly  to  hug  her  dear  old  wooden  man  : 

Yet,  verily,  it  doth  m)t  fancy  ftrike, 
That  buxom  widows,  full  of  rich  defires, 
Full  of  fine  prancing  blood,  and  LOVE'S  bright  fires, 

Might  fuch  a  wooden  fupplement  dillike : 
But  who  can  anfwer  for  the  fex,  indeed  ? 
Of  things  moft  wonderful  we  fometimes  read  ! 

It 


ODK3    OF    IMPORTANCE.  35) 

it  came  to  pafs,  a  Youth  admir'd  the  Dame- 
Burning  to  fatisfy  a  lawlefs  flame 

With  much  more  paflion  fill'd,  the  rogue,  than  grace. 
What  did  he?  Brib'd,  one  night,  NARCISSA'S  maid. 
And  got  his  limbs,  fo  dev'lifli  faucy,  laid, 

Th'  importers,  in  poor  wooden  SIMON'S  place ; 
SUSAN,  though  born  amongft  a  vulgar  tribe. 
Knew  nature,  and  the  nature  of  a  bribe. 

'The  Dame  came  up,  delicious,  and  undreft, 

When  SUSAN'S  candle  fuddenly  went  out- 
Misfortunes  fometimes  will  attend  the  beft — 

No  matter — Sweet  NARCISSA  made  no  rout. 
She  could,  not  mifs  the  way,  although  'twas  dark, 
Unto  her  bed,  and  dear  old  bit  of  bark. 

In  flipp'd  the  FAIR,  fo  frefli,  beneath  the  flieets, 
Thinking  to  hug  her  dear  old  oaken  LOVE— 
But,  lo!  her  BEDFELLOW  with  kifles  greet*! 
She  trembles,  like  an  afpen,  pretty  dove. 

In  (hort,  her  terror  kept  her  fo  much  under, 
She  could  not  get  away — and  where's  the  wonder? 
Since  'tis  an  old  and  philofophic  notion, 
That  terror  robbeth  all  the  limbs  of  motion. 

The  upfliot  of  the  matter  foon  was  this — 
Her  horrors  funk,  and  died,  at  ev'ry  kifs ; 
And,  '(lead  of  wifhing  for  the  man  of  wood, 
She  ieem'd  to  relifti  that  of  flefh  and  blood. 

Next  day,  but  not  indeed  extremely  foon— 

Some  five  or  fix  o'clock — the  afternoon, 
.  N  came  tapping  at  the  chainber-door : 

(\OA-  this  wa-.  very  prudent,  ti  be  fure; 
It  hod  been  foo'ifh  to  have  tapp'd  till  then) 

"  Well,  Madam,  what  d'ye  choofe  for  dinner,  pfav 

44  Fifh,  flelh,  and  I  fc  Lady  quick  did  "lay— 

44  The  beft  of  ev'ry  thing— I  don't  care  iU 
VOL.  II.  Gg  M  But 


334  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

"  But,  Madam,  I  want  wood  to  make  a  fire — 
"  'Tis  rather  late — our  hands  we  have  no  time  on." 

"  Oh,"  cried  NARCISSA,  full  of  her  new  'SQUIRE, 
.*'  Then,  SUSAN,  you  may  go  and  burn  old  SIMON.'* 


ODE    TO    THE    KING. 

Written  fome  Timejtnce. 

A  N'T  pleafe  your  MAJESTY,  'twas  rumour'd  lately 
That  you  had  got  it  in  your  head  fo  ftately, 
That  we  muft  have  a  law-fuit — God  forbid  it ! 
Whether  'tis  HAWKSB'R  y,  or  his  Grace  of  LEEDS, 
Invented  fuch  intended  hoftile  deeds, 

Or  whether  the  more  lofty  SAJL'SP'RY  .did  .it, 
I  fay  not — but  great  Lords  are  giv'n  to  chatter ; 
So,  Sir,  I  deem  it  all  .a  lying  matter. 

There's  my  Lord  BLUFF  too — CARDIGAN  the  Great, 
Whofe :face  Dame  NATURE  never  meant  fhould  cheat; 
Who,  if  aught  hurts  the  King,  doth  fhrink  and  wince, 
As/iz/M/w/'to.his  Sovereign  as  his  Prince  ! 
Brimful  of  .loyalty  his  noble  bread ; 
Large  and;fe.rmenting  like  a  tub  of  yeaft  ! 
Glad  at  the  aloes  thrown  into  my  cup, 
fie  fays  .too,,  that  you  mean  to  eat  me  up. 

That  heartily  they  wifh  it,  I  don't  doubt — 
Moft  loyal  feem  they  in  your  caufe,  and  flout ! 
You  can't  think  how  \heyfeem  to  take  your  part; 
And  at  the  Poet,  as  the  Devil,  ftart — 

I  fay  the  Devil,  Sir,  becaufe  fome  Peers 
Ar.e  with  the  Devil  oft  in  large  arrears : 
They  open'd  an  account,  Sir,  long  ago— 
And  SATAN'S  a  great  creditor,  I  know. 

Yes, 


ODES    OF    IMPO1TANCC.          ,  33$ 

Yes,  hugely  do  they/v/»  to  takr  your  part, 
And  at  the  Pos'T,'  as  a  Demon,  ihrt ; 
Juft  like  a  horic  or  afs  at  fomc  wild  beaft 
Trepar'd  to  jump  upon  their  backs,  and  feafl. 

This  LOYALTY'S  a  bird  of  paflage,  Sire; 

Likes  die  fun's  eye — a  comfortable  fire  ! 

Warm'd  by  this  tire,  fo  chcerftil  doth  /he  fing 

The  hack'd  old  ballad,  call'd  •«  God  fave  the  King." 

Hut  be  in  trouble,  Sir,  foon,  very  foon 

The  JADE  will  drop  the  good  old  tune. 

Yes — much  your  Lord  nre  like  the  birds  of  May, 
Crving,  Cuckoo,  Cuckoo,  Cuckoo,  fogay;  ' 

&ut  if  a  gloomy  month  op|>ear,  fo  rough, 
And  froft,  and  fno\v,  and  ftoirns  ln^  vvafie  the  Und, 
Where  are  the  prettv  birdi  with  note  fo  bland  r 
Off! 

Spit  on  the  Courtiers,  when  xvith  praife  they  greet : 
What  from  their  mouth's  unhallow'd  cenfer  flows  ? 

Inftead  of  FAME'S  perfume,  fo  palling  fweet, 
Lo,  putrid  dunghills  fmoke  beneath  thy  nofe ! 

Good  God  !  that  man  mould  fo  far  lofe  his  nature, 
To  beg  HYPOCRISY  to  mould  each  feature— 
Crawl  like  the  meaneft  reptile  upon  the  plain  ; 
Kick'd,  cur-like  whipp'd,  and  whittled  back  again! 

Y(HI  tell  me  that  fuch  reptiles  you  abhor, 
And  that  you  \\cverftf  mvfancy'd  Cur. 
Indeed^  Sir  [ !  !  then  I  ftrongly  do  furmife 
Oa  levee-days  you  always  fat  jour  eye*. 


Gg  2  ODE 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE, 


ODE  TO   A  MARGATE  HOY. 


TI7HEN  VIRGIL  fliipp'd  himfelf  for  Greece; 

Whether  to  'fcape  the  Bailiffs,  I  can't  tell— 
Or  libels  wrote,  got  dnink,  and  broke  the  peace  ; 
.But  HORACE  wrote  an  Ode,  to  wifli  him  well. 

Whether,  like  Margate  Hoys,  the  fhip  was  cramm'd 
With  Roman  Quality,  nahift'ries  know  it; 

But  HORACE  fvvore  me  might  as  well  be  damn'd, 
As  fliow  her  nofe  again  without  the  Poet  : 

In  the  fame  verfe  he  breath'd  a  pious  wifh 

To  bluft'ring  BOREAS,  and  the  King  of  Fifh.* 

Noxv  if  a  Bard,  and  that  a  Heathen  too, 

Could  offer  verfe  to  make  old  OCEAN  quiet, 

Inftruct  the  great  King  NEPTUNE  who  was 
And  bid  the  God  of  Mackrel  breed  no  riot. 

A  Gkriflian  Bard  may  give  a  Hoy  an  Ode, 

So  oft  with  valuable  people  ftow'd, 

That,  thick  as  rats  or  maggots,  from  Wool  Quay 

Crawl  down  the  ladder  to  their  wat'ry  way  ! 

Go,  beauteous  HOY,  in  fafety  every  inch  ! 

That  ftorms  mould  wreck  thee,  gracious  Heav'n  forbid  i 
Whether  commanded  by  brave  CAPTAIN  FINCH, 

Or  equally  tremendous  CAPTAIN  KIDD. 
Go,  with  thy  cargo—  =Marga*e-  town  amufe  ; 
And  God  preferve  thy  Chriftians  and  thy  Jews  ! 

Soon  as  thou  gett'ft  within  the  Pier, 

All  Margate  will  be  out,  I  trow, 
And  people  rufh  from  far  and  near, 

As  if  thou  hadit  wild  beafts  to  fliow. 


O  VENVS 


ODES    07    IMPORTANCE.  337 

O  VENUS,  Qiieen  of  ev'ry  kifling  joy, 
Beneath  thy  fort  protection  take  the  Hoy  ; 
Protect  each  damfel  from  the  dangerous  brine; 
For  many  a  nymph  it  holds,  thou  called  tkirtf. 

Alas!  the  little  LOVES,  and  blooming  GRACES, 
Would  all  put  on  mod  melancholy  faces, 
Should  OCEAN,  hoflik  to  their  foft  DESIRES, 
O'erwhelming,  quench  for  aye  their  am'rous  fires. 

My  good  friend  JOHNSON— -  MBS  DAMES  WIXDSOU, 

KELLY, 
Who  for  the  Public,  let  me  tell  ye, 

And  through  St.  James's  ftreet,  the  Park,  Pall-Mall, 
Oft  lead  iheir  lovely  giggling  tits  along, 
A  prettv  pleafmg,  falcinating  throng — 

Much  would  they  grieve  to  rind  their  voyage  fail : 

Like  three  (tout  men  of  war  for  fafrty  made, 
From  port  to  port,  who  convoy  tlicfair  trade ; 
Or  three  protecting  DUCKS,  that  g;uard  their  brood, 
And  lead  their  cackling  young  to  pick  up  food. 

Yet  not  alone  would  thofe  be  taken  napping — 
Great  were  the  lofs  of  Gentlefolks  from  WAITING, 
Who,  fond  of  travel,  unto  MARGATE  roam, 
To  gain  that  oxxiequence  they  want  at  home. 

At  MARGATE  how  like  Quality  they  ftrut ! 

Nothing  is  good  enough  to  greet  their  jaws; 
Ytt,  when  at  home,  are  often  fore' d,  God  wot, 

To  fuck  like  bears  a  dinner  from  their  paws— 

Forc'd  on  an  old  joint  ftool  their  tea  to  take, 
With  treacle  'ftead  of  fugar  for  their  gums ; 

Butt'ring  their  hungry  loaf,  or  oaten  cake, 

Like  mighty  CHARLES  of  SWEDEN,  with  their  thumbs. 

But  HOY,  inform  me — who  is  SHE  on  board, 
That  feems  the  Lady  of  a  firft-rate  Lord, 
With  ftomach  high'pufti'd  forth  as  if  in  fcorn, 
Like  craws  of  ducks  and  geefe  o'ercharg'd  with  corn : 

Gg  3  Drefs'd 


33?  ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE.  " 

Drefs'd  in  a  gorgeous  damalk  gown, 

Which  rofes,  like  the  leaves  of  cabbage,  crown ; 

With  alfo  a  bright  petticoat  of  pink, 

To  make  the  eye  from  fuch  a  luftre  fhrink  ? 

Yes,  who  is  fhe,  the  Patagonian  dame, 

As  bulky  as  of  Heidelberg  the  tun ; 
Her  face,  as  if  by  brandy  taught  to  flame, 

In  blaze  fuperior  to  the  noonday  fun— 
With  fingers  juft  like  faufages,  fat  things  ; 
And  loaded  much  like  curtain-rods  with  rings  ? 
Yes,  who  is  SHE  that  with  a  fquinting  eye 
Surveys  poor  paflfengers  who  fick'ning  figh ; 
Sad,  pale-nos'd,  gaping,  puling,  mournful  faces; 
Deferted  by  the  blooming,  fmiling  GRACES  ; 
That,  reaching  o'er  thy  fide,  fo  doleful  throw 
The  ftomach's  treafure  to  the  fifli  below  ? 

'Tis  MADAM  BACON,  proud  of  wordly  goods, 

Whofe  firft  fpoufe  ihav'd  and  bled— drew  teeth,  made 
wigs; 

Who  having  by  her  tongue  deftroy'd  poor  SUDS, 
Married  a  wight  that  educated  pigs ! 

But,  hark  !  fhe  fpeaks  !  extremely  like  a  man  ! 

Railing  a  furious  tempeft  with  her  fan — 

*'  Why,  Captain,  what  a  beaftly  fhip  !  good  God  ! 

"  Why,  Captain,  this  indeed  is  very  odd  ! 

**  Why,  what  a  grunting  dirty  pack  of  doings ! 

41  For  heav  Vs  fake,  Captain,  flop  the  creatures'  fp-w-gs.'* 

Now,  hark !  the  Captain  anfwers — "  Miftrefs  BACON, 
*'  I  own  I  can't  be  vt\\hfuch  matters  taken. 

**  I  likes  not  vomitings  no  more  than ^00 / 
"  But  if  fo  be  that  gentlefolks  be  fick, 
5*  A  woman  hath  the  bowels  of  Old  Ni&9 

'*  Poor  fouls,  to  bung  their  mouths — 'twere  like  a 
Jew/' 

3  MajefHc 


ODES    OP    IMPORTANCE.  339 

Majeftic  Miftrefs  BACON  fpcaks  agcn  ! 

••  Folks  have  no  bus'nefs  to  make  others  fick : 
"  I  don't  know,  Mifter  Captain,  what  you  mean 

44  About  your  Jews,  and  bowels  of  Old  Nick : 
44  if  all  your  cattle  will  fuch  hubbub  keep, 
44  I  know  that  I  fliall  leave  your  finking  (hip. 

44  Some  folks  have  dev'lifli  dainty  guts,  good  Lord ! 
44  What  bus'nefs  have  fuch  cattle  here  aboard? 
44  Such  gang  indeed  to  foreign  places  roam  ! 
41  'Tis  more  becoming  them  to  fp-w  at  home." 


But,  hark !  the  Captain  properly  replii 
44  Why,  what  a  breeze  is  here,  G-d  d-mn  my  eyes ! 
44  God  blefs  us,  Miftrefs  BACON  !  who  are  you  ? 
44  Zounds,  A/a'*w,  1  fay  my 


THE 

WOLF    AND   THE    LION. 
A    TALE. 

DEDICATED    TO    LORD   HAWKtSBUET. 


T7"INGS  really  are  in  general  not  Jo 
•***  And  therefore  I  muft  take  their  part  ; 
But  'tis  their  fervants  that  are  drunk  or  mad, 
With  ev'ry  demon  trick  and  little  art. 

Champions  for  Matter's  fame,  they  fire  away  ; 
And,  'midft  the  buftte  of  the  idle  fray, 
Like  lubbers,  knock  him  on  the  head'; 
Then,  (taring,  wonder  how  he  fhould  be  dead! 
Sometimes  a  King  difcovers  he  has  eyes- 
Then  for  himfeif  he  fees  —  now,  that  is  wife. 

One* 


ODES    OF    IMPORTANCE. 

Once  on  a  time  a  LION,  not  a  fool, 

Though  in  the  under-clafs  of  WISDOM'S  fchool, 

Amidft  his  fubjecls  had  a  Monkey  got, 
Who,  rather  impudent  enough, 
Would  take  his  Sov'reign's  foibles  off, 

Tell  flories  of  him  —  mimic  him  —  what  not  ? 

This  for  the  fcheming  WOLF  was  quite  a  feaft, 
Who  told  the  Monarch  of  the  Monkey's  finning^ 
Relating  all  his  mimicry  and  grinning, 

Trying  to  irritate  the  noble  beaft. 

• 

"  What,  what,  what  doth  he  fay  ?"  the  LION  cry'd—  - 
'*  Dread  Sir,  you  are  moft  wickedly  belied," 

Rejoin'  d  the  WOLF  with  brazen  face  — 
"  He  fays  that  you  to  Merit  are  no  friend, 
44  And  only  to  a  Patronage  prettnd  ; 

And  flight  th'  inferiors  of  the  Brutal  Race. 


44 


44  He  fwears  you  don't  encourage  ufeful  beafts  ; 

44  That  for  yourfelf  alone  you're  making  feafts  j 

44  And  that  it  is  beyond  a  queftion, 

44  No  beaft  has.fucha  wonderful  digeftion; 

44  That,  all  fo  faving,  you  would  fldn  a  ftone, 

4*  And  only  think  of  number  one  ; 

44  And  that  it  is  a  fin  indeed  and  fliame 

44  My  LADY  LIONESS  fliould  do  the  fame; 

44  That  fycophants,  who  flatter,  fawn,  and  creep, 

4<  Are  really  ail  the  company  you  keep  ; 

4<  That  beafts  of  talents,  whom  you  mould  fupport> 

44  Are  all  forbid  to  fhow  their  nofe  at  Court. 

"What?"  quoth  the  MONARCH  —  "what,  what?  doth 
44  hefo?" 

44  Yes,  SIRE,  now  hang  him,  and  the  rogue  requite." 
"  WOLF,"  quoth  the  LION,  *-4  no,  no,  no,  no,  no  — 

44  I  fear,  I  fear,  the  rogue  is  :n  the  right." 

Now  this  was  noble  —  like  a  King  mfooth  —  i 
Who  fcornM  to  choak  a  fubject  for  the  truth. 

OTHE 


•  ors  or  IMPORTAXCI.  341 

THE    WOLVES,    THE    BEAR, 

AKD 

OTHER    BEASTS. 

A    FABLE. 

ALL  JUDGES  ftiould  be  mild  and juft : 
This  is  the  cafe  with  Englijk  ones,  I  truft : 
Such  K***,  B**»,  (bine— thofe  rare  law -lages  : 
Neither  of  theft  a  rafli  or  hot-brain'd  fool— 
Moft  charming  dove-like  Imps  of  MERCY'S  fchool, 

Whofe  names  fliall  live  to  diftant  ages- 
All  meeknefs,  fweetnefs,  teoder  nature— 
And  all  their  virtues  of  a  giant  ftature  I 

What  happinefs  it  needs  muft  yield  a  land, 

To  fee  luch  goodly  men  upon  the  Bench, 
Whom  none  can  with  a  finale  murder  brand ; 

Whofe  hearts,  fo  pure,  did  ne'er  emit  a  flench 
Like  carrion,  fo  offenfive  to  our  nofes, 
But  fcents  of  lilies,  violets,  and  roles  ! ! ! 

They  never,  with  the  faces  of  the  Furies, 

Dar'd  dictate,  brow- beat,  and  controul  the  Juries ; 

Nor  wilful  mifinterpreted  the  Law: 
Full  well  they  know  that  Juries  are  above  'em  ! 
And  'tis  aftonifhing  how  much  they  love  'em  ! 

When  Judge  and  Jury  thus  together  draw. 

With  fo  much  pltafure,  like  a  pair  of  '.ags, 

behold !  no  tongue  opprobrious  wags ! 

No    tongue    cries,     "  JEFFRIES,     bloody    JEFFRIES, 

SCRPGS ! 
"  Hang,  hang  thofe  traitors,  like  a  brace  of  dogs ! 

*'•  Xot  in  their  beds  be  they  allow'd  to  die — 

or  let  their  putrid  carcafes  have  graves  : 
"  Slap  PITY'S  face,  if  e'er  (he  bids  her  eye 
"  Hold  but  a  drop  for  fuch  a  pair  of  knaves." 

Full 


34*  CBES    O'F    IMPORTANCE. 


Full  x>f  rich  chara&sr  fhallywofc  defcend, 

And  honour'd  with  their  high-fam'd  fathers  fleep 

Fair  JUSTICES  mall  with  fighs  their  herfe  attend, 
An4  P*TY'S  fong  of  melancholy  weep. 

Like  leaves,  whilft  others  fall  unmourn'd  away, 
And  load  of  DEATH  the  folitary  glooms, 

Lo  !   GLO  R  Y  frem  her  fun  fnall  pluck  a  ray, 
And  bid  it  fpread  eternal  round  their  tombs. 

Yet  Nations  have  been  curs'd  with  wicked  Judges, 
Who,  fond  of  pow'r,  poflefs  hard  jury  -grudges  j 
Who  calmly  fent  poor  culprits  to  their  graves,, 
Juft  as  an  Eaftern  Defpot  fends  his  flaves, 
For  fuck  I  pen  a  neat  ^Lfopian  tale  ; 
Hoping  the  pretty  moral  will  prevail. 


TH'  Inferior  Beads  moft  bitterly  complain'd, 

(And  who  will  not  complain,  whole  cheek  is  fmitten  ?) 

That  from  the  Wolves  much  hardships  they  fuftain'd, 
And  often  moft  inhumanly  were  bitten. 

This  wantonnefs  DAME  JUSTICE  did  cry,  "  fie"  on — 

And  mention 'd  it,  but  vainly,  to  the  LION. 

"  Thofe  damn'd    furr'd   rafcals  !"    growl'd  the  angry 

Beaftsy 
**  Each  Wolf  upon  our  meat  continual  feafts ; 

*'  Yet  Snap'?,  the  word,  and  quick  off  goes  a  head  : 
**  We  mud  take  out  their  teeth — it  can't  be  borne — 
"  Yes,  from  their  ;aws  their  grinders  muft  be  torn. — 

"  Behold,  the  very  fields  with  blood  are  red  !" 

But  firft  the  Bear  muft  be  confultecL — BRUIN, 
Who  dkl  not  much  approve  jaw -ruin,' 
With  his  black  hide,  to  all  the  beafts  appear'd, 
And  with  much  gravity  their  flory  heard. 

<{  Sirs,"  (quoth  the  Bear)  you  talk  of  taking  teeth 
With  fuch  an  eafy  and  familiar  breath, 

As 


ODE?    OF    IMPORTANCE.  343 

As  though  it  might  be  pleafant  to  their  jaws; 
But  I  muft  afk  the  Wolves  if  they'll  confent 
"That  from  their  mouths  their  grinders  fhall  be  rent  ; 

For  this  is  neceflary,  Sirs,  becaufe 
The  Wolves  are  viuncrs  of  the  teeth,  and  therefore, 
Before  *  RUSPINI'I  call'd,  will  afk  a 


BRUIN,  in  confequence,  the  Wolves  addreft: 
**  LORD  WOLVES,  it  is  the  wi(h  of  many  a  bead, 

"  That  you  confent  your  teeth  may  all  be  pull'd  ; 
"  D-m  me  if  I  would  lofe  my  fnags,  my  Lords  ; 
•'  I'd  tell  the  knaves  fo,  in  fo'  many  words  — 

"  God  d'mn  me,  of  one's  grinders  to  be  GULL'D  !" 

«  What  !    lofe  our  teeth  ?"  exclaim'd  the  Wolves—  no, 

«*  no— 
"  We'll  keep  them,  if  it  only  be  forjlw. 

u  Say,  my  LORD  BRUIN,  that,  and  let  them  ckcw'it  : 
44  Nay,  tell  the  fools,  we  wifh  them  fomewhat  longer, 
•*  Sharper,  and  more  of  them,  and  ftronger  ; 

u  And,  if  we  lofe  them,  force  (hall  only  do  it." 

This  anfwer  of  the  WOLVES,  LORD  BEAR  reported  : 
Which  anfwer  did  not  pleafe  the  Beads  at  all  ; 

Who  (lighted,  now  no  longer  prafd  and  courted^ 
But  on  the  villains  fad  began  to  hill, 

Choak'd  two  or  three  prime  Rogues*  and,  on  condition, 

Receiv'd  from  all  the  affrighted  reft,  fu&miffion. 

*  The  Chevalier,  a  famous  dentift, 


THi 


THE 

TEARS   OF   ST.  MARGARET. 

ALSO, 

ODES  OF  CONDOLENCE 

% 

TO    THE 

High  and  Mighty  Mufical  Dire&ors,  on  their  Downfall. 

TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED, 

THE  ADDRESS  TO  THE  OWL. 

LIKEWISE, 

MISTRESS  ROBlNSON'i  HANDKERCHIEF, 

AND 

JUDGE  BULLER's  WIG; 
A    FABLE. 

ALSO, 
THE  CHURCHWARDEN  OF  KNIGHTSBRIDGE* 

OR,  i 

THE    FEAST   OX    A    CHILD. 


Delirant  Regej,  plt 
The  King  was  wroth,  and  fmejling  matters  out, 
He  put  the  Grand  Dirtflcrs  to  the  rout. 


VOL.  II.  H  h 


TO    THE    READER. 

THE  frequent  complaints  of  ignorance,  partiality,  pro- 
fufion,  &c.  exhibited againft  the  MOST  NOBLE  MUSI 
CAL  DIRECTORS,  together  with  their  quarrels  with  the 
principal  SINGERS  and  PERFORMERS,  having  brought 
them  into  unpopularity;  and  what  feemed  •  worft  of  all, 
the  MOST  NOBLE  DIRECTORS  having,  imprudently  made 
a  public  declaration,  without  his  MAJESTY'S  confent,  that 
there  was  an  end  of  ABBEY  COMMEMORATION,  fuch  a 
favourite  hobby-horfe  of  MAJESTY  ;  the  King  refolved  on 
their  dii'miflion  from  all  and  every  interference  at  the  ORA 
TORIO  to  be  performed  at  ST.  MARGARET'S  CHURCH. 
The  .immediate  confequence  of-the -Royal  annunciation  was 
the  difpleafure  of  the  DIRECTORS,  and  was  alfo,-of  confe 
quence,  the  difpleafure  of  the  LYRIC  BARD,  who  fighed 
on  the  mournful  occafion,  and  took,  up  the,  cudgels  in  their 
defence.  Great  has  been  the  cry  againft  them,  that  they 
feafted  at  the  Saint  Albans  Tavern,  at  the  expence  of  the 
MUSICAL  FUND.  Although  I  do  not  credit  Inch  rumour, 
I  have  taken  the  fa<5t  for  granted,  that  (like  their  DEPU 
TIES,  who  actually  did  feafl  at  different  times  at  the  Saint 
Albany  Tavern,  at  the  expence  of  the  FUND)  the  NOBLE 
DIRECTORS  did  condefcendingly  (hew  the  example  ;  and  I 
have  hinted  that  thofe  MOST  NOBLE  DIRECTORS  had  as 
fair  a  right  to  be  rewarded  with  dinners  as  PariJJj  Officers  and 
their  friends,  who  fo  frequently  have  a  jovial  meeting,  to 
tat  and  tipple  eleemofinary  on  the  Birth  of  a, BASTARD. 


(    '347     ) 

PROLOGUE  TO  THE  ODES? 

OR,    THE 

TEARS  OF  ST.  MARGARET. 


NOW     NIGHT,    the    negro,    reign'd— "  Pa  ft    one 
«  o'clock," 

The  drowfy  watchman  bawl'd — from  murky  vaults, 
The  dough-fac'd  fpeftres  crowded  forth — the  eye, 
The  funk,  the  weaned  eye  of  TOIL,  was  clos'd  : 
Mute,  NATURE'S  bufied  voice,  her  brawl  and  hum  ; 
While  HORROR,  creeping  on  the  world  of  zloom, 
Breath'd  her  dark  fpirit  through  the  death-like  hour— 
Now  from  her  fi  I  ver- fringed  eaft  the  MOON 
Peep'd  on  the  VAST  of  lhacie — up-mounting  flow, 
In  iblemn  ftillnefs,  till  her  lab'ring  orb, 
Freed  from  the  caves  of  DARKNESS,  gain'd  its  fphcrf, 
And  mov'd  in  fplendid  folitude  along. 
At  this  blank  hour  of  awe,  amid  her  fane, 
That  caught  a  partial  radiance  on  its  walls, 
A  radiance  Healing  on  the  fliadowy  tombs, 
Illuminating  death, — the  pious  MAID, 
Whofe  flefh  did  wonders  in  its  days  of  bloom, 
And  bones  work'd  marvels  when  (he  fmil'd  no  more— 
The  penfive  MARGARETTA  ftalk'd,  and  paus'd, 
And  paus'd  and  ftalk'd,  and  ftalk'd  and  paus'd  agen  ; 
Now  nailing  to  the  twilight  floor  her  eye; 
Now  gazing  on  the  holy  windows  dim'; 
Now  motionlefs,  and  now  with  hurrying  ftep 
Along  the  hollow-founding  aides  fhe'pafs'd ; 
And  leaning  lorn  at  murder'd  RALEIGH'S  tomb, 
Of  SILENCE  wak'd  the  pale  and  facredfleep, 
With  plaintive  accent,  thus— • 

H  h  a  MARGARET'a 


THE    TEARS    OF    ST.    MARGARET. 

MARGARET'S  LAMENTATION. 

WHY  fhould  yon  old  Abbey,  fhould'ring 

My  poor  Fane  with  Gothic  pride, 
Cracking,  finking,  falling,  mould'ring, 

On  the  back  of  Marg'ret  ride  ? 

What  is  that  huge  Ruin's  merit  ? 

Only  fit  for  houfing  rats. 
Be  her  guefts,  with  all  my  fpirit, 

Hooting  owls,  and  horrid  bats  ! 

Why  am  /  to  be  defpis'd, 

Why  am  /  to  be  kept  uncler ; 
/  who  once  by  Kings  was  priz'd  ? 

What's  the  meaning  on'r,  I  wonder  ? 

/  whofe  pow'r  could  agues  charm, 
Fits  and  tooth-achs,  cramps  ajid  evil ; 

Safari's  wicked  felf  difarm  } 
Him^  the  great  proud  Prince  of  Devils. 

Lo  !  that  Abbey  for  part  years, 

At  each  grand  Commemoration 
For  DIRECTORS  boafted  Peers — 

Peers  the  glory  of  the  Nation  ! 

W  ho  were  my  Diredors  ?  Lo, 

DOCTOR  PARSONS,  JUSTICE  COLIIC  ; 
ARNOLD  and  Duruis  and  Co. 

What  a  very  pretty  frolic  ! 

But  'tis  faid  the  KING  commanded, 
And  the  Grand  DIRECTORS  fell : 
By  the  KING  were  they  dilbanded  ? 
'FAME  will  blufli  the  tale  to  tell. 

Soon  I'll  go  (for  what  mould  hinder?) 

To  the  firft  of  rhyming  men, 
To  that  Giant  PETER  PINDAR  : 

He  fliall  hear — and  then,  and  then  ! ! 

PETER 


fHt    TEARS    OF    ST.    MARGARET. 

PETER  in  His  wrath  (hall  rife, 
And  the  fey  the  of  verfe  prepare ; 

Lo,  I  fee  his  lightning  eyes ! 
Lo,  his  ami  of  vengeance  bare  T 

Backs  of  Monarchs  (hall  he  (lice, 
As  he  fcorns  them  fojincrrdy— 

Women  need  not  afk  him  t\v '. 
PETER  loves  the  ladies  dearly. 


TITUS  fpoke  the  SAINT  !— When  MORN  her  bhifow 
fpread, 

To  Covent-Garden's  fquare  (he  wing'd  her  flight, 
And  drew  the  curtains  of  the  POET'S  bed, 

Who  fortunately  flept  alone  that  night. 

To  him  (he  told  her  (lory  o'er  and  o'er : 

When  PETER,  roiib'd  by  MARG'RET'S  fad  narration, 
Pull'd  off  his  -nioht-cap,  and  devoutly  fwore 

He'd  roafl*  certain  KULKR  of  a  nation. 

SAINT  MARG'RET  tliank'd  the  Bard  with  fweeteft  fmiles, 
And  PHER  thunder'd  on  the  KING  OF  ISLES. 


Ha  3  QDI  3 


(    35°    ) 


ODES  OF  CONDOLENCE,  &c, 


O  D  E      I. 

The  Poet  breaketh  mournfully  out  on  the  fall  of  the  Noble  Dircfiors  — 
,     Threatcneth  to  expoftulare  with  the  King  —  Lamenteth  the  lofs  of 

Direction-importance,  boxes,  white  wanck,  and  dinners  at  the  Saint 

j&lbans  Tavern,  &c.  &c. 

"DOOR  LEEDS!    poor  UXBRIDCE  !    and  poor  Jo  AH 

BATES  ! 
And  all  yev  other  poor  ones,  of  hard  fates  ! 

'Tis  a  ftrange  man  this  King  of  our's  indeed  — 
There's  reafon  to  be  fure,  in  roafting  eggs  ! 
What  !  raife  an  Oratorio  at  SAINT  PEG'S, 
And  fet  a  thing  on  foot  without  a  head! 

What  !  could  the  King  have  mufic  in  a  church, 
And  leave  the  great  DIRECTORS  in  the  lurch? 
Ev'n  to  !  —  but  lo,  I'll  parley  with  the  King, 
And  fuch  a  peal  into  his  ears  I'll  ring  ! 


will  I  fay,  howe'er  it  may  difguft  — 
"  An't  pleafe  your  Majefty,  you  are  unju/l." 

"  How,  how  ?"  the  King  will  cry,  with  wild  rapidity  — 
«4  Yes,  S^RE,  the  grand  Directors  take  it  ill  ; 
44  Deemin|  themfelves  all  men  of  tuneful  (kill, 

"  And  having  all,  for  crotchets,  hawk-avidity  ; 

"  1*hat  they  mould  lofe  the  Jead  in  this  affair, 
*'  \Yhich  really  makes  them  marvel,  and  fo  Hare, 

«  Not 


ODES    O?    CONDOLENCE.  3$I 

*•  \'ot  knowing  what  offence  they  have  committed; 

"  Heing  a  fet  of  very  clever  men, 
[  So  tluff'd  with  crotchet-knowledges,  and  then 
"  For  Oratdrios  fo  nicely  fitted  ! 

Behold  !  no  boxes  for  DIRECTOR-)  !  no  ! 

Who  at  the  ABBEY  form'd  a  rarce-fliow, 

With  nice  kid  gloves,  medallions,  wands  fo  white  ! 
44  Tagrag  and  bobtail  now  condemn'd  to  join  ; 
44  What's  ten  times  worfe,  condemn'd  to  pull  out  COIN  ^ 

44  Men  fo  unus'd  to  pay  a  fingle  doit ! 

44  When  proud  to  view  of  Royalty  the  rays, 
44  Your  SUBJECTS  had  their  bellie*  full  of  gaze, 

44  Amid  the  ABBEY'S  glory  for  paft  years ; 
44  Then  would  they  ponder  on  the  whitc-ftick  row, 
**  Of  UXBRIDGE,  GREY  DK  WILTON,  LEEDS,  ajid  Co. 

44  And,  next  to  MAJESTY,  admire  the  PEERS. 

4  Who's  that  flim,  whey-fac*d  gentleman,  and  thin, 
*  With  fome  old  gentlewoman's  nofe  and  chin  ? 

4  And  he  fo  furly,  with  a  fable  face  ?' 
44  Would  gaping-rt rangers  all  fo  curious  cry ; 
44  When,  all  fo  folemn,  I  have  made  reply, 

4  That  Lord  is  LEEDS'S  very  noble  Grace. 

4  With  lath  like  form,  whey-face,  and  cheeks  fo  thin, 

4  And  good  old  gentlewoman's  nofe  and  chin — 

4  And  he  who  lours  as  though  he  meant  to  bite, 

4  Is  EARL  OF  UXBRIDGE,  with  his  face  of  night.' 

44  And  then  I've  told  the  names  of  all  the  reft ; 

44  At  which  the  ftrangers  have  been  allfo  blefl^ 

44  Bow'd,  curtfy'd  low,  fo  grateful — I  don't  doubt  it, 

44  They  told  their  dear  relations  all  about  it  / 

>  more  DIRECTORS  challenge  admiration  ! 
*•  Xo  more  the  tuneful  rulers  of  a  nation  ! 

44  Unknown,  in  vulgar  feats  they  bite  their  thumbs' ; 
44  Now  half  awake  they  nod,  and  now  they  fl 

,nd  no\v  they  figh,  'and  now  in  dreams  they  \ 
"  And  mumble  much  difpleafure  'midft  their  <nim< 


3*5*  ODES    OT    CONDOLENCE. 

44  Heav'ns !    with  what  huge  delight  their  eyes  would 

"  hail. 

*'  The  *;breeche$  blazing  on  S  A  INT  MAPG'RET'S  tail, 
"  Inftead  of  STEPHEN,  who,  to  all  belief, 
"  Poor  fellow,  muft  have  travell'd  with  a  brief  !f 

"  JBut,  SIR,  this  is  not  all — for,  in  your  ear, 
"  Something  more  horrible  brings  up  the  rear  \ 

*'  No  longeron  the  tioeedle-dum  account, 
"  At  yon  fair  tavern  in  SAINT  ALBANS  Street, 
44  Thofe  men  of  tafte  and  nrufic  joyful  greet, 

"  And  load  their  ftomachs  to  a  large  amount ; 

*4  All  for  the  good  o£  the  poor  FUND,  fo  kind  I 
"  Now  this  is  dreadful  to  my  fimple  mind ; 

"  To  think  thofe  TITLED  MEN,  whofe  valiant  jaws, 
r<  And  ftomachs  all  fo  keen,  and  deep  as  fecks, 
"  And  teeth  fo  valorous  in  feaft  attacks, 

"  So  bravely  battled  in  the  tuneful  caufe, 
"  Should,  by  the  royal  word  fo  hard  commanded, 
"  Difgracefully  be  turn'd  adrift — difbanded ! 

**  I  hear,  I  hear,  the  angry  Lords  exclaim, 

*  Thus  to  be  all  difcarded  !  'tis  a  fhame—       . 

*  The  royal  mandate  will  be  cruel  ftyl'd — 

*  Behold  CHURCHWARDENS,  OVERSEERS  fo  fkek  ? 

*  Read  their  card-invitations  ev'ry  w-eek — 

*  Sir,  you're  defir'd  to  come  and  eat  a  child.' 

*  One  thild  a  week  they  conftantly  devour  ; 

'  Sometimes  they  eat  two  chiidren-^fonietimes  four, 

*  If  thus  thofe  fellows  live,  the  lazy  drones, 
'  LORDS,  of  a  charity  may  pick  the  bones ; 

*  Poor  Saint  S&pheri  had  a  very  warm  fair  of  breeches  dapred  to  his 
.  ...  .  lately  ;  but  the  S<iint  luckily  ihook  them  off.  Without  a  meta 
phor,  the  Houfe  of  Commons  was  nearly  fet  on  fire  by  fome  patriotic- 
Incendiaries. 

f  To  folicit  charity,  like  many  others  who  fuffer  by  fire, 

Yw, 


*>DES    OF    CONDOLENCE.  353 

.  as  proviiions  are  fo  very  dear, 
«  Eat  a  fciv  f.tUlcrs  once  or  twice  a  year.' 

'*'  Such  is  the  language  Lords  employ,  O  King, 

migh  the  hearts  of  favagesto  wring, 
44  And  make,  I  hojxr,  your  royal  conscience  ache : 

';  reas'nings  are  indeed  extremely  deep ! 
*•  \Viiy  fliould  rff  Lords  the  teeth  and  ftomachs  fleer*,   - 
44  Whilrt  thofc  of  keen  CAitrcfaan/cns  are  awake  ?" 

Thus  to  the  King  of  Nations  will  I  try — 

But  what  will  be  his  MAJESTY'S  reply:-— 

44  Thank,  thank  ye,  PETER,  for  fupporting  ftrawi — 

4i  Good  advocate — good,  good,  in  a  bad  caufe : 

44  I'll  have  no  mort  Inch  doings,  let  me  tell  ye— 

44  No,  no,  no  eating  calves  in  the  cowjs  bt 


ODE    TO    SAINT    CECILIA. 

The  Poet  very  loyally  callcth  upon  St.  Cecilia,  tl*  great  P^troncfs  of 
Mufic,  by  way  of  Jujiice  of  Peate,  Conftabie,  and  Cwfitter,  to 
come  down  from  Heaven  to  the  Noblt  Dirtfton,  to  ifluc  a  FiwMwMb 
t.:vt  for  di(Tolv ing  Societies  of  Mufical  Inttrutnents  ;  t.iking  them  up, 
.ind  knocking  them  to  pieces,  as  alfo  the  l*ead»  of  the  Muficians 
jnft  each  other. — The  Poet  condudcth  with  a  prophecy  of  ictuui- 
ing  power  to  the  Dirctf  or». 

TT>IVIXE  CKCILIA,   pray,  from  Heav*n  ftep  down  ; 

^  Mod  wond'rous  are  the  doings  in  this  town ! 

Behold,  behold  a  tuneful  revolution  ! 

DIRECTORS  banifh'd,  but  no  execution! 

Thank  God,  no  grinning  heads  of  Lords,  poor  foulsr 

Amid  the  mob,  furvey  the  flreets  on  poles. 

The  fiddles  fcreech  with  rapture  one  and  all; 
The  flutes  and  hautboys  whiftle  at  the  fall ; 

The 


3JJ4-  ODES    OF    CONDOLEN'CIL. 

The  pompous  organ,  for  rebellion  ripe  ! 
Glad  of  the  long-wifh'd  overthrow,  he  opes, 
To  fhevv  the  world  his  pleafure,  all  his  flops, 

And  pours  his  thunder  through  each  giant  pipe ; 

Whilft  all  his  pigmies,  trilling,  fqueaking,  fqualling, 
Like  mad  things,  every  one  his  tune,  are  bawling : 
The  hoarfe  bafToons  their  nafal  twang  employ — 
And  hog-like  bafes  grunt  the  fong  of  joy. 

Wild  fcreams  the  trumpet's  brazen  note  fo  clear ; 

And  on  th'  occafion,  fcorning  to  be  muni, 
Like  cannon  foundeth  on  the  loaded  ear, 

At  folemn  intervals,  the  double  drum. 

The  various  inflruments  of  wind  and  firing, 

Thus  to  the  world  irt  faucy  triumph  fing — 

"  What  are  thofe  Lord -Directors? — arrant  fools, 

"  Mean  mongrels — never  bred  in  Music's  fchools — 

"  With  jujl  as  much  of  fcience  as  a  pig ; 

"  Who  fcarcely  know  a  pfalm-tune  from  a  jig. 

"   Are  thefe  the  men  to  lead  us  ? — Music  fwears> 

"  Ani  to  tiie  piil'ry  recommends  their  ears." 

And,  lo  !  of  Mufic  the  choice  bands, 

Delighted,  clap  their  madding  hands; 

And,  raifing  to  the  liars  their  eyes  devout, 

<;  Thank  heav'n,"  they  roar,  "thofe  fellows  are  tuni'd  out. 

*;  No  longer  fhall  their  tyranny  impofe, 

"  And  lead  the  King  of  Nations  by  the  nofe.'' 

Then,  Tweet  CECILIA,  leave  thy  lofty  flation  ; 
O  hafte  and  iflue  out  thy  Proclamation — 

Of  wond'rous  danger  let  it  talk  aloud — 
Root  up  focieties  of  flutes,  balloons  ; 
Knockdown  the  organ,  for  his  rebel  tunes, 

The  brazen  trumpet  break,  and  crack  .the  crowd. 

Lay  on  the  necks  of  the  rebellious  BA>II> 
Thy  powerful  and  chaftiling  baud*— 

And 


ODES    07    CONDOLENCE. 

And  for  their  impudent  and  fenfelefs  pother, 
Sweet  GODDESS,  knock  one  head  againft  another. 

O  hade  and  keep  the  mournful  Lords  in  heart, 
As  fcarce  a  (ingle  mortal  takes  their  part ; 
Except  the  lofty  family  of  PRIDE, 
Few  are  the  comforters  they  boa  ft  betide— 

Thefe  are  their  conftant  friends  indeed,  and  ftout; 
Friends  that  few  Nobles  ever  are  wit/tout  : 
Hereditary  friends  of  ancient  dare, 
Accompanying  great  title  and  eilatew 

And  yet  'tis  faid  no  virtues  can  refide 
Where  d  wells  that  lofty  fcowling  SPIRIT,  PRIDE; 
That  Aconite,  the  noHome  weed  of  gloom, 
That  near  it  fuffen  notaflow'r  to  bloom. 

Joy  to  my  foul!  of  LEEDS  his  glorious  Grace 
Puts  forth  a  fimpering  fweet  prophetic  face, 

Amid  this  row^h  mifchance,  that  feems  to  fay, 
*'  Though  clifappointment  mocks  the  prefcnt  hour, 
"  Next  year  fhall  mark  the  triumph  of  my^pow'r, 

"  When  FACTION'S  fcowling  fiends  iliall  Hum  the  day." 

Thus  when  the  MONARCH  of  the  winds,  in  fpite, 
Rolls  a  dark  phalanx  on  the  golden  light, 

And  blots  the  beauteous  ORB  the  world  adorning, 
SOL  lifts  the  fable  mantle  of  a  cloud, 
And,  peeping  underneath  the  envious  fliroud, 

Smiles  liojie,  ami  fays,  "I'll  iliine  to- morrow  morning." 


op* 


356  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 


O    D    E. 

The  Bard  advifcth  the  Directors  to  fubmit  to  their  degraded  fyuation  ; 
and,  by  way  of  confolation,  informeth  them  of  the  fallen  ftate  of  the 
Poets — and,  moreover,  comforteth  the  Directors  with  the  changes 
that  take  place  amongft  crowned  as  well  as  w«-crowned  heads. 

"\7"ET  not  alone  are  you  by  Kings  defpis'd; 
•*•    Lo  !  lofty  poets  are  no  longer  priz'd, 

That  to  an  eagle  turn'd  a  popinjay  ; 
That  fcorn'd  of  TIME  the  ever-dreaded  wars, 
Turn'd  winking  rum -lights  into  blazing  ftars, 

And  ftole  from  frail  mortality,  decay  ! 

POETS,  with  that  rare  inftrument  call'd  RHYME, 
Drew  with  thegreateft  eafe  the  teeth  of  TIME  ; 
Snapp'd  his  broad  fcythe  fo  keen,  and  broke  his  glafs ; 
Clipp'd  his  two  wings,  and  fix'd  him  on  an  afs: 
Such  was  the  envy'd  pow'rof  ancient  BARDS, 
"When  Kings  vouchfaf  'd  to  crown  them  with  rewards. 

In  days  of  old,  the  BARDS  were  facred  creatures, 
Deem'd  fo  exalted  in  their  natures ! 

By  numbers  thought  fit  company  for  Gods  / 
Lo,  at  the  feafts  of  Kings  the  MINSTRELS  fat ; 
Eat,  fung,  and  mingled  in  the  royal  chat; 

And  fcarcely  did  there  feem  a  grain  of  odds. 

Thus  cry'd  thofe  Kings  of  old,  (delightful  praife!) 
"  Touch  not  the  men  of  other  days; 

"  Hurt  not  .a  hair  of  thofe  fweet  foris  of  fong, 
"  Whofe  voices  mall  be  heard  amidft  our  halls, 
"  When  we,  amidft  of  death  the  narrow  walls, 

"  In  gloomy  iilence  fhall  be  ftretch'd  along." 

Scot-free  the  Poets  drank  and  ate ; 
They  paid  no  taxes  to  the  State  I 


ODKS    OF   CONDOLEVCE.  357 

comes  a  Butcher,  roaring,  "  Pay  your  bill  ;" 
Now  the  blue-apron'd  wight  of  beer, 
And  man  of  bread,  approach  and  cry,  "  Look  here; 

"  Not  one  more  morfel,  not  a  fingle  gill, 
"  Shall,  Matter  Poer,  pafs  your  pipmg  throat, 
«  Until  you  guickly  pay  up  every  groat." 
Unnatural  !  alas,  what  Gothic  founds  !  l 

Thus  'tis  the  rude  PROFANE  a  Poet  wounds  ! 

At  Windfor,  when  the  Monarch  has  been  by, 
How  have  I  languiih'd  on  the  royal  ftye. 

Where  wanton'd  fifty  little  grunting  grigs  ! 
But  never  had  the  King  the  grace  to  fay, 
44  You're  hungry,  hungry,  PKTER  —  *nkeav 

44  Take,  take  a  couple  of  the  prettielt 


Oft  of  his  geefe  too  have  T  heard  the  notes, 

And,  hungry,  wiuYd  to  (lop  their  gobbling  thro.its; 

But  vainly  did  mitie  eyes  around  them  war 
How  eafily  the  Monarch  might  have  faid, 
"  You  don't  eat  roafl  meat  often,  J'm  afraid  ; 

u  Take,  take  away  the  fatteft  gootc  or  gander." 

Kings  cr.renot  if  we  neither  drink  nor  carve— 
This  is  their  (Verdi  in  lecret,  "  Sing  and  ilarve." 
And  yet  our  Monarch  has  a  world  of  bo  - 
And  daily  on  their  backs  fo  gorgeous  looks; 
So  neatly*  bound,  fo  richly  gilt,  fo  fine, 
He  fears  to  open  them  to  read  a  line  ! 

Since  of  our  looks  a  King  can  highly  deem, 
The  Authors  furely  might  command  efteem  : 
But  here's  the  dev'l  —  I  fear  too  many  know  it— 
Some  Kings  prefer  the  />/;.,£/  to  the  Poet. 

Yet,  though  it  never  was  poor  PETER'S  fate 
To  get  a  fix  pence  from  the  MAN  OF  STATE, 
Who  rather  tries  to  keep  the  Poets  under— 

VOL.  IJ.  I  i  Oft 


35       '  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

Oft  have  I  dipp'd  in  golden  praife  the  pen, 
Writing  Cuch'kandfotitc  tilings  about  great  men, 

That  CANDOUR'S  eye-balls  have  been  feen  to  wonder. 

Yet  Jiadit  happened  that  the  BARD 
Had  borne  on  high-bred  folk  a  little  Jiard^ 
Good  for  an  evil  mortals  mould  return — 
'Tis  very  wicked  with  revenge  to  burn. 
The  fun's  a  bright  example,  let  me  fay — 
Obliges  the  black  clouds  that  veil  his  ray ; 
Oft  makes  them  decent  figures  to  behold, 
And  covers  all  their  dirty  rags  with  gold. 

But  let  us  not  an  idle  pother  keep, 

And,  afs-like,  at  a  revolution  bray ; 
Lo  !  Kings  themfelves,  like  cabbages,  grow  cheap ; 
'  Thus  e? 'ry  dog  at  laft  will  have  his  day — 
He  who  this  morning  fmiVd^  amight  may  fonew  ; 
The  grub  to-day's  a  butterfly  to-morrow. 


ODE. 

The  Poet  adminiflereth  Comfort  to  the  difgraced  Dire&ors. 

T3OOR  Imps !  we  are  all  born  to  heave  the  groan ! 
-*-     MISFORTUNE  can't  let  HAPPINESS  alone: 
Sharp  as  a  cat,  for  ever  pleas'd  to  watch  her, 
And  trying  with  a  thoufand  traps  to  catch  her. 

SubmhTion  is  our  lot — it  is  our  fate 

To  drop  the  tear,  amid  this  mortal  ftate  ! 

Yet  by  our  folly  often  worfe  we  make  it. — 
At  difappointment  frequent  have  I  (igh'd  : 
"  P-x  take  the  world  !"  indignant  I  have  cry'd— 

"  Life  is  not  worth  the  terms  on  which  we  take  it :" 

Then  on  the  lot  of  mortals  giv'n  a  fcowl ; 
And  angry  thus,  one  night,  addrefs'd  an  OWL. 

ADDRESS 


ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 


ADDRESS    TO    AN    OWL. 

"  THOU  folemn  BIRD  on  yonder  ivy'd  tou-'r, 
44  Wilt  thou  exchange  thy  'nature,  OWL,  with  me  ? 

"  II  ;ke  poflt-lfion  of"  thy  bow'r, 

"  I  here  proteft  1  would  exchange  with  thec. 

"  When  to  hiswcfiern  bed  the  SUN  retires, 
41  Obeys  the  curfew,  and  puts  out  his  fires; 

"  And  EVENING,  blufhful  harbingerof  NIGHT, 
*•  Gems  with  the  dews  of  health  the  drooping  flow'r; 
**  With  cooling  zephyr  fens  the  fober  hour, 

••  And  wakes  the  *  fongftrefs  to  the  fading  light  ; 

44  Forth,  'mid  the  deepening  gloom  I  pafs, 
*4  And  tread  the  moill  reviving  grafs, 
44  To  meet  the  tribes  by  NATURE  made 
44  To  crawl  and  wing  the  world  of  fhade  ! 

44  Daughters  and  fons  of  Night  that  creep  the  ground, 
"  Bleft  muft  ye  live,  with  fuch  a  calm  around, 

44  So  unmolefted,  to  enjoy  your  loves  ! 
44  And  ligkter  PEOPLE,  ye  who  wave  the-wing, 
4<  Now  'mid  the  moon's  pale  lull  re  fport  and  fing, 

44  Now  playful  pierce  tne  lhadows  of  the  groves  : 

"  Ye  harmlefs  nations,  with  averted  eyes, 
"  The  fons  of  men  your  Client  world  defpife, 

44  Becaufe  their  eyes  no  punch-  houfes  behold; 
"  Becaufe  no  mobs,  nor  fires,  nor  thieves  appear  ; 
*4  Becaufe  no  riots  with  their  yells  they  hear  ; 

44  No  brothels,  fcenes  of  fallow  fete  unfold. 

44  Sweet  Owl,  this  (hort  apoftrophe  excufe  ; 
"  And  willing  now  to  thec  returns  the  MUSE. 


*  The  night  i 

I  i  3  "  Grave 


3*°  •DES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

"  Grave  Bird  of  Wifdom,  'mid  the  twilight  fcene 
"  Dimly  I  mark  thy  philofophic  mien — 

"  And  now  I  fee  expand  thy  fnowy  wings  : 
"  To  yonder  elm,  O  happy,  happy  fowl, 
"  Thou  rufheft  forth  to  call  upon  Miss  OWL, 

"  Expectant  of  her  BEAU,  who  darkling  fings^ 

"  Together  now  ye  fail  the  dufky  vale, 

"  Now  dart  on  prey,  now  mount  agen  the  gale  j 

"  Now  on  the  moon- clad  barn  or  filent  grove, 
"  Your  four-feet  fill'd  with  various  game,  ye  go 
*J  (For  hunger  muft  be  fatisfied,  I  trow) ; 

"  And,  after  feafling,  kifs  and  fing  of  love. 

"  To-morrow  fullen  muft  I  move  to  town, 
"  Shook  in  a  wooden  engine  up  and  down, 

"  For  want,  O  Owl,  of  thy  foft  gliding  wing — 
"  Stow'd  with  a  gang  of  thieves  perchance,  and  trulls ; 
*'  Too  noify  for  the  mickeft  human  fkulls— 

"  Who  fmoak,  and  laugh,  and  roar,  and  fwill,  and  fing. 

"  Jaded  at  length  I  quit  my  wooden  hive  j 
**  Unhing'd,  at  bufy  London  I  arrive, 

"  Parent  of  fin,  and  nafiinefs,  and  noife  : 
44  By  coach,  and  cart,  and  wheelbarrow,  and  dray, 
"  Through  mofley  mob  I  force  my  fighing  way ; 

"  Pimps,  porters,  chairmen,  chimney-fweepers  boys : 

"  Saluted,  as  I  pafs  along, 

"  By  all  the  various  imps  of  fong, 

"  One  crying  rabbits,  rabbits,  wild  fowl  that, 

"  Another  mackrel,  falmon,  oyfter,  fprat ! 

"  With  fuch  a  howling  ear-difirafting  note, 
"  And  mouth  extended  as  a  barn-door  wide, 
«  That  filh  and  fleili  forfooth  may  be  -well  cry'd, 

44  A  man  might  leap  into  each  cavern  throat. 

"  Tn  Covent-Garden,  at  the  HUMMUMS,  now 
"  I  fit,  but  after  many  a  curfeand  vow 

«  Never 


ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE.  361 

a  Xever  to  fee  the  madding  city  more ; 
"  Where  barrows  truckling  o'er  the  pavement  roll, 
44  And,  what  is  horror  to  a  tuneful  foul, 

"  Where  afles,  deep  in  love,  to  afles  roar: 

"  Which  afles,  that  the  Garden's  fquare  adorn, 
"  Muft  lark -like  be  the  heralds  of  my  mom, 
"  Let  others  talk  with  wild  affright 
"  Of  fpeclres  and  the  (hades  of  night ; 
**  Ye  want  not  SOL'S  refulgent  painful  ray; 
•'  Night  to  your  eyes  is  but  a  milder  day. 

"  Let  others  mock  your  airs  that  fimply  flow — 
'*   Tffho  ffttvAit,    tfcx/iit  tccho — 

«'  But  then,  dear  OWL,  'tis  fweetlj  fimple,  mind: 
"  A  vaunt  the  fcientific  fquall — 
44  I  hate  it — nature  hates  it  all — 

44  But,  lo !  'tis  fciencc  and  the  /wr,  I  find. 

44  The  ear  with  harjh  chromatics  muft  be  teas' d^ 
44  Grown  much  too  fajhionablc  to  be  pleased. 

44  Here  could  I  wander  'mid  the  dewy  glade, 
44  On  facred  filence  feaft,  and  (hade : 

44  But,  ah  !  farewell — SLEEP  calls  me — 'tis  night's  noon; 
44  On  wings  of  freedom  as  thou  fweep'ft  the  Jky, 
44  Sweet  child  of  (liadows,  o'er  my  hamlet  fly, 

44  And  kindly  foothe  my  (lumber  with  a  tune." 


Thus  out  of  humour  I  addrefs'd  the  bird, 
Wishing  to  change  conditions  with  the  fowl; 

But  at  the  cheerful  morn,  upon  my  word, 
J  lik'd  the  man-fa\.$  better  than  the  vwl. 


Thus 


3fc  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

Thus  anger'd  at  the  wayward  tricks  of  FATE, 

Pettifh,  ye  wifli  your  grandeur  at  the  devil ; 
Yet,  after  curfing  high  and  mighty  ftate, 

Ye  wifely  deem  it  not  fo  huge  an  evil : 
Contented  to  be  men  of  worjkip  ftill, 

Pleas'd  with  the  gifts  that  Kings,  not  Heav'rt,  beftow; 
Proud,  from  the  height  of  TITLE'S  ftar- clad  hill, 

To  mock  us  poor  unhonour'd  grubs  below. 


,         O    D    E. 

X 

The  Poet  comforteth  again  and  again  and  again  the  Noble  Directors  with 
moral  Refledions,  &c. 

>rpIS  giv'n  as  gofpel,  both  in  profeand  rhymes, 

•*•      That  people  fliould  not  be  for  ever  bleft  / 
Misfortune  therefore  muft  be  good  at  times, 
A  falutary,  though  fatiric  gueft ; 

That  goads  to  virtuous  works  the  rump  of  SLOTH  ; 

Like  gout,  that  bites  us  into  health  fo  fair ;   . 
Or  like  the  needle,  while  it  wounds  the  cloth, 
It  puts  the  rag  into  repair. 

Sigh  now  no  more,  nor  let  thofe  funs,  your  eyes, 
Be  dimly  gleaming  through  perpetual  (how'rs — 

Let  PLEASURE  bring  the  beam  of  fummer  fkies, 
And  gild  the  pinions  of  your  fable  hours. 

Let  not  GRIEF'S  furge  along  your  bofom  roll, 
Nor  FANCY  gather  forrows  for  the  foul. 

Ah !  figh  no  more,  fweet  Lords,  pray  figh  no  more ! 

Not  all,  not  all  your  confequence  is  dead ; 
In  Tot'nam  ftreet  ye  ftill  prefer ve  a  pow'r, 

And  proudly  bear  an  elevated  head ; 

Whert, 


ODES    OP    CONDOLENCE.  363 

Where,  all  obedience,  and  with  one  accord, 
Muficians  learn  to  tremble  at  the  *  Lord. 


ODE. 

The  Viciflkwfc*  of  Life  !  woofcrto  t 

LIFE  changes — now  'ris  calm — now  hurricane— 
Up,  down  ;  down,  up — a  very  windmill's  vane 
Is  man,  poor  fellow — much  too  like  a  ball ; 
'Tis  high,  'tis  low — 'tis  this  way  now,  now  that, 
Juft  as  its  iixoden  mafler  wills,  the  bat  : 
Thus  MAJESTY  can  bid  us  rife  or  fall. 

,  V  : 

The  Monarch  may  repent  hirrrof  the  deed— 
His  heart,  fo  foft,'  at  your  difmiflkm  bleed. 
To  Houfe  of  Buckingham  you  may  be  call'd, 

And  at  the  Queen's  fweet  little  conceits  fing; 
Then  how  the  tribe  of  NOBLES  will  be  gall'd  ! 
This  will  be  foaring  on  the  eagle's  wing. 

Thus  to  the  world  then  be  it  underftood, 
What  feems  misfortune,  happens  for  our  good : 
This  from  my  rhyming  ftorehoufe,  or  my  Jlalle9 
May  be  elucidated  by  a  Fable. 


*  Of  th*  Night,  who  felcfts  the  mufic,  and  fometime*  givet  a  foprea* 
fang  to  a  baft  -voice,  and  who  once  ordered,  in  the  Jubilate,  the  trumpet 
be  executed  b    the  German  flue. 


MRS 


364  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

MRS.   ROBINSON's  HANDKERCHIEF, 

AND 

JUDGE  BULLER's  WIG. 

A    FABLE. 


A  HANDKERCHIEF,  that  long  had  prefs'd 
The  fnows  of  LAURA'S  fwelling  breaft, 

O'er  which  fair  fcene  full  many  a  longing  lover,' 
With  panting  heart,  and  frequent  fighs, 
And  pretty  modeft  leering  eyes, 

Had  very  often  been  obferv'd  to  hover— 
This  Handkerchief,  to  Kitty  giv'n, 
Was  forc'd  at  length  to  leave  its  heav'n, 

"  For  a  Jew  clothes-man's  moft  unchriftian  bag : 
O  what  a  fad  reverfe,  poor  foul ! 
To  fweat  in  fuch  a  horrid  hole, 

Cramm'd  in  with  ev'ry  fort  of  dirty  rag  ! 

u  Pray,  who  arejyc# .?"  the  plaintive 'Kerchief  cry'd, 
Perceiving  a  rough  neighbour  at  her  fide : 

"  You  fmell  as  though  your  matter  was  a  pig — 
"  What  are  ye?  tell  me,  ftinking  creature." — "Ma'am," 
The  hairy  neighbour  grave  reply'd,  "  I  am 

"  That  worthy  man's,  the  mild  Judge  BuLLER'sWig." 
Sofweetly  tender  !  that,  wherj'er  he  dies, 
MERCY  will  weep  to  blindnefs  both  her  eyes. 

u  Indeed,    Sir!"    quoth  the    'Kerchief—"  ftrange  our 

"  fate  ! 
*l  Alas !  how  difF'rent  were  we  both  of  late  ! 

"  Now 


ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE.  365 

44  Now  fluff 'd  in  this  abominable  place ! 
44  What  will  become  of  us  at  laft  ?  O  dear  ! 
44  Something  more  terrible  than  this,  I  fear ; 

44  Something  tliat  carries  horrible  difgrace." 

44  Madain,"  rejoin'd  the  Wig,  ««  don't  cry; 
44  No  caufe  have  you  indeed  to  figh ; 

44  So  trull  for  once  a  Wig's  prophetic  words — 
44  My  fate  is  to  be  juft  the  fame,  J  find  \ 
44  Still  for  a  Scarecrow's  head  defign'd, 

44  To  frighten  thieves — I  mean  the  birds. 

44  But,  luckier,  you  fo  chang'd  will  rife, 
44  A  fav'rite  of  ten  thoufand  eyes  ; 

44  Not  burnt  (as  you  fuppos'd  perhaps)  to  tinder; 
44  Chang'd  to  the  whiteft  paper— happy -leaves, 
44  For  him,  the  BARD  who  like  a  god  conceives, 

44  The  great,  th'  immortal  PBTI;*PINDA»." 

44  La,  Sir,  then  what  a  piece  of  news ! 
44  God  blefs,  I  fay,  God  blefs  the  Jews— 

%a  I  wifh  my  dear,  dear  Miftrefs  did  but  know  it : 
44  Her  hands  men  I  (hall  happy  touch  again ; 
44  For  MADAM  always  did  maintain 

44  That  MISTER  PINDAR  was  a  charming  Poet." 


ODE 

Still  more  Comfort  for  Directors  ! 

/^\NTCE  more  I  pray  you,  be  not  fad  ; 

*^  Remember  what  the  Proverb  doth  declare ; 

'Tis  better  riding  on  a  pad 
Than  on  a  horfe't>  back  that's  bare. 
At  Tot'nam's  concert,  to  delight  ye, 
Behold,  my  Lords,  you  ftill  are  mighty. 

Think 


366  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

Think  of  your  titles  too — the  name  of  Lent, 
What  merit  it  proclaims  of  head  and  heart ! 

It  is  a  tradefman's  handfome  board, 
In  letters  fair  of  gold  that  doth  impart 

To  people  who  their  mouths  of  wonder  ope, 

What  goodly  articles  are  in  the  fliop. 

Yes,  as  of  yore,  the  pompous  nameofZW 
Doth  flill  our  awe-clad  admiration  rule — 

And  comfort  to  the  hungry  doth  afford — 
As  nods  of  LORDS  are  dinners  for  afoot. 


"  I  thank  my  God,  I  am  not  like  thofe  fellows, 
Cry'd  the  proud  PHARISEE,  the  bellows 

Or  trumpet  of  his  reputation,  blowing: 
And  you  in  triumph  alfo  may  exclaim, 
Proud  of  a  Peer's  exalted  name, 

With  pride  of  title  and  fair  birth  o'erflowing, 

"  I  thank  my  ftars,  I  am  not  like  the  moby 
"  Whom  NATURE  fabricated 


Ye  fhall,  ye  fhall  return  to  pow'r, 
And  o'er  the  grumbling  million  tow'r  ; 

Yonr  facred  laws  fhall~be  obey'd  — 
Muficians  to  allegiance  muft  return— 
In  fackcloth  and  in  aflies  mourn  ; 

Submitting,  if  ye  will  it,  to  \>tjiead. 

Their  eyes  fo  fierce,  that  flafh'd  like  tin  reflectors, 
As  though  they  meant  to  roaft  the  Grand  Directors, 

Shall  from  their  meteor  fury  fade  away  — 
Becoming  mild  and  placid  as  the  light 


Shed  by  the  WORM,  the  lamp  of  dewy  night, 

:holy  ray. 


Or  LUNA'S  modefl  melancl 


Yes !  to  your  noble  hearts  delight, 
With  waving  wands  and  gloves  fo  white, 

And  gilt  medallions  bleft,  fhall  ye  appear; 
Smile  at  us  M>£,  the  many-headed  beaft ; 
And,  as  ye  feem  to  like  £  £r*/w 

JEat  a  few  fiddlers  ev'ry  year. 

THE 


•  DBS    OF    CONDOLENCE, 
THE 

CHURCHWARDEN; 

OR,    TH1 

FEAST  ONT  A  CHILD. 
A    TALE. 


The  fatiguing  fioryi  fmndetl  OH  a  fatf  tnat  happened  Jome 
jears  Jfnce,  *f  ///$WAN  at  Knig  kljbnd^  is  introduced 
to  illvftrate  the  meaning  of  eating  a  child,  mentioned  in 

I    the  firft  Ode. 

AT  KNIGHTSBRIDGE,  at  a  tavern  call'd  the  SWAN, 
•**  Churchwardens,  Overfecrs,  ajollvclan, 

Order'J  a  dinner  for  themfelves  and  /riends-^- 
A  very  handfome  dinner,  of  the  beft  : 
Lo  !  to  a  turn,  the  different  joints  were  dreft  — 

Thf  ir  lips,  wild  licking,  ev'ry  man  commends. 

Loud  was  the  clang  of  plates,  and  knives,  and  forks; 
Delightful  w;  s  the  found  of  claret  corks, 

That  ftopp'd  fo  clofe  and  lovingly  the  bottle  : 
Thou  Sxvoir-vfore  Club,  and  Je  ri*  fais  quoi, 
Full  well  the  voice  of  honeft  corks  ye  know, 
}  Deep  and  deep-blufhing  from  the  generous  pottle. 

ear,  all  eye,  to  liften  and  to  fee, 
e  Landlord  was  as  bufy  as  a  bee  — 
fe%  LARDER  fkipp'd  like  harlequin  fo  light; 
bread,  beer,  wine,  removal  fwilt  of  dimes, 
nbly  anticipating  all  their  wifhes: 
Now  this,  to.  man  voracious  as  a  kite, 


ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

Is  pleafant — as  the  TRENCHER-HEROES  hate 
All  obftacles  that  keep  them  from  the  plate, 
As  much  as  jockies  on  a  running  horfe 
Curfe  cows  or  jack-afles  that  crofs  the  courfe. 

Nay,  here's  a  folid  reafon  too ;  for  mindj 
Bawling  for  things  demandeth  mouth  and  wind  : 
Whatever •,  therefore,  weakeneth  wind  and  jaws, 
Is  hoftile  to  the  gormandizing  caufe. 

Having  well  cramm'd,   and   fwill'd,   and  laugh'd,   and 

fang,  ^ 

And  toafted  girls,  and  clapp'd,  and  roar'd,  and  rung. 
And  broken  bones  of  tables,  chairs,  and  glafles, 
Like  happy  bears,  in  honour  of  their  lafles, 
Not  wives  ! — not  one  was  toafted  all  that  time — 
Thus  were  they  decent — it  had  been  a  crinae, 
As  wives  are  delicate  and  facred  names, 
Not  to  be  mix'd  indeed  with  wh — s  and  flames : 

I  fay,  when  all  were  cramm'd  unto  the  chin, 
And  ev'ry  one  with  wine  had  fwell'd  his  fkin, 

In  came  the  Landlord  with  a  cherub  fmile : 
Around  to  ev'ry  one  he  lowly  bow'd, 
Was  vaftly  nappy — honoured—  vaftly  proud— 

And  then  he  bow'd  again  mfuch  a  ftyle  : 

"  Hop'd  Gemmen  lik'd  the  dinner  and  the  wine :" 
To  wnom  the  Gemmen  anfwer'd,  "  Very  fine  ! 

**  A  glorious  dinner,  LARDER,  to  be  fure."— • 
To  which  the  Landlord,  laden  deep  with  blifs, 
Did  with  his  bows  fo  humble  almoft  kifs 
The  floor. 

Now  in  an  altered  tone — a  tone  of  gravity, 
Unto  the  Landlord  full  of  fmiles  of  fuavity, 

Did  MISTER  GUTTLE  the  Churchwarden  call— 
"  Come  hit  ler,  LARDER,"  faid  foft  MISTER  GUTTLE 
With  folemn  voice  and  fox-like  face  fo  fubtle— 

44  LARDER,  a  little  word  or  two,  that's  all.** 

c  Fortt 


OftES    0?    CONDOLENCE. 

Forth  ran  the  bowing  Landlord  with  good  will, 
Thinking  moft  nat'rally  upon  the  hill. 

"  Landlord,"  (quoth  GUTTLE,  in  afmall  fly  found, 

Not  to  be  heard  by  any  in  the  room, 
Yet  which,  like  clap*  of  thunder,  did  confound) 

"  Do  you  know  any  thing  of  BETTY  BEOOM  r" 

"  Sir?"   anfwer'd  LAKDEI,   ftamm'ring— "  Sir?    whaf 

«  Sir? 
"  Yes,    Sir,   yes  —  yes  —  (he   liv'd  wkh  MISTRESS 

"  LARDER ; 
"  But  may  I  never  move,  nor  never  ftir, 

**  If  but  for  impvdrnec  we  did  difcard  her! 
*«  No,  Miftcr  GUTTLE — BETTY  was  toobrafly— 
**  We  never  keep  aftrvant  that  islaucy." 

«  But,  Landlord— BETTY  fays  (he  is  with  child."— 
**  What's  that  to  me?  quoth  LARDER,  flaring  wild— 

"  I  never  kifs'd  the  hufley  in  my  life, 
"  Nor  hugg'd  her  round  the  waift,    nor   pinch'd  her- 

«•  cheek ; 
"  Never  once  put  my  hand  upon  her  neck— 

"  Lord,  Sir,  you  know  that  I  have  got  a  7ui/<r. 

•  Lord  1  nothing  comely  to  the  girl  belongs— 
Ci  I  would  not  touch  her  vith  a  pair  of  tongs: 
c*  A  little  puling  chit,  as  white  a^  pafte ; 
'•  Befides !  (he  never  fuited  with  my  tafte. 

a  But  then,  fuppofe — I  only  fay,  fvppofe 
•*  I  had  been  wicked  with  the  eirl — alack, 

"  My  wife  hath  got  the  curfed'ft  keeneft  nofe, 

M  Why,   zounds,    (lie  would  have  catch'd  me  in  a 
"'crack; 

**  Then  quickly  in  the  fire  had  been  the  fat — 
41  Curfe  her !  fhe  abway  watch'd  me  like  a  cat. 

"  Then,  as  I  fay,  BET  did  not  hit  my  fafirt 
44  It  was  imttjjibh  to  be  unchalle;— 
VOL.  II.  K  k  There- 


37<>  ODES    OF    CONDOLENCE. 

"  Therefore  it  never  can  be  true,  you  fee— 
"  And  Miftrefs  LARDER'S^/W//  enough  for  me. 

"  /Jcifs  the  maid  !  why,  Lord  !  the  thing  I  fcorn— - 
41  Sir,  I'm  as  innocent's  the  child  unborn." 

41  Well,"  anfwer'd  GUTTLE,  "Man,  PH  tell  ye  what ; 

44  Your  wind  and  eloquence  you  now  are  wafting : 
u  Whether  Mifs  BETTY  hit  your  tafte  or  not, 

"  There's  good  round  proof  enough  that  you've  been 
C-M.;    **  fa/ting. 

*4  And,  LARDER,  you've  a  wife,  'tis  very  true, 
•*  Perhaps  a  little  fomewhat  of  a  Ihrew  ; 

But  EETTY  was  not  a  bad  piece  of  fluff." — 
44  Well,  MISTER  GUTTLE,  may  I  drop  down  dead, 
"  If  ever  once  I  crept  to  BETTY'S  bed  t 

44  And  that,  I'm  fure,  is  fwearing  ftrong  enough." 

M  But,  LARDER,  all  your  fwearing  will  not  do^ 
M  If  BETTY /wears  fhe  is  with  child  by^o«  .* 

44  Now  BETTY  came  and  faid  fhe'dfwear  at  once— • 
**  Butj'ow  know  beft — yet  mind,  if  BETTY  'llfwear, 
Jt  And  then  again  !  fhould  MISTRESS  LARDER  hear^ 

**-The  Lord  have  mercy,  LARDER,  on  thy  fconce  1 

;<t  Why,  man,  were  this  affair  of  BETTY  told  her, 
**  I  really  think,  i\Q\.hell  itfelf  could  hold  her, 

**  Then  for  your  modeft  fliff-rump'd  neighbours  all— • 
"  There'd  be  a  pretty  kick-up — what  a  fquall ! 

"  Thou  couldft  not  put  thy  nofe  intoa^5<?/>.   ., 
<4  There's  greafy  Miftrefs  W'ICK,  the  chandler's  wife, 
**  And  Miftrefs  BULL,  the  butcher's  imp  of  ftrife, 

<i  With  Miftrefs  BOBBIN,  SALMON,  MUFF,  andSLOPf 
44  Wkh  fifty  -others  of  fuch  old  compeers — 
•**  Zounds,  what  a  hornet's  neft  about  thy  ears'!" 

From  cheerful  fmiles,  and  looks,  like  SOL  fo  bright, 
Poor  LARBER  fell  to  fcowls  .as  black  as  night  j 

And 


ODES    OP    COKDOLEVCE. 


And  now  his  head  he  fcratch'd,  importing  guilt— 
For  people  who  are  innocent  indeed, 
Never  look  down*  fo  black,  and  fcratch  the  head; 

But  tipp'd  with  confidence,  their  nofes  tilt, 
Replying  with  an  unembarrafs'd  front  ; 
Bold  to  the  charge,  and  fix'd  to  ftand  the  brunt. 

TRUTH  is  a  tow'ring  DAMB—  divine  her  air  ; 

In  native  bloom  (he  walks  the  world  with/*/*-  .« 
But  FALSEHOOD  is  a  meretricious  Fair, 

Painted  and  mean,  and  fliuffling  in  her  gait  ; 

Bares  not  lookup  with  RESOLUTION'S  mien, 
But  fncaking  hides,  and  hopes  not  to  be  feen  ; 
For  ever  haunted  by  the  Ghofl  of  DOUBT  ! 
Trembling  for  fear  the  world  will  find  her  out. 


Again—  there's  honefty  in 
That  (hrinking  (hew  when  tongues  tell  lies  ^ 
.With  LARDER  this  was  verily  the  cafe; 
Informers  were  the  eyes  of  LARDER'S  face. 

*  Well,    Sir,"    laid   LARDER,   whifp'ring,   hetnminjy 

ha-ing, 
Each  word  fo  heavy,  like  a  cart-horfe  drawing— 

**  This  is  a  d-mn'd  affair,  I  can't  but  fay— 
'*  Sir,  pleafe  t'  accept  a  note  of  twenty  pound  ; 
**  Contrive  another  rather  may  be  found  ; 

"  And,  Sir,  here's  not  a  halfpenny  to  pay." 

Thus  ended  the  affair,  bv  prudent  treaty  : 

Peace,  ev'ry  man  defires  —  than  war,  much  rather  : 

GUTTLE  next  morning  went  and  talk'd  to  BETTY, 
When  BETTY  quickly  found  another  father  /" 

*  By  this  ingenious  mode  of  Parifh  Cookery,  the  fame  child  may 
te  devoured  a  dozen  times  over. 


K  \  a  A  LYRIC 


A 

PAIR    OF     LYRIC    EPISTLES 

TO 

,     LORD    MACARTNEY 

AHD 

HIS      SHIP. 


Yes,  of  our  Bagfbot  wonders  tell  Kir*  UONC  ! 
Delicious  fubjccls  for  an  Epic  Song  I 

EPISTLE  TO  I.OKI>  MACAHTMY, 


O.  if  fucct  fsful,  thou  wilt  be  aJor'd  I 

WiJc  as  a  CHFSHIRC  CAT,  our  Court  Wfirgrinj- 

TO  find  as  many  Pearls  and  Gems  on  board 
As  will  not  leave  thre  room  to  ftick  a  pin. 

EPISTLI   Tt  THI  SHIP. 


TO    TH,E    READER. 

7T  has  been  my  with-,  that 'the  following  pair  of  Lyric 
•*  Epiftles  might  be  prefented,  with  my  Odes,  to  the  P/ni- 
peror  KIEN  LONG,  on  account  of  the  quantity  of  original 
ifterit — but,  to  ufeafublime  phrafe,  as  it  would  be  "  letting 
the  cat  out  of  the  bag"  I  have  forborne. 

The  buttle  and  prowefs  of  the  invincible  DUKE  on  Bag- 
fhot  Heath— the  Heath  on  fire — the  Royal  vifit— the  Man  of 
Straw  blown  from  the  Mine^-the  explofion  of  the  Powder- 
mills  at  Houvflcw — the  attention  of  GODS,  as  well  as  of  tli/e 
CROWS,  to  the  Camp — the  humility  of  the  Bagfhot  bufhes> 
^&c.  are  circumftances  which,  however  they  may  be  dit- 
dained  by  the  faltidious  pen  of  HISTORY,  ought  to  be  re 
corded.  Indeed,  I  from  my  foul  believe,  that  our  Hijlorians* 
as  they  are  called,  are  too  conceitedly  lofty  to  think  of  fullying 
a  page  witli  an  account  of  the  Camp-tranfaclion  j  but  Poets 
were  the  only  hiftorians  of  ancient  times,  which  I  am  ready 
to  prove  by  a  profufion  of  learned  quotations  ;  and  confe- 
quently  your  dull  uninfpired  profe  men  are  invaders.  For 
j'ny  part,  I  am  refolved  to  fupport  the  poetical  charter ;  and 
eonfequently,  as  often  as  the  DUKE,  and  the  KJNG  and  tlie 
Q^JEEN,  and  MADAM  ScHWELLENB-ERG,and  LORD  CAR 
DIGAN,  and  old  NICHOLAS  the  fiddler,  and  SIR  FRANCIS 
DRAKE,  ami  the  Pages,  the  Cooksy  and  the  Stable-boys,  &c. 
&c.  fhull  utter  good  things,  achieve  great  actions,  and  be 
feen  in  clofe  and  important  conversation  together,  fuch 
events  fhall  be  honoured  with  niches  in  my  LYRIC  TEMPLE 
ef  IMMORTALITY* 

The  EpifUe  to  the  SHIP  feems  to  be  full  of  poetry  and 
good  wifties;  but  the  horrid  piclure  of  the  future  difap- 
pointment  of  our  Ambaffador  and  his  Suite  at  Pekin,  with 
the  difgracefully  attendant  circurnftances,  we  hope  to  be 
merely  a  playful  iketch  of  fancy  of  the  Mufe,  and  that  (he 
has  really  been  yifited  by  no  fuch  flogging  illuminations. 


A 

LYRIC     EPISTLE 

TO 

LORD  MACARTNEY, 

AMBASSADOR  TO  THE  COUtT  OF  CHINA. 


f\  C  R  o  w  * '  r>  \\  ith  glory  by  our  glorious  King, 
^  Deck'd  in  his  liv'ry  too,  a  glorious  thing, 

Amid  the  wonders  of  SAINT  JAMES'S  done  ; 
At  Houfe  of  BUCKINGHAM,  in 'RICHMOND  bow'rs, 
At  KEW,  and  laftly  WINDSOR'S  lofty  tow'rs, 

Rich  fcenes  at  once  of  Majeflj  and  Fun  ! 

Forget  not  that  the  Camp  on  BAGS  HOT  HEAT  HP, 
Where  met  the  grimly  regiments  of  death  ; 

Where  not  the  DEV'L  their  rage  fubiime  could  damp; 
Though  HBAV'N,  as  If  it  meant  to  mock  the  matter, 
Pour'd  on  their  powder'd  heads  huge  tubs  of  water, 

And  made  the  mighty  heath  a  dirty  fwamp. 

of  our  Bagihot  wonders  tell  KJEN  LONG— 
Delicious  fubjects  for  the  Epic  fong. 

Talk  of  the  valiant  troops,  all  heav.'n-defrended, 
<)u  u-hich  the  Kings  of  Britain  oft  depended, 

When 


3?  LYRIC    EPISTLES." 

When  bold  REBELLION  through  the  nation  ran, 
Her  venom  fpread,  and  told  a  vulgar  hpft, 
To  humble,  fweet  Subordination  loft, 

That,  lo  !  the  miglitieft  Monarch  was  but  Man  ! 

Such  foldiers  !  fuch  rare  gen'rals  !  no  poltroons^ 
SwellM  by  the  gas  of  courage  to  balloons  ; 
Where,  though  thofe  men  like  bacon  all  were  fmoak'd, 
Not  ont)  by  GOD'S  good  providence,  was  choafrd. 

Of  RICHMOND'S  mighty  chieftain,  RICHMOND  fpeak— 
"  Now  wet,  a  riding  difhclout,"  fhalt  thou  fay  — 

-"  Now  broiling,  whizzing,  dropping  like  a  fteak, 
"  So  val'rous,  'mid  the  fun's  meridian  ray  !"- 

Talk  to  KIEN  LONG  about  his  GRACE'S  foul; 
What  wifdom,  fweetnefs,  love,  pervades  the  whole  ! 

"But  fouls  in  common  are  a  dreary  wafte, 
By  brambles,  thifHes,  barb'rous  docks  difgrac'd  ; 
That  need  the  ploughfhare,  harrow,  and  the  fire— 
Some  fouls  are  caves  of  filth  and  fpeclred  gloom, 
That  want  a  Avindow  and  a  broom 

To  yield  them  light,  and  clear  the  mire. 

When  honours  lift  th'  unworthy  fool  on  high, 
On  FORTUNE  how  with  fierce  contempt  I  fcowl! 

She  hangs  a  dirty  cloud  upon  the  Iky, 
And  with  an  eagle's  pinion  imps  an  owl. 


Yet  knaves  and  fools  enjoy  their  lucky 

And  ribbons,  '(lead  of  ropes,  their  backs  adorn- 
Thus  crawls  the  TOAD  amid  the  faireft  flow'rs, 

And  with  the  I*ILY  drinks  the  dews  of  morn. 

But  royal  RICHMOND  honours  exaltation  — 
The  pole-ftar  of  our  military  nation. 
How  pleafant  then  to  fee  a  RICHMOND  rife  ! 
Friend  of  a  KING,  zndfav'ritG  of  the  SKIES  ! 

CHARLES, 


LYRTC   .RPIsiLE^.  377 

Cn  AII  J.F.S,*  to  fupport  a  baftard  ajid  a  wh  —  , 
d  a  tax  on  coals,  that  ftarv'd  the  poor  : 

Thofeyi«-r  »/«//<-  s-  men  made  the  faddeft  din  ! 
But  mark,  how  often  g^d  proceeds  from  evil  ! 
Tills  deed  of  CHAKI  t>  is  now  a  white-wa/h'fl  Devil-* 

Lo,  RICHMOND  cads  a  hi  lire  rouiKi^ie  iiti  ! 


By  means  of  this  wet  Jbamtful  \a*  on  coal, 
'ilgglrs  motLft  .M  ERJl  iroiu  her  Ivolc  ! 

Where  is  the  Soldier  tliat  is  not  hU  frieud  ? 
See  ADMIRATION  to  lu*  virtues  bead; 

And,  lo  !  the  fear-clad  VET  EE.  AN  adores! 
\Vhile  GLORY  humbly  kneeling  to  the  fkies, 
\Vith  fupplicatiitg  hands  and  ft  iveat  eyef^ 

A  length  of  days  upon  his  head  implores. 

that  his  Grace,  ambitious  of  a  name, 
Is  ever  angling  to  catch  martial  fame  ; 
And  fay  too,  how  mod  fortunate  the  Dukr, 
What  noble  fiflies  hang  upon  his  hook  ; 
\Vhilit  humbler  mortals,  lab'ring  day  and  night; 
Poor  patient  creatures,  feldom  feel  a  bite. 


P<ru?V  in  the  hands  of  VIRTUE  is  heav'n's 
That  fnft'ring  feeds  the  rlovv'r  of  happieft  hue  : 

In  VICE'S  grafp,  it  withers,  wounds,  and  kills; 

•(en  the  iang  fo  fatal,  form'd  to  make 
A  paflage  for  the  venom  of  the/Hale, 

That  NATURE'S  life  with  JiJJolutio*  fills. 

Bow  down,  ye  armies,  then,  and  thank  your  GoDf 
ThatRicHMOD  holds  the  military  rod: 
No  Janus  ke>  vi\\hjclfjh  views  to^/o^, 
,  And  touch  the  Nation's  pocket  with  a  job.f 

*  King  of  England,  whofc  Miflrcfs  was  a  French  woman,  \\\c  grea\ 
grft,  and  illujlritus  Anccftor  of  his  prefcnt  Grace. 

f-  Wirnefs  the  convenient  houfc  and  gardens  ntar  Plymouth  Dock,  fo 
•conomicAtty  built  with  the  Public  Money.  The  annals  of  honour  fur- 
auTi  ys  not  with  a  fublirocr  inftance  of  felj  '-denial. 

Yes, 


373  JLYRIC    EPISTLES* 

Yes,  let  the  Emp'ror  all  about  him  hear, 
Talk  of  the  bold  tranfa&ions  of  the  Peer ; 

And -fay,  what  probably  he  can't  believe, 
That,  lo  !  the  dauntlefs  body  of  His  Grace, 
Jn  duels  bor'd,  has  fcarcely  one  found  pla 

A  honeycomb,  a  cullender,  a  fieve ! 

Say  how  that  nothing  could  his  courage  check ; 
Proud  of  his  poft,  and  fearlefs  of  his  neck, 

Though  only  one  upon  his  flioulders  dear— 
Thus  VALOUR  fmilesat  danger,  death,  and  pain, 
And  feels  an  eighteen  pounder  through  his  brain, 

Coolly  zsfome  a  pat  upon  the  ear ! 

Say,  how  he  gallbp'd  wild,  up  hill,  down  dale ; 
Frighten'd  each  village,  turn'd  each  hovel  pale ; 

Struck  all  the  birds  with  terror,  fave  the  crows, 
Who,  fpying  fuch  commotion  in'  the  land, 
Concluded  fome  great  matter  was  in  hand,. 

Much  blood  and  carnage  'midft  contending  foes* 

Say,  how  the  world  his  deeds  with  wonder  faw  j 
Say,  that  the  Bagfhot-bufhes  bow'd  with  awe  j 
And  fay,  his  phiz  fuch  valour  did  infpire, 
That,  lo  !  the  very  ground  he  trod,  caught  fire.* 

Say,  how  went  forth  to  fee  him  half  the  nation, 
Their  mouths  well  cramm'd  with  duft  and  admiration,;. 
So  ardent  ev'ry  eye's  devouring  look, 
To  feize  the  galloping,  the  flying  Duke. 

Such  eating  and  fuch  guzzling  ev'ry  day  ! 

Nothing  to  pay  ! 
All  the  Duke's  friends,  great  quality  and  fmall, 

Our  great  King  GEORGE,  and  lovely  Queen., 

Were  entertain'd  fcot-free,  I  ween- — 
A  generous  nation  doom'd  to  pay  it  all. 

*  TWs  is  a  literal  fatf. 

And 


LYRIC    EF1STLES. 

And  yet  when  PARLIAMENT  beholds  the  bill, 
I  think  that  Parliament  with  much  ill  wiU, 

May  growl,  and  fwear  it  was  an  idle  thing, 
This  game  of  foldiers,  fuch  a  cfaldifi  play  ; 
But  let  me  anfwer  PARLIAMENT,  and  (ky, 

It  was  not  ckilAJk,  FOR  IT  PLEAS'D  THE  KING, 

It  made  TOM  PAINE,  the  bull-dog,  hold  his  tongue; 
Arm'd  with  fuch  lion-paws,  and  teeth  fb  long ! 

Say,  that  the  fun-like  Duke  /hone  forth  fo  bright, 
That  PUNCH  ne'er  triumnh'd  in  a  fiercer  fight. 

Say,  how  he  fir'd  the  Hou^flvw  mills  of  powder; 
Say,  how  the  fympathifing  grain,  with  found, 
Friehten'd  the  tiles  from  all  the  roofs  around, 

Defying  the  bold  THUNDER  to  roar  louder! 

Say,  that  immortal  C^SAR  *  trod  the  place 
Now  fiercely  gallopp'd  over  by  His  GRACE. 

Bay,  that  the  Gods  beheld  him  from  on  high ; 
That,  to  the  Lord  of  battles,  f  with  a  figh, 

Thus  fpoke  the  MONARCH  of  the  clouds  —  "  Son 

MARS, 

44  Had  TROY  poflefc'd  a  hero  like  the  Duke, 
44  With  ./«<•£  a  foul,  andyicAa  fighting  look, 

"  Our  City  had  been  fafe  amidil  hex  wars. 

"  Go  quickly,  pull  thv  hat  off  to  the  DUKE, 
"  And  beg  a  blefling  from  the  HERO'S  book." 

Lord !  as  the  Duke,  where  ponder  only  flam'd, 
Was  fo  infpir'd,  fo  val'rous,  and  fo  hot : 

How  haa  this  Duke  the  fons  of  t>atfle  (ham'd, 
'Mid  fcenes  of  thunder,  where  they  charg'd  with^o/  / 

Say  too  (and  verily  it  was  no  joke) 

Although  fo  lofty  on  thHr  clnd-capt?d  tow'rs, 
€uch  vwere^he  volumes  of  afcending  iinoke, 
.  Smutty  as  blackfrniths  look'd  the  Iveav'nly  POW'RS; 

*  Julius  Czfar  was  rooft  certainly  it  Bagfbor. 
f  Mars.        N 

And 


3O  LYRIC    EPISTLES; 

And  that  the  MAN  ofjtraw*  (a  thought  how  bright !) 
Flew  up,  and  put  their  GODSHIPS  in  a  fright ! 

Tell  him,  which  probably  may  caufe  a  fmile, 
That,  at  the  diftance  of  a  mile, 

His  GRACE,  a  ikull  that  powder  wants,  can  note; 
(Which,  when  it  happens,  let  that  fkull  beware) 
See  too  a  club  with  one  diforder'd  hair, 

And  mark  one  fpot  of  greafe  upon  a  coat. 

Thus  war  was  Gothic,  flovenly,  unchafte, 
Till  RICHMOND  ufher'd  in  the  morn  of  tafte  ! 
Say  too,  that  for  the  honour  of  the  nation, 
We  hope  to  fee  a  book  on  reputation, 
Proving  that  public  vice  ihould  bring  no  lhame ;  f 
That  private  only  damns  a  noble  name. 

Thus  the  poor  NYMPH,  too  eafy  to  contend, 
Who  blufliing  fins  in  fecret  with  a  friend, 
^  Shall  be  a  viler  hufley  than  the  woman 
Who  hangs  her  lips  like  cherries  out  for  fale, 
And  fhews  her  bofom's  lilies,  to  regale 
Each  grazing  beaft  that  otfers — quite  a  COMMON. 

"  Why  (hould  I  fay  all  this  unto  the  King  ?" 
Thou  cryeft,  O  MACARTNEY — Good  mayfpring: 
It  may  unto  thine  embafly  give  weight, 
By  putting  great  KIEN  LONG  into  a  fright. 

*'  Who  knows,"  KIEN  LONG  may  whine  with  rueful  face, 
"  But  all  the  rank  and  file  are  like  His  GRACE — 

*  It  is  reported,  that  a  coloflal  figure,  fluffed  with  ftraw,  vds  blown 
out  of  the  hill,  to  give  their  Majejiies  an  adequate  idea  of  the  afcent  of 
ten  thoufand  men  or  fo,  a  frequent  event  at  grand  ficges.  It  is  more 
over  reported,  thai  this  fluffed  figure  obtained  a  large  portion  of  royal 
approbation.  Indeed  I  am  ftrongly  inclined  to  believe  the  ftory. — It 
was  quite  a  new  idea. 

f  The  Reader  is  defired  to  afc  Lord  Lauderdalc  concerning  this 
'matter. 

«  Then 


LYRIC    EPISTLF8. 


**  Then  (hall  I  fhake  upon  mv  fapphirc  throne  : 
**  For  troops  like  RICHMOND,  that  on  valour  feaft, 
*'  May,  like  wild  meteors,  pour  into  mine  Eaft, 

*'  And  leave  my  palace  neither  flick  nor  ftone  : 

44  Like  roaring  lions  rufti  to  eat  me  up  — 
**  In  Britain  breakfaft,  and  in  China  fup." 


TO    THE    SHIP. 

OTHOU,  fo  nicely  painted,  and  fo  trim, 
Succefs  attend  our  COURT'S  delightful  whim ; 
And  all  thy  gaudy  gentlemen  on  board ; 
With  coaches  juft  like  gingerbread,  fo  fine, 
Amid  the  Afiatic  world  to  mine, 

And  greet  of  CHIN  A  the  Imperial  Lord. 

Methinks  I  view  thee  tow'ring  at  CANTON  : 
I  hear  each  wide-mouth'd  falutatkm  gun ; 

I  fee -thy  dreamers  wanton  in  the  gale; 
I  fee  the  (allow  natives  crowd  the  fliore, 
I  fee  them  tremble  at  thy  royal  roar ; 

I  fee  the  very  MANDARINES  turn  pale. 

Pagodas  of  Nan-yang,  and  Chou-chin-chou, 
60  lofty,  to  our  trav'ling  Britons  bow  ; 

Bow,  mountains  fky-enwrapp'd  of  Chin-chung-chm ; 
Floods  of  Ming-no,  your  thund'ring  voices  raife  -t 
Cuckoos  of  Ming-fou-you,  exalt  their  praife, 

With  geefe  of  bou-chen-che,  and  Tang-ting-tin. 

O  monkeys  of  Tou-fou,  pray  line  the  road, 
Hang  by  your  tails,  and  all  the  branches  load ; 
Then  grin  applaufe  upon  the  gaudy  throng, 
And  drop  them  honours  as  they  pafs  along. 


Frogs  of  Fou-fi,  O  croak  from  pools  of  green  ; 

iow,  ye  butterflies,  around  the  fceue ; 
Vol..  II.  L  1 


••$%Z  LYRIC    EPISTLES. 

Sing  O  be  joyful,  ev'ry  village  pig  ; 
Goats,  -fheep,  and  oxen,  through  your  paftures  prance  ; 
Ye  buffaloes  and  dromedaries,  dance  ; 

And  elephants,  pray  join  th'  unwieldy  jig. 

J  mark,  I  mark,  along  the  dufty  road, 
The  glitt'ring  coaches  with  their  happy  load, 

All  proudly  rolling  to  PE  -KIN'S  fair  town  ; 
And,  lo  !  arriv'd,  I  fee  the  Enip'ror  flare, 
peep  marv'ling  at  a  fight  fo  very  rare  ; 

And  now,  ye  Gods!  I  fee 


And  now  I  hear  the  lofty  Emp'ror  fay, 

i;  Goocl  folks,  what  is  it  that  ye  want,  I  pray  ?'* 

And  now  I  hear  aloud  MACARTNEY  cry, 
*4  EMP'ROR,  my  COURT,  inform'd  that  you  were  rich, 
"  Sublimely  feeling  a  ftroug  money-itch, 

"  Acrofs'  the  eaftern  ocean  bade  me  fly  : 

*'  With  tin,  and  blankets,  O  great  King,  to  barter, 
*'  Andgimcracks  rare  for  China-man  and  Tartar. 
*4  But  prefents,  prefents  are  the  things  we  mean  : 
**  Some  pretty  diamonds  to  our  gracious  QUE  E  N, 
"  Big  as  one's  fift  or  fo,  or  fomewhat  bigger, 
"  Would  cut  upon  her  petticoat  a  figure  — 
*6  A  petticoat  of  whom  each  poet  fmgs, 
•*'  That  beams  on  birth-days  for  the  Beft  of  Kings. 

f 
^  Yes,  prefents  are  the  things  we  chiefly  wifh— 

"  Thefe  give  not  half  the  toil  we  find  in  trade.  "-*- 
On  which  th'  aftonifh'd  EMP'ROR  cries,  *4  Odsfifli  ! 

"  Prefents  [---prefeni  the  rogues  the  baftinade." 

Stern  RESOLUTION'S  eye,  that  flafh'd  with  fate, 
At  danger  cov/'ring,  wears  a  wither'd  look  j 

Palfy'd  his  finewy  arm,  where  vengeance  fate, 
Whole  grafp  the  rugged  oak  of  ages  fhook—  r 

His  blood,  fo  hot,  grown  fuddenlyfo  chill; 

Sunk  from  a  torrent  to  a  creeping  rill. 

10 


ttRIC    EPISTLES.  §85 

In  ihort,  behold  with  dread  M.\CA*TNEYlbire; 
Behold  him  feiz'd,  his  feat  of  honour  bare ; 

The  bamboo  founds — alas!  no  voice  of  FAME: 
Stripp'd,  fchool-boy  like,  and  now  I  fee  his  train, 
I  fee  their  lily  bottoms  writhe  with  pain, 

And,   like  his  LORDSHIP'S,    blu(h  with  blood  and 
ihame. 

Ah  !  what  avails  the  cont  of  (carlet  dye, 
And  collar  blue,  around  their  pretty  necks  ? 

Ah !  what  the  fpaulcttfs,  that  roaft  the  eye, 
And  loyal  buttons  blazing  with  G&rge  Rfx  f 

Heav'ns  !  if  KIF.N  LONG  refolvcs  upon  their  dripping, 

Thefe  are  no  talifmans  to  ward  a  whipping. 

Now,  with  a  mock  folemnity  of  face, 
I  fee  the  mighty  EMF'ROK  gravely  place 

Fools-caps  on  all  the  poor  degraded  men— 
And  now  I  hear  the  folemn  EMP'RO*  fay, 
*  'Tis  thus  we  Kings  of  China  folly  pay ;' 

44  Now,  children,  ye  may  all  go  home  agen," 

O  beauteous  veflel  mould  this  prove  the  cafe, 
How  in  old  England  wilt  thou  fhew  thy  face  ? 

I  fear  thy  vifage  will  be  wond'rous  long. 
Know,  it  may  happen — Minifters  and  Kings, 
Like  common  folk,  are  fallible — poor  things! 

Too  often  fanguine,  and  as  often  wrong. 

Yet,  if  fuccefsful,  thou  wilt  be  ador'd— 

Lo,  like  a  Chefhire  cat  our  COURT  will  grin  ! 

How  glad  to  find  as  many  gems  on  board, 
As  will  not  leave  thee  room  to  ftick  a  pin  ! 


L  1  a  ODES 


ODES    TO    KIEN    LONG, 

The  preftnt  Emffrer  cf  China. 

WIT* 

THE      QUAKERS, 

A    TALE. 

TO    A    FLY, 

Drowned  in  a  Boiul  of  P'uiuk. 

ODE  TO  MACMAN'US,  TOWNSEND,  AND  JEALOUS, 
THE    THIEF-TAKERS. 

TO  CJELIA*— TO  A  PRETTY  MILLINER. 

TO  THE  FLEAS  OF  TENER1FFE. 

TO  SIR  WILLIAM  HAMILTON— TO  MY  CANDLE. 

&     Ice.  &c. 


*•  AKACREOV. 

"  Yes,  let  us  ftrike  the  lyre,  and  fmg  and  rhyme ; 
M  By  far  the  wifcft  way  of  (pending  time." 
So  fays  Anacreoo,  my  dear  Kicn  Long  ; 
L«r  Britain  then,  and  China  hear  e*r 


L13 


TO    THE 

EMPEROR    OF    CHINA. 


DEAR    KIEN    LONGT, 

A  T  length  an  opportunity  prefents  itfelf  for  converging 
•"•  with  the  fecond  POTENTATE  upon  earth,  GEORGE; 
THE  THIRD  being  moil  undoubtedly  the  fir  ft,  although 
he  never  made  verfes.  Thy  praifes  of  MGUKDEN,  thy 
beautiful  little  Ode  to  TEA,  &c.  have  afforded  me  in 
finite  delight;  and  to  gain  my  plaudit,  who  am  rather 
difficult  to  pleafe,  will,  I  afliire  thee,  be  a  feather  in  thy 
Imperial  cap. 

Principibus  flacuiffe  viris,  nyn  ultim*  lavs  tjt,. 

Praife  from  a  Bard  of  my  poetic  fpirit, 
Proclaims  indeed  no  fmall  degree  of  merit. 

Excufe  this  piece  of  egotifm—  it  is  natural,  and  juftifrecfc 
by  the  fublimefl  authorities.  —  ^What  fays  VIRGIX  ? 

*'  Ttntanda  via  ejl  qua  me  quoque  fejfim 

"  Tollere  hunto,  ijifioryue  virutu  volitare  per  ora" 


What,  likewife,  Lu  CRETIUS? 

«  Infignemcfue  meo  cafiti  peter  e  inde  cOronam- 
"  Unde  priui,  nulli  -velarunt  tttnfora  Mufie." 

What,  alfo,  OVID? 

*<  Jamquc  opus  exegt"  &c» 

What,  moreover,  HORACE? 

(t  Exfgi  monvfftcntum  tert  pcrennuh"  &c. 

Wiiat, 


Tfr   THE    BXPBROR   OF     CHINA. 

What,  ENWIUS? 

«  Nemo  m:  lacrumeii  Jecoref  *e<f**trajltt*,"  &C. 

What,  again,  the  great  Father  of  Poetry,   HOMER,  fn 
his  delightful  HYMN,  that  fome  impudent  Scholiafts  de 


clare  he  never  wrote  ? 


Which,  with  a  few  preceding  lines  omitted  in  the  quo 
tation,  I  thus  a  little  paraphraftically  an4  beautihilly 
tranflate : 

Should  Cuiiofitv  at  times  inquire 

Whi  ftrikes  with  fweetcft  art  the  Muft'j  lyre  ; 

This  be  thine  anfwer — "  A  poor  man,  ftaik.  blind  5 
An  aged  minrtrel  that  at  Chiot  dvrellsr 
Who  (ells  and  fmgs  his  works,  and  fiogs  and  fells, 

And  leaves  all  other  poets  far  behind." 

So  much  for  my  profound  learning  in  defence  oT  ego- 
tifm ;  for  where  is  the  man  that  does  not  rank  himfclf 
amongft  his  own  admirers? 

Now  to  the  point. — As  LO-RD  MACARTNEY,  witftj 
his  mod  fplendid  retinue,  fs  about  to  open  a  trade  with 
thee,  in  the  various  articles  of  tin,  blankets,  woollen 
in  general,  &c.  &c.  in  favour  of  the  two  Kingdoms;. 
why  might  not  a  literary  commerce  take  place  between 
the  GREAT  KIEN  LONG,  and  the  no  lefs  celebrated 
PETER  PINDAR?  Thou  art  a  man  of  rhymes — and  fo> 
am  I.  Thou  art  a  genius  of  uncommon  verfatility— 
fo  am  I.  Thou  art  an  enthufiail  to  the  Mufes — fo  am  I. 
Thou  art  a  lover  of  novelty — fo  am  I,  Thou  art  an 
idolater  of  Royalty — fo  am  I.  With  fuch  a  congeniality 
of  mind,  in  my  God's  name  and  M/W,  let  us  furprife  the 
world  with  an  interchange  of  our  lucubrations,  both  for 
ks  improvement  and  delight.  And  to  ihew  thee  that  I 

am 


TO    THE    EMPEROR    OP    CHINA'. 

am  not  a  literary  fwindler,  unable  to  repay  thee  for  goods 
I  may  receive  from  thy  Imperial  Majefty,  I  now  trapf- 
mit  Specimens  of  my  talents,  in  Ode,  Ballad,  Elegy, 
Fable,,  and  Epigram. 

I  am,  dear  KIEN  LONG, 
humble  Servant,  and  brother  Poet, 

^  JP.JNDAR. 


ODES 


1  389 


ODES  TO  KIEN  LONG, 


ODE     I. 


Peter  complirncnteth  Kien  Long  on  hh  poetiol  talent,  aod  condemnttk 
the  want  of  tafte  in  Wcftern  Kings. 


DEAR  EMP'ROR,  PRINCE  OF  POETS,  noble  BARD, 
Thy  brother  PETER  fendeth  thee  a  card, 
To  fay  thou  art  an  honour  to  the  times- 
Yes,  PETER  tdleth  thee,  that  for  a  King, 
Indeed  a  moft  e*traordinary  thing, 
Thou  really  makeft  very  charming  rhymes. 

Witnefs  thy  MOUKDEN,*  which  we  all  admire; 

Witnefs 'thy  pretty  little  Ode  to  Ti:  A, 
Compos'd  when  fipping  by  thy  Tartar  fire ; 

Witnefs  thy  many  a  madrigal' and  glee. 


Believe  me,  venerable,  good  KIEN 
Vaft  is  my  pleafure  that  die  Mufe's  fong 

Divinely  foundeth  through  thy  Tartar  groves; 
Still  greater  that  thejfr/0  ofEaftern  Kings 
Should  praife  in  rhyme  the  Tartar  vales  and 

And  pay  a  tuneful  tribute  to  the  LOVES. 

Yet  how  it  hurts  my  claTic  foul,  to  find 
Sojne  Weftem  Kings  to  poetry  unkind  ! 

*  A  favourite  City  of  the  Emperor. 

What 


ODES  TO  KIEN  LONG. 

What  though  they  want  the  fkill  to  make  a  riddle, 
Charade,  or  rebus,  or  conundrum ;  ftill 
Thofe  Kings  might  {hew  towards  them  fome  good  will, 

And  nobly  patronife  Apollo's  fiddle. 

But  no — the  note  is,  "  How  go  fheep  a  fcore  ? 

"  What,  what's  the  price  of  bullock?  how  fells  lamb? 
**  1  want  a  boar,  a  boar,  I  want  a  boar ; 

'*  I  want  a  bull,  a  bull,  I  want  a  ram." 
Whereas  it  fhould  be  this — "  I  want  a  BARI>, 
"  To  cover  him  with  honour  and  reward." 

Kings  deem,  ah  me!  a  grunting  herd  of  fwine 
Companions  fweeter  than  the  tuneful  NINE  ; 
Preferring  to  FAME'S  dome  a  hog-ftye's  mire, 
The  roar  of  oxen  to  Apollo's  lyre. 

"  Lord  !  is  it  pofiible?"  I  hear  thee  groan— 
KIEN  LONG,  'tis  true  as  thou  art  on  thy  throne : 
For  fouls  like  thine,  'tis  natural  to  doubt  it— 
MACARTNEY  can  inform  thee  all  about  it. 


ODE    XVI. 

More  Compliments  to  the  Emperor — A  Differtation  on  Thrones,  an4 
Kings  and  Queens— A  very  proper  attack  on  the  French  Revolu- 
tionalifts — The  fate  of  poor  Religion,  propheficd — Alfo,  of  his  Holi- 
nefs  the  Poj>e~- More  Lamentations  on  degraded  Royalty. 

HPHOU  art  a  fecond  Atlas,  great  KIENLONG; 
•*•    Supporting,  half  th'  unwieldy  globe,  fo  flrong ; 

But,  Lord  !  what  pigmy  fonls  to  empire  rife ; 
Unconfcious  of  its  glorious  frame,  they  fleep— 
Now  juft  like  mice  from  pyramids  that  peep^ 

Thinking  a  hole's  a  hole,  where'er  it  lies* 

FORTUNE 


ODES    TO    KISW    LOKG.  39! 

FOR  TUNE  has  too  much  nowV  in  this  fame  world— 
Tilings  are  too  often  toply-turvy  hurl'd  ! 

A  bug  condemned  to/y  that  fcarce  can  crawls 
A  maggot  taken  from  his  little  nut, 
(There  by  the  great  ALL-WISE  mod  tvifcly  put) 

To  grovel  'midft  the  grandeur  of  St.  PAUL  ! 

Unluckily  mofl  thrones  are  plac'd  fo  high, 
That  Kings  can  fcarce  their  loving  fuhjc&s  fpy. 

Hopping  beneath  them,  like  fo  many  crow    , 
Which  fubjtcls  have  in  France  been  taking 
Great  liberties  in  ladder-making, 

To  get  up  nearer  to  the  royal  nofe. 

Thus  wren:  ere  long  their  pigmy  pow'rs  will  try ; 
And,  turning  to  the  cloudo  their  little  eye, 
Aim  to  arreft,  by  frequent  daring  flights, 
Their  elder  brothers  of  the  flues,  the  KITES ! 

And  yet  I  hate  a  Foot  upon  the  throne — 
We  have  been  happy  hitherto,  thank  God ; 

How  boys  would  burft  with  laughter,  ev'ry  one, 
Were  /ww/fcy-fchoolmafters  to  hold  the  rid  ! 

YeJ  much  more  mifchief  follows  roy.il  fools, 

<a/rns  are  on  a  larger  fcale  than//;Wj.— 
Th'  AMERICANS  provide  againft  all  this: 
\Vhich  certain  Gentlefolk  take  much  amifs  ! 

And  then  again,  the  wivts  of  glorious  Kings, 
In  generofity,  and  fuch-like  things, 

And  tem|>er  miU^  who  well  thtrmfelves  demean, 
Are  for  they//^/>t?  a  rare  happy  matter ; 
And  let  me  lay  indeed,  who  fcorn  to  flatter, 

We  BRITONS  are  moil  lucky  in  a  Queen. 

Of  humbling  their  fuperiors,  folks  fecm  fond, 

And  treiting  Monarchs  as  fo  many  logs; 
\Y     reas  it  is  in  Courts,  as  in  a  pond, 

Some  fi(h,  fome  ft 

4  Thu* 


ODES    TO  -KIEN    LONG* 

Thus  do  the  rebel  foes  of  Sovereigns  cry, 
Rending  with  vile  difloyalty  the  fky  : 

"  When  will  the  lucky  day  be  born  that  brings 
"  A  bridle  for  the  infolence  of  Kings  ? 

"  Too  flowly  moves,  alas!  the  loitering  hour! 
«'  When  will  thofe  TYRANTS  ceafe  to  fancy  MAN 
**  A  fawning  dog  m  Providence's  plan, 

**  Ordam'd  to  lick  the  blood-ftain'd  rod  of  PO\Y'R  ?" 

Kings  have  their  faults  undoubtedly,  and  many  — 

The  man  who  contradicts  me,  is  a  zany. 

Some  rob,  fome  kill,  fome  cheat,  fome  cringe  and  beg; 

Curft  with  an  av'rice,  fome  would  ihave  an  egg. 

And  yet,  with  all  their  fins,  I  -drop  a  tear 

On  what  I'm  daily  forc'd  to  fee  and  hear. 

Great  is  the  change  of  late  !  fuch  horrid~fcenes, 
Such  little  rev'reiice  both  for  Kings  and  Queens  ! 

Thus  cry  the  Frenchmen,  feldom  over-nice  — 
**  We  want  no  SCEPTRE'D  PLUNDERERS  of  States; 
**  Out  with  th&m  —  folly  to  maintain  more  ,cats 

"  Than  capable  of  catching  mice. 

*'  Death  to  their  parafites  —  we'll  have  no  more 
4t  Leeches  that  fuck  the  heart's  blood  of  the  poor. 
*<  Down  with  Dukes,    Earls,    and  Lords,    thofe 
" 


**  Falfe  gods  !  —  away  with  ftars,  and  firings,  and  crofles  !" 

The  French  are  very  wicked,  I  declare  ; 
They  raife  upon  one's  head,  one's  very  hair; 

So  much  thofe  fellows  Majefty  abufe  — 
Of  Royalty  the  purple  robe  fo  grand, 
Which  feizes  the  deep  rev'rence  of  a  land, 

They  to  a  malkin  turn,  to  wipe  their  flioes. 

rt  Out  with  State-pickpockets  !"  they  cry  aloud  : 
4<  Death  to  the  rav'nous  eagles,"  cries  the  crowd, 

«  That 


ODES    TO    KIEN     L«NO.  3J 

•*  That  happy  hover  o'er  a  PEOPLE'S  groan  j 
"  Thieves,  in  the  plunder  of  an  empire  dreft  ; 
**  FLATT'RY'*  vile  carrion  flies,  on  Kin^s  that  feaft; 

•'  Rank  bugs  that  flicker  in  the  wood  of  thrones  ! 

"  The  DUSTMAN  in  his  cart  that  hoitrly  flaves, 
"  Drawn  by  an  afs,  the  partner  of  his  toils, 

*'  How  far  fuperior  to  thofe  titled  knaves, 

"  Jn  coaches  glitt'ring  with  a  kingdom's  fpoils!" 

The  old^fr  W»,  that,  with  thund'ring  (blind, 
Rous'd  all  the  Provinces  of  France  around, 

(And  if  great  things  we  may  compare  to  fmall, 
Juft  like  the  boatfwam's  whittle,  that  makes  (kip 
The  jovial  fellows  of  a  (hip)    • 

This  great  sic  VOLO  is  not  heard  at  all — 

To  famll?r  phrafcs  chang'd  by  feme  degrees ; 
**  With  your  good  leave,   Meflieurs" — "  Sirs,   if  you 
«  pleafe." 

Yes,  favage  are  the  FRENCH  to  Kings  and  Quality ; 
Void  of  good  manners,  common  hofpitaiity — 

Barb'rous,  they  doc-like  wifh  to  pick  their  bones; 
Make  juft  as  much  of  Dukes  as  of  a  duck, 
(Nobilitv  has  therefore  mocking  luck) 

And  clam  an  infant  Prince  again  the  (tones. 
Thus  butchers  calrnlv  ftick  a  lucking  pig, 
And  o'er  a  bleeding  lambkin  hum  a  jig. 

RELIGION  too  is  in  a  deep  decline^, 
Her  vot'ries  treated  like  a  herd  of  fwine ; 

Rich  relicks  look'd  upon  as  rotten  lumber* 
I!7io  will  be  canoniz'd  for  fright'ning  devils, 
For  bringing  back  loft  limbs,  and  curing  evils, 

Scald  heads,  wry  necks,  and  rickets  beyond  number, 

\Vithomadraught,  abohis,  or  a  pill, 
That  of  redoubted  Doctors  foil  the  (kill  ? 

VOL.  II.  M  m  RELIGION, 


384  ODES    T0    K1EN    LONG. 

RELIGION,  who  in- France,  fome  years  ago, 
Made  in  rich  filks  fo  wonderful  a  mow, 

So  us'd  with  all  the  pride  of  curls  to  charm, 
Is  now,  poor  foul,  oblig'd  to  beg  her  bread, 
With  fcarce  a  cap  or  ribbon  to  her  head, 

Or  woollen  petticoat  to  keep  her  warm. 

Yes,  poor  dear  maid,  I  fear  fhe'll  foon  expire ; 
Her  whips  demolifh'd,  and  extinct  her  fire, 

Her  pincers  broken — fnapp'd  in  twain  her  cleaver, 
That  flogg'd,  that  burnt  a  (inner  to  falvation, 
Roafting  away  the  foul's  adulteration, 

And  chopp'd  and  pinch'd  him  to  a  true  Believer. 

No  longer  are  her  priefts  to  be  maintain 'd — 
Thus  is  that  horrid  bead  the  Dev'l  unchain'd, 

That  roaring  Bull  at  once  his  triumph  fliows : 
For,  if  not  paid,  what  priefts  can  prove  their  might, 
Fight  the  good  nght, 

And,  like  {launch  bull-dogs,  nail  him  by  the  nofe  ? 

DEATH  and  the  DEV'L,  the  fmutty  rogue,  and  SIN, 

A  pretty  junto,  are  upon  the  grin  ; 

Hoping  to  fill  the  dark  infernal  hole, 

If  all  the  priefts  refufe  to  help  a  foul : 

That  moft  important  conteft  then  is  o'er ; 

Pull  DEV'L,  pull  PARSON,  will  be  feen  no  more. 

Yes,  at  her  wounded pow'r  RELIGION  faints  ; 
Alas  !   no  more  old  bones  fliall  make  neiv  Saints ; 

No  more  fliall  LENT,  lean  lady,  cry  her  filh ; 
No  more  mail  dices  of  the  crofs  be  courted ; 
Defpis'd  the  manger  that  our  Lord  fupported, 

His  facred  pap-fpoon,  and  the  Virgin's  difli. 

No  abfolutions,  like  potatoes,  fold  ; 

No  purgatory-fouls  redeem'd  by  gold : 

No  more  in  cloth' of  gold,  and  red-heel'd  fhoes, 

Bag-wig  and  fword,  a  mob  the  Saviour  *  views — 

*  Once  a  year  this  fne  mummery  is  exhibited  in  France,  and  in 
other  Romifti  countries. 

c  Sold 


ODES    TO    KIEIf    LONG.  5$) 

Sold  no  certificates  *  of  good  behaviour, 

To  fhow  the  Lord,  the  V  irgin,  and  that  Saviour. 

No  more  (hall  MIRACLES  obtain  applaufc, 
Lsugh  at  old  TIME,  and  break  Dame  NATURE'S  laws; 
No  more  dead  herrings,  fill'd  with  life  and  motion, 
Leap  from  the  frying-pan,  and  fwim  the  ocean. 

Soon  may  this  wicked  Spirit  fteal  to  Rome, 
And  poifon  ev'ry  facred  dome; 

Rdicks  be  kick'd  and  mock'd  by  many  a  giber — 
The  Pontiff  to  the  very  -xcrk/ioufc  brought, 
Or,  what  could  never  have  been  thought, 

Plump'd  with  his  triple  crown  into  the  T\bcr  : 
There  may  we  view  him  flound'ring  wild  about, 
With  not  a  SAINT  he  dubb'd  to  pufl  him  out : 

The  fair  chafte  quills,  from  angel  wings  procur'd, 
Be  turn'd  to  ufes  not  to  be  endur'd  ; 
To  villain  pens,  inftead  of  crow-quills  cut, 
To  draw  lewd  figures,  and  delivery/***/ ; 

Melted  the  Church's  facred  plate  to  mugs, 
To  candlefticks,  to  punch- ladles,  and  jugs; 
To  porringers  the  pipes  f  of  facred  tunes, 
And  filver  Chrifts  to  canifters  and  fpoons. 

Phials  that  held  of  faints  the  fuffering  fighs, 
Seen  by  the  dimmed  of  believing  eyes, 
Lo,  to  the  meaneft  offices  fhall  fink — 
Hold  aquafortis,  or  reviling  ink  ! 

*  In  Come  part  of  Ruflia,  narrow  flips  of  paper,  in  form  of  a  ribbon, 
conf-crated  by  the  Biihop,  are  fold  for  about  three-pence  a  piece,  and 
bound  about  the  heads  of  dying  people.  They  arc  certificates  of  their 
good  behaviour.  The  infcription  on  each  is  as  follows  — '•  To  old 
"  God  Almighty,  to  young  God  Almighty,  and  young  GoJ  Al- 
«  mighty 's  Mamma— this  is  to  certify  that  the  bearer  hereof  died  a  good 
*'  Chriftian." 

f  Of  the  organs. 

M  m  2  The 


386  ODES    TO    KIEN    LONG. 

The  VIRGIN'S  gowns  and  garters,  ftockings,  flioes, 
Sold  to  her  enemies,  perhaps,  the  Jews — 
Her  paint,  curls,  caps,  hoop,  gauzes,  muflin,  lace> 
Sold  to  trick  harlots  for  a  rogue's  embrace  ! 

i 

.Now  to  difloyal  mongrels  we  return, 
That  bavk  at  Kings,  and  for  confufion  burn. 

How  have  our  mighty  Monarchs  been  brought  down 
Trod  in  the  duft,  like  fome  old  wig,  the  CROWN  ! 

The  WEARERS— -fome  confin'd  in  jails  fo  dread  ; 
Some  Ihot — fome  poifon'd  with  as  much  fang -froid^ 
As  though  the  MOB  had  merely  been  employ 'd 

To  knock  a  thieving  polecat  on  the  head. 

In  birth  the  PUBLIC  fees  no  kind  of  merit ! 
Think  of  the  prefent  equalizing  fpirit ! 

Amid  ft  the  populace  how  rank  it  fprings ! 
Nay,  from  the  palaces  the  VIRTUES  fly, 
While,  boldly  entering  from  their  beaftly  ftye, 

The  vulgar  PASSIONS  ru(h  to  pig  with  Kings  / 


ODE      HI. 


The  Poet  fweetly  reproveth  the  Emperor  for  neglc&ing  to  turn  a  penny 
in  an  honeft  way,  and  demonftrateth  the  tnconveniency  of  Gcnerofny 
—  proving  that  a  mind  on  a  broad  fcale  may  be  productive  of  narrow 


REAT  KING,  thou  never  educateft  fwine, 

Nor  takeft  goflins  under  thy  tuition  ; 
Nor  boarded  by  the  week  thy  neighbour's  kine, 
Like  PHARAOH'S  —  that  is,  in  a  lean  condition. 

Nor  doft  thou  cut  down  palaces  to  pens, 
Nor  fendeft  unto  market  cocks  and  hens  ; 

Nor 


ODES    TO    KIEH    LONO.  38? 

Nor  to  a  butcher  felleft  pork  and  beef: 
Nor  wool  nor  egg  merchant,  O  King,  art  thou  ; 
Nor  doft  thou  watch  the  girl  who  milks  the  cow, 

For  fear  the  girl  might  fip,  and  prove  a  thief; 
Nor  fetteft  traps  to  fave  thy  fowls  and  eggs, 
And  catch  thy  loyal  fubjeas  by  the  legs. — 

Nor  doft  thoti  go  *  flopping  mighty  King; 
I  know  that  thou  dffpifejl  fuch  a  thing; 

Yes,  to  expofe  fuch  meannefs  thou  art  loath  : 
Thou  fcorn'ft  to  pride  thyfeif  on  buying  cheap, 
And  for  fome  triHe  a  huge  pother  keep, 

An  ounce  of  blackguard^  or  a  yard  of  cloth. 

Nor  doft  thou  (whichyfcwr  people  may  deem  ftrange) 
Send  Pages  with  a  halfpenny  for  change ; 
Nor  doft  thou  (which  would  he  a  crying  fin) 
Cheat  of  his  dues  the  Parfon  of  PE-KIN. 

Thy  mind  was  form'd  upon  an  ample  fcale : 
Each  thought  is  generofity — a  whale  : 

Not  a  poor  fprat  to  dunghills  to  be  hurl'd— 
Thy  foul  a  dome  illnm'd  by  GRANDEUR'S  rays, 
That  o'er  thy  mighty  empire  cafts  a  blaze ; 

A  beacon  to  inform  a  world. 

But,  ah!  KIBN-LONG,  thou  never  wilt  be  rich, 
If  generofity  thy  heart  bewitch. 

What  fays  ECONOMY  ?  "  Let  fubje<5b  groan —  • 
'*  Let  MISERY'S  howl  be  mufic  to  thine  ear— 
"  Yes,  let  the  widow's  and  the  orphan's  tear 

44  Fall  printlefs  on  thy  heart  as  on  a  ftone." 

The  fouls  of  many  Kings  are  vulgar  entries, 

With  not  a  rumlight  'midft  the  difmal  winding ; 

A  long,  dark,  dangerous,  dreary  way,  paft  finding— 

HYPOCRISY  and  MEANNESS  the  two  (entries. 

*  A  coarfc  fnutf,  emphatically  Co  called. 

M  m  3  AMBITION, 


388  ODES    TO    KIEN    LONG. 

AMBITION,  that  on  riches  cafts  its  eyes, 
Mounts  on  the  tempeft  of  a  PzoTLE's 
O  Emp'ror,  GENEROSITY'S  a  fool- 
She  wants  advice  fromfaving  WISDOM'S  fchool. 

Look  at  a  fmiling  field  of  grafs  r 
Nothing  can  eat  it  out,  nor  horfe  nor  afs, 
Provided  that  you  put,  to  fpare  the  feaft, 
A  padlock  on  the  mouth  of  ev'ry  beaft. 
Thus,  muzzle  but  thy  palace  now  and  then, 
Thou  wilt  be  wealthy  among  fcepter'd  men. 

Invite  not  a  whole  MILLION  *  to  thine  hunt: 
Thy  purfe  with  fuch  a  heavy  weight  would  grunt. 

In  England,  when  a  King  a  deer  unharbours, 
The  fport  a  half  a  dozen  butchers  fhare ; 
Of  fmutty  chimney -fweeps  perchatmce  a  pair; 

With  probably  a  brace  or  two  of  barbers. 

What  though  'tis  not  quite  royal — dill  we  boaft 
Of  gaining  glorious  fun  with  little  coft. 
The  pocket  is  a  very  ferious  matter : 
Small  beer  allayeth  thirft— -nay,  fimple  water* 

The  fplendor  of  a  chace,  or  feaft,  or  ball, 
Though  ftrong,  or  palling,  momentary  rays— 

Tfce  luftre  of  a  little  hpur— that's  ail ; 
While  guineas  with  eternal  fplendor  blaze. 

*  This  is  the  number  of  the  Emperor's  attendants,  in.  genera!,  at 
hunt. 


ODE 


ODES    TO    KI1K    IONC. 


ODE      IV. 

Peter  breakrth  out  into  tjkaqre  rhapffxty,  fo  unlike  PeDrr*  who  chrif- 
trncth  hinsfelf  (he  PoU  of  the  f^fJf—Hf  advifeth  tke  Emperuj  to 
aliens  »ru«r  fr»ftiftd  by  King*  I — Is  k,  orb  it ««/,  one  wnuou*i 
vein  of  happy  irwoy  * 

f**  IVE  nothing  from  thy  privy  pilrfc  away, 
^  I  fay- 

Nay,  fhould  thy  coffers  and  thy  bag*  rum  oVr, 
Neglefi  or  jxnjio*  MERIT  on  the  P*r. 

Give  not  to  Hofpicals-— thy  Nine's  tvottgk  / 
To  death-face  FA  MI  N  E,  not  a  pinch  of  fnuff : 
On  WEALTH  thy  quarry,  keep  a  falcon-view, 
And  from  thy  vtxy  children  (leal  their  due. 

Shouldft  thou,  in  hunts,  be  tumbled  from  thy  horfe, 
Unlucky,  'midft  fome  river's  rapid  courfc  ; 
Though  (harp  between  thyfclf  and  Dtath  the  ftrifc, 
Give  not  the  Page  ayt,.,i  that  laves  thy  life. 

Should  LOVE  allure  thee  to  fome  FAIR-ONE'S  arms, 
Who  yields  thee  all  the  luxury  of  charms, 

And  deluges  thy  panting  heart  with  blifles  ; 
Take  not  a  fixpatct  from  thy  groaning  cheft, 
To  buy  a  ribbon  for  the  fragrant  breaft 

That  fweli'u1  with  all  its  ardour  to  thy  kiflcs. 

Buy  not  a  garland  for  her  flowing  hair; 
Buy  not  of  mittens,  or  of  gloves,  a  pair, 

To  fhield  her  hands  from  froft,  or  SUMMER'S  ray; 
But  not  a  Donnet  tx>  defewJ  her  face, 
Nor  'kerchief  to  protect  each  laovvy  grace, 

And  deck  her.  on  feme  rural  holiday  : 
But  fuffer  her  in  homely  geer  to  />/»*, 
In  fimple  elegance  where  other i  Jkine, 

Thou 


39°  ODES    TO    KIEN    LONG* 

Thou  probably  mayft  anfwer,  with  a  groan, 
"  What !  give  a  vile  contagion  to  the  throne  I 
"  Perdition  catch  the  wealth,  in  heaps  that  lies, 
"  Whilft  trodden  MERIT  lifts  heraiking  eyes  ! 

"  That  calf,  Ihall  garim  OSTENTATION  grin, 
"  Deck'd  by  the  fweat  of  LABOUR'S  fnn-burnt  {kin, 
46  Poor  cart-horfe,  envy'd  e'en  his  very  oats  ? 
"  Heav'ns  !  fliall  this  Mummer  OSTENTATION  cry, 
-  "  Roaft  in  the  fun,  thou  MOB,  in  aflies  lie; 

"  Mine  be  the  guineas,  SLAVE,  and  thine  the  groats. 

*'  Mine  be  the  luxury  of  wine  and  oil ; 

"  Thine,  that  I  condefcend 'to  drink  thy  toil." 

Ah  !  fay'ft  thou  thus  ? — dares  honour  this  high  pitch  ? 

Then,  noble  EMP'ROR,  thou  wilt  ne'er  bench. 

Gold  mould  not  gather  in  afufy'e&s  cheft — 
The  crew  grows  mutinous — it  cannot  reft ; 

It  talketh  of  equality,  indeed  ! 
No,  let  the  Monarch's  bags  and  coffers  hold 
The  flatt'ring,  mighty,  nay,  ^//-mighty  gold  ; 

On  this  fhall  brawny  POW'R  his  finews  feed  j 
JOVE'S  eagle  near  the  throne,  with  eye  of  fire, 
The  vengeance- bearer  of  the  royal  ire ! 
Enrich  the  realm,  SUBORDINATION  dies — 
Wealth  gives  a  wing  that  dajlies  at  thej&ies. 

Blufh  not,  though  up  to  neck,  to  nofe  in  gold, 
To  let  thy  fav'rite  Mandarine  be  told, 

"  The  Emp'ror  pants  for  money — hunt  about :" 
And  fliould  thy  Minifter,,  with  impious  breath, 
Say,  "  SIR  E,  we've  fqueez'd  the  people  nigh  to  death. "-- 

Off  with  the  villain's  head,  or  kick  him  out. 

'Tis  pleafant  to  look  down  upon  the  hovel, 
And  count  the  royal  treafure  with  ajfiovel ! 
Pleafant  to  mark  the  whites  of  wilhing  eyes, 
And  hear  of  POVERTY  the  fruitlefs  fighs ! 
Grand,  on  their  knees  to  fee  the  million  cow'r  ! 
Pale,  fiarv'd  fubmiffion  is  \hefeajt  of  POW'R. 

Pr'ythe*, 


ODES   TO    K1EN    LONG.  39! 

Pr'ythee,  to  Europe  come,  KIEN  LONG,  with  (peed: 
We'll  give  thee  much  inftruftiou  on  thU  head ; 
Nay,  feme  examples  alfo  (hall  be  brought, 
Which  beats  a  cold  dry  precept  all  to  nought. 

PRECEPT'S  a  pigmy,  he&ick,  weak,  and  flight; 
EXAMPLE  is  a  giant  in  his  might; 
Then,  pr*ythee,  to  our  EUR  OPE  hafte  to  flare; 
Lo,  EUROPE  (hall  produce  thee/ia//  a  Pair  I 
A  PAIR  !  to  whom  lean  AV'RICE  is  a  fool, 
And  means  to  take  a  leflbn  from  their  fchool. 


ODE      V. 

Peter  gireth  an  acoonnt  of  the  expedition  of  Lord  Macartney,  and,  con 
trary  to  the  tenor  of  the  preceding  Ok,  abfolutcly  recomroendeth  Cc- 
ncrofity  to  the  Emperor. 

TZ'IEN  LONG,   our  GREAT  GREAT  PEOPLE,   and 

•*•*"  'SquiRE  PITT, 

Fam'd  through  the  univerfe  for/aving  wit, 

Have  heard  uncommon  tales  about  thy  wealth  ; 
And  now  a  veflel  have  they  fitted  out, 
Making  for  goo<i  KIEN  LONG  a  monftrous  rout, 

To  trade,  and  beg,  and  alk  about  his  health. 

This,  to  my  fimple  and  unconnylng  mind, 
Seems  economical,  and  very  kind  ! 
And  now,  great  EMPEROR  of  China,  fay, 
What  handlome  things  haft  thou  to  give  away  ? 

Accept  a  proverb  out  of  WISDOM'S  fchool  — 
'  Barbers  firft  lear 


learn  to  (have, 

PITT  fhav'd  our  faces  firft,  and  made  us  grin- 
Next  the  poor  French  —  and  now  the  hopeful  LAD, 
Ambitious  of  the  honour,  fcemeth  mad 
To  try  this  razor's  edge  upon  thy  chin. 

THEI 


39*  ODES    TO    KIEN    LONG/ 

THEE  as  a  generous  Prince  we  all  regard  ; 

For  ev'ry  prcfent,  lo  !  returning  double  : 
'Tis  therefore  thought  that  thou  wilt  well  reward 

and  LORD  MACARTNEY  for  their  trouble. 


And  now  to  GEORGE  and  CHARLOTTE  what  the  pre^ 

fents  ? 

No  humming-birds,  we  beg  —  no  owls,  no  pheafants  ; 
Such  gifts  will  put  the  palace  in  a  fweat  — 
For  God's  fake  fend  us  nothing  that  can  eat. 

**  What  gifts,  I  wonder,  will  thy  KING  and  QUEEN 
"  Send  to  KIEN  LONG?    thou  cry'ft.  —  Not  much,   I 
"  ween  ; 

They  can't  afford  it  j  they  are  very  poor  — 
Aad  though  they  fhine  in  fo  fublime  a  ftation, 
They  are  the  pooreft  people  in  the  nation, 

So  u*ide  of  Charity  their  neat  *  trap-door  !  !  !  . 

Our  King  may  fend  a  dozen  cocks  and  hens  ; 

Perhaps  a  pig  or  two,  of  his  own  breeding  ; 
Perhaps  a  pair  of  turkeys  from  his  pens  ; 

Perhaps  a  duck,  of  his  own  feeding— 

Or  pojjibly  a  half  a  dozen  geefe, 

Worth  probably  a  half  a  crown  a-piece  ; 

And  that  he  probably  may  deem  enough,— 
Her  gracious  MAJESTY  may  bondefcend 
Her  precious  compliments  to  fend, 

Tack'd  to  a  pound  or  two  of  fnuff: 

The  hiflory  of  Strelitz  too,  perhaps  ; 
A  place  that  cuts  a  figure  in  the  maps. 

Moft  mighty  EMP'ROR,  be  not  thou  afraid 
That  we  fliall  generofity  upbraid  : 

*  Reader,  this  expreflion  is  uncommonly  beautiful.     The  mojlfecrct 
charities  arc  generally  thclargcfl,  and  molt  acceptable  to  God. 

Send 


ODES   TO    KIEV    LONft.  393 

Send  heaps  of  things — poh  !  never  heed  the  meafu 
If  Palaces  won't  hold  the  precious  things, 
Behold,  the  beft  of  Queens  and  eke  of  Kings 

Will  build  them  barns  to  hold  the  treafure. 

I  know  thy  delicacy's  fuch, 

Thou  fancyeft  thou  canft  fend  too  much  : 

But  as  I  know  the  Great-ones  of  our  ifle, 

The  very  thought  indeed  would  make  them  fmile. 

/ 

Lord  !  couldft  thou  fend  the  Chinefe  Empire  o'er, 

So  hungry,  we  fhould  gape  for  more  : 

Yes,  couldft  thou  pack  the  Chinefe  Empire  up, 

We'd  make  no  more  on't  than  a  China  cup ; 

Ev'n  then  My  LADY  SCHWELLBNBBRG  would  bawl, 

"  Gotc  dem  dc  Jkabby  fella— vat,  dn  all?" 

Whales  very  rarely  make  a  hearty  meal— 
Thus  Princes  an  eternal  hunger  feel ; 
Moreover,  fond  of  good  things  gratis  ; 
Whofe  ftomach's  motto  mould  be,  nunauam /atis. 

Then  load  away  with  rarities  the  (hip, 

And  let  us  cry,  "  She  made  a  handjome  trip" — 

But  mind,  no  humming-birds,  apes,  owls,  mackaws; 

The  dev'l  take  prefents  that  can  wag  their  jaw. 


ODE. 

SIMPLICITY,  I  dote  upon  thy  tongue; 

°  And  the,  O  white-rob 'd TRUTH,  I've rev'renc'd  long ; 

I'm  fond  too  of  that  flafiiy  varlet  WIT, 
Who  fltims  earth,  fea,  heav'n,  hell,  exigence  o'er, 
To  put  the  merry  table  in  a  roar, 

And  (hake  the  (ides  with  laugh-convulfing  fit. 

O  yes  !  in  fweet  SIMPLICITY  I  glory — 
To  her  we  owe  a  charming  little  fiory. 

WILLIAM 


(    39*    ) 


WILLIAM  PENN,  NATHAN, 

AND    THE 

BAIL  IFF. 

A    TALE. 

AS  well  as  I  can  recollect, 
It  is  a  ftory  of  fam'd  WILLIAM  PENN, 
By  bailiffs  oft  befet,  without  effect, 

Like  numbers  of  our  Lords  and  Gentlemen— 

WILLIAM  had  got  a  private  hole  to  fpy 

The  folks  who  came  with  writs,  or  "  How  d'ye  do  ? " 
Pofleffine,  too,  a  penetrating  eye, 

Friends  from  his  foes  the  Quaker  quickly  knew. 

A  bailiff  in  difguife  one  day, 

Though  not  difguis'd  to  our  friend  WILL, 
Came,  to  WILL'S  moulder  compliments  to  pay, 

Conceai'd,  the  catchpole  thought,  with  wond'rous  (kill. 

Boldly  he  knock'd  at  WILLIAM'S  door, 

Dreft  like  a  gentleman  from  top  to  toe, 
Expecting  quick  admittance,  to  be  fure — 
But  no ! 

WILL'S  fervant  NATHAN,  with  a  ftrait-hair'd  head, 
Unto  the  window  gravely  ftalk'd,  not  ran — 

"  Mailer  at  home  ?"  the  Bailiff  fweetly  faid — 

"  Thou  canft  not  fpeak  to  him,"  reply 'd  the  Man. 

"  What,"  quoth  the  Bailiff,  "  won't  he  fee  me  then  ?" 
'*  Nay,  fnuffled  NATHAN,  "  let  it  not  thus  (hike  thee ; 

«  Know,  verily,  that  WILLIAM  PENN 

"  Hathfeen  thee,  but  he  doth  not  like  thee." 

TO 


395 


TO     A    FLY, 
TAKEN  OUT  OF  A  BOWL  OF  PUNCH. 


A  H  !  poor  intoxicated  little  knave, 
•**•  Now  fenfelefs,  floating  on  the  fragrant  wave  ; 

Why  not  content  the  cakes  alone  to  munch  ? 
Dearly  thou  pay'ft  for  buzzing  round  the  bowl  ; 
Loft  to  the  world,  thou  bufy  fweet-lipp'd  foul  — 

Thus  Death,  a$  well  as  Pleafure,  dwelh  with  Punch. 

Now  let  me  take  thee  out,  and  moralize.— 
Thus  'tis  with  mortals,  as  it  is  with  die  , 

Forever  hankering  after  PLEA  SERB'S  cup: 
Though  FATE,  with  all  his  legions,  be  at  hand, 
The  beafts,  the  draught  of  C  iiftand, 

But  in  goes  every  nofe—  they  muft^  will  fup. 

Mad  are  the  PASSIONS,  as  a  colt  untam'd  f 

When  PRUDENCE  mounts  their  backs  to  ride  them 
mild, 

They  fling,  they  faort,  they  foam,  they  rife  inflam'd, 
Infilling  on  their  own  fole  will  fo  wild. 

Gad/bud  !  my  buzzing  friend,  thou  art  not  dead  ; 
The  Fates,  fo  kind,  have  not  yet  fnipp'd  thy  thread  ; 
By  heav'ns,  thou  mov'ft  a  leg,  and  now  its  brother, 
And  kicking,  lo  !  again  thou  mov'ft  another  ! 

And  now  thy  little  drunken  eyesunclofe; 
And  now  thou  feeleft  for  thy  little  nofe, 

And,  finding  it,  thou  rubbeft  thy  two  hands; 
Much  as  to  fay,  "  I'm  plad  I'm  here  again." 
.And  well  mayft  thou  rejoice  —  'tis  very  plain, 

That  near  wert  thou  to  DEATH'S  unfocial  lands. 
VOL.  II.  Nn  And 


59$  TO    A    FLY. 

And  now  thou  rolleft  on  thy  back  aboiit, 
Happy  to  find  thyfelf  alive,  no  doubt- 
Now  turned — on  the  table  making  rings  ; 
Now  crawling,  forming  a  wet  track, 
Now  ftiaking  the  rich  liquor  from  thy  back, 
Now  flutt'ring  nectar  from  thy  iilken  wings : 

Nowflanding  on  thy  head,  thy  ftrength  to  find, 
And  poking  out  thy  fmall,  long  legs  behind  ; 
And  now  thy  pinions  doft  thou  brifldy  ply  ; 
Preparing  now  to  leave  me — farewell,  Fly  ! 

Go,  join  thy  brothers  on  yon  funny  board, 
And  rapture  to  thy  family  afford — 

There  wilt  thou  meet  a  miftrefs,  or  a  wife, 
That  faw  thee,  drunk,  drop  fenfelefs  in  the  ftream ; 
Who  gave,  perhaps,  the  wide-refounding  fcream, 

And  now  fits  groaning  for  thy  precious  life. 
Yes,  go  and  carry  comfort  to  thy  friends, 
And  wifely  tell  them  thy  imprudence  ends. 

Let  buns  and  fugar  for  the  future  charm ; 

Thefe  will  delight,  And  feed,  and*  work  no  harm— 

Whilft  PUNCH,  the  grinning  merry  imp  of  fin, 
Invites  th'  unwary  wand'rer  to  a  kifs, 
Smiles  in  his  face,  as  though  he  meant  him  blifs, 

Then,  like  an  alligator,  drags  him  in. 


ELEGY 


(    597    ) 
E  L  K  G  Y 

TO     THE 

FLEAS   OF  TENERIFFE. 

en  in  the  Year  1768,  at  Santa  Cruz,  in  company  with  a  Son  of 
the  late  Admiral  Bofcawcn,  at  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  M acker:  ick,  » 
Merchant  of  that  place. 

hopping  natives  of  a  hard,  hard  bed, 
Whofe  bones,  perchaitncc,  may  ache  as  well  as  our**, 
O  let  us  reft  in  peace  the  weary  head, 

This  night — the  firft  we  ventur'd  to  your  bow  Vs. 

Thick  as  a  flock  of  ftarlings  on  our  fkins, 
Ye  turn  at  once  to  brown,  the  lily's  white ; 

Ye  ftab  us  alfo,  like  fo  many  pius — 

SLEEP  fwears  he  can't  come  near  us  whiift  ye  bite. 

In  vain  we  preach — in  vain  the  candle's  ray 
Broad  flames  on  the  imps,  for  blood  that  itch-» 

In  vain  we  brufh  the  bufy  holts  away ; 

Fearlefs,  on  other  parts  their  thouiands  pitch. 

And  now  I  hear  a  hungry  varlet  cry, 

"  Eat  hearty,  fleas—they're  fome  outlandifti  men — 
*  Fat  ftuff — no  Spaniards,  all  fo  lean  and  dry— 

44  Such  charming  ven'fon  ne'er  may  come  agen." 

How  (hall  we  meet  the  morn  ?  With  ftiameful  eyes ! 

With  nibbled  hands,  and  eke  with  nibbled  faces, 
Juft  like  two  turkey -eggs,  we  fpeckled  rife, 

Scorn 'd  by  the  LOVES,  andmock'd  by  all  the  GRACES. 

What  will  theftately  Nymph,  JOANNA,*  fay? 

How  will  the  beauteous  CATHERINA*  (tare  ! 
'*  Away,  ye  nafty  Britons — foh  !  away," 

In  founds  of  horror  will  exclaim  the  Fair. 

*  Young  Spanifh  Ladies  of  the  fir  A  faftuon. 

.\  n  a  What 


398        TO  THE  FLEAS  OF  TENERIfFE. 

What  though  we  tell  them  'twas  MACKERRICK'S*  bed? 

What  though  we  fvvear  'twere  all  MACKERRICK'S  fleas  ? 
Diigufted  will  the  Virgins  turn  the  head  ; 

No  more  we  kifs  their  fingers  on  our  knees. 

No  more  our  groaning  verfes  greet  their  hand  j 
No  more  they  liften  to  our  panting  profe ; 

No  more  beneath  their  window  fliall  we  ftand, 
And  ferenade  their  beauties  to  repofe. 

The  Converfationi-^  meet  their  end ; 

The  love-infpir'd  Fandango  warms  no  more; 
The  laugh,  the  nod,  the  whifper,  will  offend  ; 

The  leer,  the  fquint,  the  fqueezes,  all  be  o'er. 

But,  O  ye  ruthlefs-hofts,  an  Arab  train, 
Ye  daring  light-troops  of  that  roving  race, 

Know  ye  the  ftrangers  whom  with  blood  ye  ftain  ? 
Know  ye  the  voyagers  ye  thus  difgrace  ? 

One  is  aDocxoR,  of  redoubted  (kill, 

A  Briton  born,  that  dauntlefs  deals  in  death  j 

Who  to  die  Weflern  IND  proceeds  to  kill, 
And,  probably,  of  thoufands  flop  the  breath  : 

A  BAKD,  whofe  wing  of  thought,  and  verfe  of  fire, 
Shall  bid  with  wonder  all  PARNASSUS  Hart; 

A  BARD,  whofe  converfeMoNARCHs  fliall  admire^ 
And,  happy,  learn  his  lofty  Odes  by  heart'4 

The  other,  lo  !  a  Pupil  rare  of  MARS, 

A  youth  who  kindles  with  a  FATHER'S  flame; 

Bos  c  A  WEN  calPd,  who  fought  a  kingdom's  wars, 
And  gave  to  Immortality  a  name. 

Lo !  fuch  are  tve,  freebooters,  whom  ye  bite  ! 

Such  is  our  Britifh  Quality,  O  Fleas  ! — 
Then  fpare  our  tender  fkins  this  one,  one  night — 

To-morrow  eat  MACKERRICK,  if  ye  pleafe. 

#  He  is  a  principal  man  in  the  ifland,  and  much  refpeded. 

•f-  At  his  Excellency's  the  Governor. 

J  Part  of  this  prophecy  has  been  amply  verified. 

TJiC 


(    399    ) 


Tie  prefent  unnatural  and  fatal  enmity  towards  thofe  left 
creatures  in  the  TIW///,  KINGS  and  QUEENS,  put 
ting  our  moff  A v GUST  COUPLE  more  on  their  guard 
againft  evil  machinations,  ly  f circling  ]\fr.  TOWNS- 
IND,  Mr.  M  ACM  ANUS,  aiut  Mr.  JEALOUS,  the  moft 
accomplijfietl  Thief'takfrt  upon  earth,  to  watch  over 
fl.cm  as  a  Garde  de  corps ;  Juch  an  important  circum- 
ftnnce,  fo  illuminative  cf  the  hijtorual  page,  coulJ  not 
cfcape  the  eagle  eye  of  the  LYRIC  BAKP,  7i//9,  in  CM- 
Sequence,  has  aJjrcjfiJ  an  Ode  of  praife  and 
ti«n  to  the  three  flforefaid  Genllcinciu 


ODE 


TO 


MESSRS  TOWNSEND,  MACMANUS,  AWD  JEALOt'S, 

TMB   THIEF-TAKERS,    ANU   ATTINDANTS   OS   VAJFITY. 


friends  to  JUSTICE  GIBBET,  Ji-fTict  JAIL, 
And  JUSTICE  CART'S  flow-moving  tail, 
Accept  the  BARD'S  fincerecongratukn 
Ye  glorious  imps,  of  thief  fupprefling  fpirit, 
Ele&ed,  for  your  mofr  heroic  mtrit, 
The  Guardians  of  the  Rulers  of  the  Nation. 

When  BLOOD,  that  enterprifing  chap, 
Attempted  on/yon  the  cr<r.vn  a  rape, 

Pate  HORROR  rais'd  her  hands,  and  roll'd  herc-v- 
But  (hould  fome  knave,  with  fingers  mod  unclean, 
Attempt  to  fteal  away  our  Ki N  c;  and  Qy  K K N, 

How  would  the  Empire  in  difortler  rife ! 

N  n 3  Juft 


4OO  ODE    TO    MESSRS.    TOWNSEND, 

Juft  like  the  nations  of  the  honey 'd  hive, 

Who,  if  they  lofe  their  So v 'REIGN,  never  thrive. 

At  midnight,  lo  !  fome  knave  might  fteal  fo  fry, 
In  filence,  on  the  royal  fleepy  eye, 

And,  giving  to  his  facrilege  a  loofe, 
Bear  off  the  mighty  Monarch  on  his  back, 
Juft  as  fly  Reynard,  in  his  night  attack, 

Bears  from" the  farmer's  yard  a  gentle  goofe. 

Ye  glorious  thief -takers,  O  watch  the  Pair ; 
We  cannot  fuch  a  precious  couple  fpare — 

O,  cat-like,  guard  the  door  againft  TOM  PAINE  : 
TOM  PAiNE's.an  artful  and  rebellious  dog, 
Swears  that  a  facred  throne  is  but  a  log, 

And  MONARCHS  tooexpenfive  to  maintain. 

I  know  their  Majefties  are  in  a  fright  ; 
I  know  they  very  badly  deep  at  night : 

To M  PA  i N E'S  indeed  a  moil  terrific  word  j 
A  name  of  fear,  that  founds  in  ev'ry  wind  \ 
A  goblin  damn'd,  that  haunts  the  royal  mind  j 

Of  DAMOCLES,  the  hair-fufpended  fword. 

Why  mould  our  glorious  Sov'reigns  be  unbleft  ? 
Why  by  a  paltry  fubjea  be  diftreft  ? 

Is  there  no  poifon  for  TOM  PAINE  ? — alas ! 
Is  there  no  halter  for  this  knave  of  knaves  ? 
Audacious  fellow  |  lo,  the  Crown  he  braves, 

And  calls  the  Kingdom  a  poor  burden'd  afs, 

For  this  poor  burden'd  aj$,  he  fwears  he  feels, 
And  bids  him  lift,  a  regicide,  his  heels. 

What  a  bright  thoughtin  GEORGE  and  CHARLOTTE, 
Who,  to  efcape  each  wicked  varlet, 

And  difappoint  TOM  PA  IN  E'S  difloyal  crew, 
Fix'd  on  the  brave  M  ACM  ANUS,  TOWN  SEND,  JEALOUS, 
Delightful  company,  delicious  fellows, 
-     To  point  out,  ev'ry  minute, -who  is  who  / 

T© 


MACMANVS    AND   JEALOUS.  1OI 

To  huftle  from  before  their  noble  Graces, 
Rafcals  with  ill-looking  defigninz  faces, 

Where  troalon,  murder,  and  (edition,  dwell  ; 
To  give  the  life  of  ev'ry  Newgate  wretch  ; 
To  fay  who  next  the  fatal  cord  (hall  ft  retch — 

The  fweet  hiftoriamof  the  penfive  cell. 

O  with  what  joy  felonious  acls  ye  view  ! 

How  pleas'd  a  thief  or  highwayman  to  hunt  * 
BIcft  as  CORNWALLIS,  Tippoo  to  ptirfuc ; 

Bleftasold  PUKS'RAM  BHOW,  and  HARRY  PUNT  f 

How  itch  your  fingers  to  entrap  a  thief  ' 

How  nimbly  you  purfue  him  ! — with  what  foul 

k  him  from  haunt  to  haunt,  to  mercy  t 
And  drag  at  laft  the  felon  from  his  hole  I 

Thus  when  a  CHAMBERMAID  a  FLEA  efpies, 
How  beats  her  heart !   what  lightnings  fill  i.t  r  eyes  f 
To  feizehim,  lo  !  her  twinkling  fingers  fnreaU, 
And  flop  his  travels  through  the  realm  of  bed. 

He  hops — theea^er  dam(el  marks  the  jump; 
'.uddeu  falls  in  thunder  on  his  rump— 
She  mifleb — oft'  hops  BLOODSUCKER  again  : 

ymph  with  wild  alacrity  purfues ; 
Now  loffs  fight  of  him,  and  now  gets  views, 

Whilft  all  her  trembling  nerves  with  ardour  (train. 

Now  fairly  tir'd,  with  melancholy  face, 
Poor  fighing  SUSAN  quits  th*  important  chace: — 
Once  more  refolv'd,  flie  brightens  up  her  wits, 
And,  furious,  to  her  lovely  fingers  fpits — 
Thrice  happy  thought !  yet,  not  to  flatter,. 
JTis  not  the  clcanlieft  trick  in  nature. 

Now  in  the  blanket  deep  flie  fees  him  hide, 

,  winking,  fancieth  SUSAN  cannot  fee; 
Now  SUSAH  drags  him  forth,  with  viclor  pride, 
The  culprit  cruflieth  j  and  thus  falls  the  FLEA  ! 

What 


402  ODE    TO    MESSRS.    TOWNSEND1, 

What  pity  'tis  for  this  important  nation, 
The  Princes  all  have  had  their  education  ! 

What  pounds  on  Gottingen  were  thrown  away  ! 
How  had  he  moraliz'd  their  youngling  hearts> 
How  had  ye  giv'n  an  infight  of  the  Arts, 

So  neceflary,  Sirsy  for  fov'reign  fway  ! 

CUNNING'S  a  pretty  monitor  for  Kings  ; 
She  teacheth  mod  extraordinary  things  ; 

She  keepeth  fubjeets  in  their  proper  fphere; 
She  brings  that  fool,  the  Million,  tame  to  hand, 
To  dance,  to  kneel,  to  proftrate  at  command  — 

A  Kingdom  is  a  Monarch's  dancing  bear. 
By  means  of  this  fame  humble  capering  beaft, 
What  royal  fhowmen  fill  their  fobs,  and  feaft  ! 


O  tell  the  world's  great  Matters,  not  to 
A  fubject's  murmur  is  beneath  their  care  : 
When  well  accuftom'd  to  the  bufy  thong, 
Flogging's  a  matter  of  mere  fport—  a  fong. 

All  know  the  tale  of  BETTY  and  the  Eel  — 
"  You  cruel  b  —  h  (a  man  was  heard  to  fay) 
u  To  ferve  poor  creatures  in  that  horrid  way  !'r 

**  Lord,  Sir,  quoth  BETTY,  turning  on  her  heel, 
"  The  eels  are  us*d  to  it  !"  —  fo  faying, 

And  humming  (-a  irar  continued  flaying.. 

O  how  I  envy  you  each  happy  name  ! 
TIME  fhallnoteat  the  mountain  of  your  fame;. 
For  thus  myfelf  your  Epitaph  fhall  write, 
And  dare  the  vile  old  ft  one  -eater  to  bite^ 

THE    EPITAPH, 

"  Here  lie  three  crimps  of  death,  knock'd  down  by  FATE  ; 

"  Of  JUSTICE  the  ftaunch  blood  -hounds  too,  fo  keen; 
««  Who  choak'd  the  little  piund'rers  of  the  State, 

M  And,  glorious^  fav'd  a  mighty  King  and  Queen." 

4  Behold, 


MACMANUS    AND    JEALOUS.  403 


Behold,  the  Guards,  fo  difappointed,  mourn  ! 
With  jealoufy  their  glorious  bufoms  burn, 

To  find  by  you^  dread  Sirs,  ufurp'd  their  phew  : 
"  What  !  not  die  regiments  of  Death  be  trufted  ! 
"  By  Thief-takers,  5  Jefu  !  to  be  ouftcd  ! 

44  Thief-catchers  Gardes  Ac  corps  unto  their  Graces  !" 
Thus,  thus  exclaim  the  angry  men  in  red, 
Who,  with  their  fwords  and  guns,  may  go  to  bed. 

Gods  !  how  J  envy  our  great  folk  their  joys  ! 

Your  talcs  of  houfe  -breakers,  thofe  nightly  curfes; 
Of  heroes  of  the  heath,  St.  Giles's  boys  ; 

Hift'ries  of  pocket-handkerchiefs  and  purfes  \ 

Oh,  for  minds-royal,  what  delightful  ftxxi  ! 

Stories  furpaffing  thofe  of  ROBIN  HOOD. 

Sweet  are  of  flight-hiini  CAkki*GTON  rhr  tales  ; 

Of  chanceful  MAJOR  SEMPLE,  charming  too! 
Delicious  ftorv  through  each  HULK  prevails, 

Full  of  inftru&on,  pleafent,  fage,  and  new. 

Hence  the  pure  dreams  of  thieving  fcience  flow, 
Which  through  your  mouths  to  gaping  Monarch's  go; 
.And  frequently  the  royal  gaze,  ye  greet 
With  curious  inftrume'nts,  for  robbing  meet. 

WTw  would  not  wifh  to  fee  the  gliding  crook, 
With  whom  the  purfes  oft  in  iilence  dray  ? 

Who  would  not  on  the  tools  with  rapture  look, 
That  from  poft-chaifes  fnapthe  trunks  away  ? 


would  not  ope  felfe  dice,  ingenious  bones  ? 
A  curious  fpecularion,  worthy  thrones. 

Laugh  the  loud  world,  and  let  it  laugh  again  r 

The  GREAT  of  WINDSOR  fliall  fuch  mirth  difdain. 

lm 


404  ODE    TO    C.ELfA. 

In  days  of  yore,  dull  days,  infipid  things, 
Kings  trufted  only  to  a  PEOPLE'S  love  ; 
But  modern  times  in  politics  improve, 

And  Bow-ftreet  Runners  are  the  Shields  of  Kings. 


ODE      TO      CJELIA. 

muft  own  that  thou  art  pafling  fair; 
•       Love  in  tliy  fmiles,  and  Juno  in  thy  air  : 

Yet,  C^ELIA,  if  with  Gods  I  may  be  free, 
I  think  that  Jove  commits  a  fort  of  fin, 
By  Gripping  all  the  Graces  to  the  fkin, 

Merely  to  make  a  nonpareille  of  thee. 


,  thou  knoweft  too  that  thou  artpleafing; 
Moil  fpider-like,  the  hearts  of  mortals  feizing  ; 

And  what  too  maketh  me  confounded  four, 
Thou  knoweft  what  I  wifli  to  hide, 
Which  rather  mortifies  my  pride, 

That  I'm  a  fimple  fly,  and  in  thy  pow'r. 

When  NATURE  fent  thee  blooming  from  above, 
She  meant  thee  to  fupport  the  caufe  of  LOVE— 

To  keep  alive  a  beautiful  creation  : 
Thy  graces  hoarded,  girl,  thou  muft  be  told, 
Are  really  like  the  fordid  MISER'S  gold, 

Worthlefs,  for  want  of  circulation. 

Behold  !  a  guinea,  by  a  proper  ufe, 
Another  pretty  guinea  will  produce  ; 

And  thus,  O  peerlefs  girl,  thy  beauty 
May  bring  thee  cent,  per  cent,  within  the  year  ; 
That  is,  another  beauty  may  appear, 

If  properly  it  minds  its  duty. 


ODE    TO    A    PRETTY    MILLINBft.  405 

Of  wonder,  lo  !  thou  putted  on  the  dare — 
It  feems  a  dark  and  intricate  affair ; 

Thou  wanted  a  good,  able,  found  advifer : 
Well,  then,  my  dear,  at  once  agree, 
As  rta/»^r-counfel  to  take  me ; 

I  know  none  better  qualified,  nor  wifer. 


o 


AN      ODE 

TO 

A     PRETTY     MILLINER. 


NYMPH,  with  bandbox  tripping  on  fo  fweet, 
For  Love's  fake,  day  thofe  pretty  tripping  feet, 
Join'd  to  an  ancle,  form'd  all  hearts  to  deal- 
That  ancle  to  the  neated  leg  united, 
Perhaps — with  which  I  fliould  be  much  delighted, 
For  men  by  little  matters  guefs  a  deal. 

LOVE  lent  thee  lips,  and  lent  that  bloom  divine- 
But,  deared  Damfel,  what  can  make  them  mine? 

Heav'n  reds  upon  thofe  heaving  hills  of  mow ; 
The  fafcinating  dimple  in  thy  chin ; 
In  fliort,  thy  charms  without,  and  charms  within, 

Speak,  are  they  purchafeable  r  aye,  or  no  ? 

Thou  feed  my  foul  wild  daring  from  my  eyes ; 

Let  me  no:  burd  in  ignorance,  fair  Maid — 
Why  fliewedthou,  O  peerlcfs  Xymph,  furprife? 

I  am  no  wolf  to  eat  thee — why  afraid  ? 

O  could  I  gain  by  gold  thofe  heav'nly  charms ! 

Could  gold  once  give  thee  to  my  eager  arms, 

Lo,  into  guineas  would  I  coin  my  heart  j 

Thofc 


406  ODE    TO    A    PRETTY    MILLINER. 

Thofe  would  I  pour  pell-mell  into  thy  lap, 
With  thee  to  wake  to  love,  and  then  to  nap, 
Then  wake  again — again  to  fleep  depart, 

All  happy  circled  in  thy  arms  of  blifs ; 

To  match,  with  riot  wild,  thy  burning  kifs  ; 

A  kifs  ! — a  thoufand  kifles  let  me  add— 
Ten  tlioufand  from  thy  unexhaufted  mint, 
And  then  ten  thoufand  of  /rtyo-wn  imprint — 

Speak,  tempting  Syren,  to  a  fwain  dark  mad. 

Heav'ns  1  o'er  thy  cheek  how  deep  the  crimfon  glows, 
And  fpreads  upon  thy  breaft  of  pureft  fnows  ! 
Why  mute,  my  Angel  ?  thou  difdain'ft  reply  ! 
'Sdeath  !  what  a  cuckoo,  what  a  rogue  am  1 ! 

O  Nymph,  fo  fweet,  forgive  my  wild  defires ; 
That  knave,  thy  bandbox,  wak'd  my  lawlefs  fires, 

Bade  me  fufpeft  what  CHASTITY  reveres: — 
What  will  wipe  out  th' affront,  O  Virgin,  fpeak, 
That  flufh'd  the  rofe  of  virtue  on  thy  cheek, 

Chill'd  thy  young  heart,  and  dafii'd  thine  eye  with  tears  ? 

Go,  guard  that  honour  which  I  deem'd  departed— 
O  yield  thy  beauties  to  fome  fwain  kind-hearted, 
Whofe  foul  congenial  mall  with  thine  unite, 
And  LOVE  allow  no  refpite  from  delight. 


A    MORAL    AFTER- THOUGHT 

ON    THE   ABOVE. 

DEAR  INNOCENCE,  where'er  thou  deign'fl  to  dwell, 
The  PLEASURES  fport  around  thy  fimple  ceil; 
The  fong  of  NATURE  melts  from  grove  to  grove  ; 

Perpetual 


A    M01AI    AFT»1-THO*GHT.  407 

Perpetual  funfliine  fits  upon  thy  vale ; 
CONTENT  and  ruddy  HEALTH  thy  hamlet  hail, 
And  ECHO  waits  upon  the  voice  of  LOVE. 

But  where — but  where  is fcowling  GUILT'S  abode? 
The  fpeftred  heath,  and  DANGER'S  cavern'd  road ; 

The  fhuffiing  monfter  treads  with  panting  breath** 
Thccloud-wrapp'd  ftorm  infulting  roars  around, 
FEAR  pftlls  him  at  the  thunder's  awful  found, 

He  ftarcs  with  horror  on  the  flafh  of  death. 

He  calls  on  DARKNESS  with  affright. 
And  bids  her  pour  her  deepeft  night ; 
Her  clouds  impenetrable  bring, 
And  hide  him  with  her  raven  wing ! 

Are  theft  the  pi&ures  ?  Then  I  need  not  mufef 
Nor  gape,  nor  ponder  which  to  choofe : 
O  INNOCENCE,  this  inftant  I'm  thy  (lave— 
What  but  the  greateft  foci  would  be  a  knave  f 


LYRIC    EPISTLE 

TO 

SIR   WILLIAM  HAMILTON. 

OIR  WILLIAM!  what,  aneweihte! 
^  I  give  thee  joy  of  *GABIA'S  fate — 
More  broken  pans,  more  gods,  more  mugs  ; 
More  fnivel  bottle^  jordans,  and  old  jugs ; 

*  A  newly  difcovcrol  town,  Met  in  misfortune  to  Hcrci|Uncuai| 
Pompcia,  and  Pxftuna. 

Voi.  II,  O  o  More 


LYRIC    EPISTLE 

More  faucepans,  lamps,  and  candlefticks,  and  kettjes ; 
la  fiiort,  all  forts  of  culinary  metals ! 

Leave  not  a  duft-hole  unexplor'd ; 
Something  mall  rife  to  be  ador'd  : 

Search  the  old  bedfteads  and  the  rugs ; 
Such  things  are  facred — if,  by  chance, 
Amidft  the  wood,  thine  eye  mould  glance, 

On  a  nice  pair  of  antique  bugs ; 

Oh,  in  fome  box  the  curious  vermin  place, 
And  let  us  Britons  breed  the  Roman  race ! 

Old  nails,  old  knocker?,  and  old  fhoes, 

Would  much  DAINES  BARRINGTON  amufe; 

Old  mats,  old  dim-clouts,  dripping-pans,,  and  fpits, 

Would  prove  deleftable  to  other  wits ; 

Gods  legs,  and  legs  of  old  joint  ftpols, 

Would  ravifh  all  our  antiquarian  fchools. 

Some  rev'rend  moth,  with  ne'er  a  wing, 

Would  charm  the  *  Knight  of  Soho- Square ; 

A  headlefs  flea  would  be  a  pretty  thing, 
To  make  the  Knight  of  Wonders  ftare. 

A  curl  of  fome  old  Emp'ror's  wig, 

Or  Nero's  fiddle,  'mid  the  flames  of  Rome, 

That  gave  fo  exquifite  a  jig, 

Believe  me,  would  be  well  worth  fending  home. 

Oh,  if  fome  lumping  rarity  of  gold, 
Thy  l',cky  lucky  eyes  by  chance  behold, 

Send  it  to  our  good  K***  and  gracious  Q**** * 
No  matter  what  th'  infcription — if  there's  none, 
'Tisallone! 

Plain  gold  will  pleafe,  as  well  as  ivorled,  I  ween — 
Mucty  will  the  prefent  their  great  eyes  regale, 
Let  it  but  cut  a  figure  in  the  fcak. 

*  Sir  Jofeph  Banks. 

Oh! 


TO    ?IR    «TILLIAM    HAMILTON.  409 

Ob  !  .ecu Id  an  earthquake  (hake  down  WAPPING, 
And  catch  th'  inhabitants  and  goods  all  napping, 
And  then  a  thoufand  years  the  ruin  (hade, 
What  fortunes  would  be  quickly  made  ! 
What  rare  Mufaeums  from  the  rubbifti  rife, 
Wapping  antiquities  to  glad  the  eyes  ! 

How  portraits  of  MOLL  FLANDERS,  HANNAH  SKILL, 
And  Mifs  D'EoN,  thofc  heroines  would  fell! 

CANNING  and  SQUIRE-;. 
How  would  the  dilettanti  of  the  nation 


res 


Devour  the  prints  with  eyes  of  admiration  ! 
And  to  their  merits,  Poets  ftrike  their  ly 

Sign-pofts,  with  Old  Blue  Boars,  and  Heads  of  Nag?, 
Would  from  the  proud  pofleflbr  draw  fuck  brags ! 
Red-Lions,  Crowns  and  Magpies,  George  the  Third— 
The  Cat  and  Gridiron,  our  moft  gracious  Queen, 
With  rapt'rous  adoration  would  be  feen  : 

They  would,  upon  my  word. 
Such  would  tranfport  the  people  of  hereafter, 
Though  fubjefb  now  of  merriment  and  laughter. 


POSTSCRIPT     (fub  RofJ.) 

HIST  ! — what  frefh  ovens  of  Etrurian  ware ; 
What  pretty  jordans  has  my  friend  to  fpare  ? 

What  gods  are  ripe  for  digging  up,  O  Knight  ? 
What  Britons,  knowing  in  the  Pirtu  trade, 
Soon  as  a  grand  difcov'ry  (hall  be  made, 

Are  near  thee,  gudgeon-like,  prepar'd  to  bite  ? 

What  brazen  god,  baptiz'd  with  chamber  lye,* 
For  which  the  future  connoijfeurs  may  figli, 

*  Sir  WILLIAM  keeps  an  old  antiquarian  to  hunt  for  him,  who, 
when  he  ftumblcs  on  a  tolerable  tfatue,  bathes  him  in  urine,  buries 
him,  and,  when  ripe  for  digging  up,  they  proclaim  a  great  difcovery  U» 
be  crude,  and  out  comes  an  antique  for  univerfal  admiration. 

Oo  a  Is 


LY-R1C    EPISTLE. 

Is  going  into  ground,  with  front  fublimc? 
Hereafter  to  be  wodhipp'd  foon  as  feen  j 
A  refurreftion  rare,  array 'd  in  green, 

A  downright  fatire  upon  TIME  ; 
Who  feems,  a  poor  old  fumbling  fool,  to  dote ; 
Taking  two  thoufand  years  to  make  a  coat. 

A  whifper — lock'd  is  the  Mufaeum  door,* 
From  whence  antiques  were  wont  to  ftray : 

\Vhofe  parents  ne'er  fat  eyes  upon  them  more, 
So  much  the  little  creatures  loft  their  way  ? 

Pity  thou  couldft  not  news  of  them  obtain, 

And  fend  the  gods  and  godlings  back  again  ! 

Sir  WILLIAM,  what's  become  of  that  fame  Monk, f 
From  whofe  old  corner-cupboard,  or  old  trunk, 

Thine  hift'ry  iiTued  about  burning  mountains  ? 
For  who  would  toil,  and  fweat,  and  hoe  the  hill, 
To  find,  perhaps,  of  knowledge  a  poor  rill, 

Who  eafily  can  buy  the  fountains  ? 

O  Knight  of  Naples,  is  it  come  to  pafs, 
That  thou  haft  left. the  gods  of  ftone  and  brafs, 

To  wed  a  deity  of  flejh  and  blood  f% 
O  lock  the  temple  with  thy  ftrongeft  key, 
For  fear  thy  deity,  a  comely  She, 

Should  one  day  ramble,  in  a  frolick  mood. 

Tor  fince  the  idols  of  a  youthful  King, 
So  very  volatile  indeed,  take  wing  ; 

*  Some  valuable  antiq-tes,  not  long  fince,  made  their  efcape  from  the 
Royal  Mufaeum>  and  travelled  the  Lord  knows  where. 

f  He  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Vefnvius,  and  furnifhed  the 
Knight  with  all  his  volcanic  obfervations,  which  pafs  on  the  world  as 
his.  own — Nam  quod  emis,  fo/fis  dicer e  jure  tuum. 

\  It  is  really  true — the  Knight  is  married  to  a  beautiful  -virgin,. 
whom  he  ftiles  his  Grecian.  Her  attitudes  are  the  raoft  de/irabh  models 
for  young  attifta, 

If 


ON    A    NEW-MADE    LORD.  4. 

If  ////,  to  wicked  wand'rings  can  incline, 

Lord  !  who  would  anf.ver,  poor  old  Knight,  foi  thint  ? 

Yet  fiould  thy  Grecian  Goddefs  fly  the  fane, 

1  think  that  we  may  catch  her  in  Hedge-Lane.* 


EPIGRAM 

ON  A  STONE  THROWN  AT  A    VERY   GRE4T  jtf.-.'.V, 

BUT    WHICH    HUIID    HIM. 

HP  ALK  no  more  of  the  lucky  efcape  of  the  had, 
A      From  a  flint  fo  unluckily  thrown — 
I  think  very  duf'rent,  with  thoufands  indeed, 
'Twas  alucky  efcape  for  tlie  Stone. 


TO    CHLOE. 

DEAR  CHLOB,  well  I  know  the  fwain, 
Who  gladly  would  embrace  thy  chain ; 
And  who,  alas  !  can  blame  him  ? 
Affeft  not, CHLOE,  afurprifc; 
Look  but  a  moment  on  thefc  eyes, 
Thou'ltaik  me  not  to  name  him. 


ON    A    NEW-MADE    LORD. 

H^HE  carpenters  of  ancient  Greece, 

Although  they  bought  of  wood  a  ftubborn  piece, 
Not  fit  to  make  a  block — yet,  very  odd  ! 

*  The  rcfort  of  the  Cyprian  corps,  an  *veoue  that  opens  into  Cock- 
fpur-ftrcet. 

No 


TO    MY    CANDLE* 

No  lofers  were  the  men  of  chipping  trade, 
Becaufe  of  this  fame  flubborn  fluff  they  made 
A  damn'd  good  god  ! 

Thus,  of  the  Lower  Houfe,  a  ftupkt  wretch, 
Whofe  mind  to  A,  B,  C,  can  fcarcely  ftretch, 
Shall,  by  a  Monarch's  all- creative  word, 
Become  a  very  decent  Lord. 


TO    MY    CANDLE. 

rPHOU  lone  companion  of  the  fpe&red  night, 
•*•    I  wake  amid  thy  friendly-watchful  light, 

To  fteai  a  precious  hour  from  lifelefs  fleep— 
Hark,  the  wild  uproar  of  the  winds  !  and  hark, 
HELL'S  genius  roams  the  regions  of  the  dark, 

And  fweils  the  thund'ring  horrors  of  the  DEEP. 
From  cloud  to  cloud  the  pale  moon  hurrying  flies ; 
Now  blacjken'd,  and  now  flaming  through  her  Ikies. 

But  all  is  filence  here — beneath  thy  beam, 

I  own  I  labour  for  the  voice  of  praife — 
For  who  would  fink  in  dull  OBLIVION'S  ffream? 

Who  would  not  live  in  fongs  of  diftant  days  ? 

Thus  while  I  wond'ririg  paufe  o'er  SHAKSPE  ARE'S  page, 
1  mark,   in  vifions  of  delight,  the  SAGE, 

High  o'er  the  wrecks  of  man,  who  ftands  fublime; 
A  COLUMN  in  the  melancholy  Wafte, 
(Its  cities  humbled,  and  its  glories  paft) 

Majeftic,  'mid  the  folitude  of  TIME. 
Yet  now  to  fadnefs  let  me  yield  the  hour — 
Yes,  let  the  tears  of  pureft  friendfiiip  fliow'r. 

I  view,  alas !  what  ne'er  fhould  die, 
A  form,  that  wakes  my  deepeft  figh  j 
A  form,   that  feels  of  Death  the  leaden  fleep-*- 

i  Defcendino; 


TO    MY    CANDLI. 


nte  weep. 


Ah !  could  the  MUSE'S  fimple  pray'r 

Command  the  envied  trump  of  FAME, 
OBLIVION  fliould  ELIZA  fpare ; 

A  world  ftiould  echo  with  her  name. 

Art  thou  departing  too,  my  trembling  friend  > 
Ah !  draws  thy  little  luftre  to  its  end  > 

Yes,  on  thy' frame  FATE  too  mail  fix  her  fcal— • 
O  let  me,  penfive,  watch  thv  pale  decay; 
How  faft  that  frame,  fo  tender,  wears  away ! 

How  fail  thy  life  the  reftlefs  minutes  fteal! 

How  (lender  now,  alas  !  thy  thread  of  fire ! 
Ah,  falling,  falling,  ready  to  expire ! 

In  vain  thy  ftrugeles — all  will  foon  be  o'er— 
At  life  thou  matcheft  with  an  eager  leap : 
Now  round  I  fee  thy  flame  fo  feeble  creep, 

Faint,  lefs'ning,  quiv'ring,  glimm'ring — now  no  more! 

Thus  (hall  the  funs  of  Science  fink  away, 
And  thus  of  Beauty  fade  the  fcireft  flow'r — 

For  where's  the  GIANT  who  to  TIME  (hall  fay, 
"  Deftruftive  tyrant,  I  arreft  thy  pow'r  ?" 


END  or  VOL. 


!  koft 


: 


INDEX 


TO    THE 


SECOND    VOLUME. 


**& 

ACADEMICIANS,  to  the            —  —  —  53 

Academic  Ode             —                 —  — -  — .  30* 

.             Chair,  Ode  to            —         —  x    —  —  327 

Academicians,  Ode  to         —         —          —  —  —  uz 

Addrcfs  to  my  Book             —          —        —  —  —  179 

.                  the  Virtue!             —             —  —  —  308 

Admiration,  Progrcfs  of         —         —         —  — •  —  304 

Advice  to  the  future  Laureat      —        —  —  —  171 

Affeftition,  Ode  td                             —         —  —  —159 

Apology  for  Kings    '                        —          —  —  —  175 

Apollo,  Elegy  of         —        —        —         —  —  —  135 

Apology,  Peter's         —         —         —         —  —  —  155 

for  keeping  Miftrcfles        —         — -  —  —  166 

————— for  going  into  the  Country          —  —  —  167 

for  Kings               —             — -  —  —  175 

Afs,  Peter's  Ode  t«            —            —        —  — .  —  26  r 

VOL.  II.                                  H  lank*. 


INDEX   TO    VOL.    IT, 


B. 


Barjts,  Sir  Jofeph,  and  the  Emperor  of  Morocco  —  —           I 

-----  and  the  Thief-takers          —  .  —  —         67 

----  and  the  foiled  Fleas          »—  —  —       138 

Barn,  Peter's,  in  Devonlhire,  Ode  to           —  —  156,  157 

Benevolent  Epiftle  to  Jchn  Nichols              —  «  —  —       12  1 

Bienfeance             —             —             —  —  —         84 

Book,  Addrefs  to         —         —         —         —  —  —       279 

Bruce,  James,  Efq.  Epiftle  to                 —  —  —       187 

.....  ----  Ode  to         —         —  —  —       204 

Brudenell,  Lord,  and  the  Eunuch             —  —  —         50 

Bullocks,  the  Royal             —          —          —  —  —296 

Burke,  Ode  to            —             —            —  —  —      320 


Csdia,  Ode  to             —             —  —  _  —  404 

Candle,  to  my             —            —  —  — .  _  41  z 

China,  Emperor  of,  to             —  —  —  —  386 

•Chloe,  to         —              —             —  167,   173,411 

Churchwardens,  a  Tale            —         —         —  —  —  367 

Condolence,  Ode  of         .    —          — •  —  —  —  226 

Countryman  and  Sir  Jofeph  Banks  —  —  — .  I  % 


Delia,  Song  to  —  —  —  —        —         6j 

— -to  —  —  '•«-  —  —       172, 

DeviL  an  Ode  to  the  —          «-.        —        —.«.        54 


INDEX  TO  VOL.  ir. 


ft* 

to  the  Royal  Bulloctts                                        —  —  196 

*_ my  Dying  Afs            —            —             —  —  3&° 

the  Fleas  of  Teneriflc          —           —          —  —  397 

Epigram        —         —        —        —        —        —  —  41* 

Epifllcs  to  Lord  Macartney  and  his  Ship  —  37? 

Epiltle,  complimentary  to  James  Bruce,  Efq.             —  —  1*87 

Expoliubtory  Odes  to  a  Great  Duke  and  a  Liuk  Lord  —  93 


F. 


Fly,  to  a        —        —       —       —        —       —        —      395 

Fortune)  to  _.        —        —          —          —  163,  ijz 

Friend,  to  one  out  of  Place      —  —  —  —      >  74 


G. 


Gentlcm-m  and  bis  Wife  —  —  —        —        8 

Glow- worm,  Ode  to          —         —  —  —       20 


H. 


Hamilton,  Sir  William,  Epiftle  to          —  —  —      407 

Horace,  an  Imitation  of,  on  Pitt  aad  Co.  —  —         24 

Hulb^d,  the  Tender              —            —  —  —         5* 

Hymen,  Ode  to               —             —  —  —      23* 

**  Jcwefs 


INDEX   TO    VOL.   II, 


.Jewefs  and  her  Son 
Irony,  Ode  to 
Ifis,  Triumph  of 


K. 


King  of  Spain  and  the  Horfe  —  48 

King,  Ode  to  the  —  _  —  334 

Kings,  Apology  for               —  —  —  «  a^ 

Knowledge,  Progrcfsof         _  —  -_  0 


L. 

Lonfdale,  Lord,  Ode  to            «—            — .  —  ^.323 

Lords,  to  a  Neft  of                —              —  «  «.         9O 

Lord,  on  a  new-made  one         -—             —  — -  —      411 

Lyric  Epiftle  to  Sir  William  Hamilton  —  —407 


Mendez,  a  Jew,   Ode  to  his  Eight  Cats  —.  —  65 

Macartney,  Lord,  and  his  Ship,  Epiftle  t»  —  —  373 

Magpie  and  Robin  Red-breaft,  a  Tale  ~  271 

Margate  Hoy,  Ode  to                               —  —  —  336 

Margaret's  Lamentation             — •             —  —  —  348 

Moral  After-Thought             —  —       .      —  406 

More  Money             — •             —             «  —  —  283 


Ode 


1XDEX   TO   VOL.    II. 

O. 

r" 

Ode  to  the  Devil          —         —         —         —         —  —         54 

"•  -  •    Eight  Cats             —             — .         —         —  —         65 

a  diftrefs'd  Beauty         —          —             —        '  —         7<J 

Patience         —             —             —             —  —         88 

my  Barn             —             —                  —  156,  15% 

—  Affectation                                 —             —  —159 
— —  Madam  Schw-  • .     g  and  Co.             —         —  ; « '  —       165 

La'*                               —              —             —  —       169 

——aFutureLaure.it             —            —          —  —       177 

-  James  Bruce,  Efq.             —          —          —  —       404 
'    i    the  Glow-worm                —                 —  —       205 

— the  Academicians                —                 —  —       ti* 

— •—  Hymen               «.               _               _  _      13* 

-  ••       Pitt          —          — .                  —                  _•  _       141 
— —Paine                —                —                —  —      *45 

•  .     my  Afs,  Peter             — .            —             —  —261 

— —  Refignation,  or  Journeymen  Shoemaker*        —  —      317 

— -  •  Burke               —               __               —  _      3^0 

— —  Irony               —               —                —  —      322 

—  Lord  Lonfdale             —              —              —  —       323 

-  •       the  Academic  Chair                 —                —  —       327 

—  the  King                —                — .                —  —       334 

•—  Margate  Hoy               —              —             —  —       336 

^ Sr.  Cecilia            —                                   —  —      353 

MeflTrs.  Townfend,  Macmanus,  and  Jealous  —       399 

r Carlia                              —                            —  —       404 

a -pretty  Milliner  —       40$ 

Odes  of  Inftruction  to  Mr.  Pitt         —          —          —  —       283 
Importance             —          —          —        —  —       3T5 

-  Condolence              —          —          —          —  326,  350 
Odes,  Expoftulatory                 —                              —  —         93 
Odes  to  Kicn  Long                —               —             —  385,  389 
Old  Simon,  a  Tale          —                                 —  —       3*9 

,  Parfoa- 


INDEX    TO    VOL.    tl* 


Parfon-Dealcr  —  «*.  _ 

>Patience,  an  Ode  to  —  —  — 

Penn,  William,  Nathan,  and  the  Bail  iff,  a  Tale         — 
Peterborough,  Earl  of,  and  the  Mob         -—  — 

Peter's  Apology  ,       —  —  ~  ~- 

Petit-Maitrc  and  the  Man  on  the  Wheel          —         — 

Petition  to  Time         —         —  —  — 

Pig  and  Magpie,  FaHe  —  — —  — 

Pig,  on  the  Death  of  L->dy  Mount  E 's  — 

Poetical  Epiftle  to  a  Falling  Miniiler  —         — 

Pretty  Milliner,  Ode  to  *— .  — -  — 

Proeaiiunv to  the  Rights  of  King*.  — ._..         •*+* 

. .  - —  Magpie  and  Redbceaft  -«-« 

Prologue  to  the  Tears  of  St.  Margaret       —         — • 


Reflection,  a  Serious  — •  •    •  —        •—        •—  —  88 

— ,  a  Moral  one  —  —          —        —  —  298 

Remonftrance           —  —  — .         —         —  —  251 

Refignatioii,|  Ode  to  —  —           —         —  —  317 

Rights  of.  Kings          —  — -  —         —         —  —  107 

Robinfon's,  Mrs.  Handkerchief  and  Judge  Buller's  Wig,  a. Tale  364 

Rowland  for  an  Oliver  —  —  —  —  •  143 


S. 


Saint  Cecilia,  Ode  to     . 
• Margaret,  Teau  of 


INDEX   TO   VOL.    II. 

Page 

SJ.w j,  Ode  to  —       165 

Ship  to  the             —             —           —         _         _  __       3$! 

Shoemakers,  Journeymen,  O Je  to             —            —  —       317 

Soldier  and  Virgin  Mary,  a  Tak             — •             —  —         6* 

Solomon  and  the  Muiifctrap                                           — ,  —         69 

Songs              —                —                —            —  —         67 

Song,  by  Mr.  Paine                               —               —  .-.250 

Spain,  King  of,  and  the  Horfe  —         48 

Subjedb  for  Painters            —             —            *r-  —        jj 


Van  Tmmp,  Tale  of  —  —  —  _      301 

Virgin  Mary  and  the  Soldier,  a  Tale         —  —        —         it 

Viruiofo't  Piajer  —  —  — .  —          f 


W. 


'Windfor  Gardeners  —  —  —       304 

Wolf  and  Lion  —      339 

Wolves,  Bear,  and  other  Beafts        —        _        _         _      341 


1428   4 


BINDING  SECT.  JUL2    19701 


Wolcot,  John 

3W5        The  works  of  Peter  Pindi 
W7 
1797 


XET
